<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa039)  [Next](isa041.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 40:0</span></span>

In this chapter the prophet opens the subject respecting the restoration
of the Church with great force and elegance; declaring God's command to
his messengers the prophets to comfort his people in their captivity,
and to impart to them the glad tidings that the time of favor and
deliverance was at hand, [Isa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001.md),
[Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002.md). Immediately a harbinger is
introduced giving orders, as usual in the march of eastern monarchs, to
remove every obstacle, and to prepare the way for their return to their
own land, [Isa 40:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md). The same words,
however, the New Testament Scriptures authorize us to refer to the
opening of the Gospel dispensation. Accordingly, this subject, coming
once in view, is principally attended to in the sequel. Of this the
prophet gives us sufficient notice by introducing a voice commanding
another proclamation, which calls of our attention from all temporary,
fading things to the spiritual and eternal things of the Gospel, [Isa
40:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006.md). And to remove every obstacle
in the way of the prophecy in either sense, or perhaps to give a farther
display of the character of the Redeemer, he enlarges on the power and
wisdom of God, as the Creator and Disposer of all things. It is
impossible to read this description of God, the most sublime that ever
was penned, without being struck with inexpressible reverence and
self-abasement. The contrast between the great Jehovah and every thing
reputed great in this world, how admirably imagined, how exquisitely
finished! What atoms and inanities are they all before Him who sitteth
on the circle of the immense heavens, and views the potentates of the
earth in the light of grasshoppers, - those poor insects that wander
over the barren heath for sustenance, spend the day in continual
chirpings, and take up their humble lodging at night on a blade of
grass! [Isa 40:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012.md). The prophet
concludes with a most comfortable application of the whole, by showing
that all this infinite power and unsearchable wisdom is unweariedly and
everlastingly engaged in strengthening, comforting, and saving his
people, [Isa 40:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027.md).

The course of prophecies which follow, from hence to the end of the
book, and which taken together constitute the most elegant part of the
sacred writings of the Old Testament, interspersed also with many
passages of the highest sublimity, was probably delivered in the latter
part of the reign of Hezekiah. The prophet in the foregoing chapter had
delivered a very explicit declaration of the impending dissolution of
the kingdom, and of the captivity of the royal house of David, and of
the people, under the kings of Babylon. As the subject of his subsequent
prophecies was to be chiefly of the consolatory kind, he opens them with
giving a promise of the restoration of the kingdom, and the return of
the people from that captivity, by the merciful interposition of God in
their favor. But the views of the prophet are not confined to this
event. As the restoration of the royal family, and of the tribe of
Judah, which would otherwise have soon become undistinguished, and have
been irrecoverably lost, was necessary, in the design and order of
Providence, for the fulfilling of God's promises of establishing a more
glorious and an everlasting kingdom, under the Messiah to be born of the
tribe of Judah, and of the family of David, the prophet connects these
two events together, and hardly ever treats of the former without
throwing in some intimations of the latter; and sometimes is so fully
possessed with the glories of the future and more remote kingdom, that
he seems to leave the more immediate subject of his commission almost
out of the question.

Indeed this evangelical sense of the prophecy is so apparent, and stands
forth in so strong a light, that some interpreters cannot see that it
has any other; and will not allow the prophecy to have any relation at
all to the return from the captivity of Babylon. It may therefore be
useful to examine more attentively the train of the prophet's ideas, and
to consider carefully the images under which he displays his subject. He
hears a crier giving orders, by solemn proclamation, to Prepare the way
of the Lord in the wilderness; to remove all obstructions before Jehovah
marching through the desert; through the wild, uninhabited, impassable
country. The deliverance of God's people from the Babylonish captivity
is considered by him as parallel to the former deliverance of them from
the Egyptian bondage. God was then represented as their king leading
them in person through the vast deserts which lay in their way to the
promised land of Canaan. It is not merely for Jehovah himself that in
both cases the way was to be prepared, and all obstructions to be
removed; but for Jehovah marching in person at the head of his people.
Let us first see how this idea is pursued by the sacred poets who treat
of the exodus, which is a favourite subject with them, and affords great
choice of examples: -

"When Israel came out of Egypt,

The house of Jacob from the barbarous people;

Judah was his sanctuary, Israel his dominion."

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md), [Psa
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md).

"Jehovah his God is with him;

And the shout of a king is among them:

God brought them out of Egypt" -

[Num 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021.md), [Num
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022.md).

"Make a highway for him that rideth through the deserts:

O God, when thou wentest forth before thy people.

When thou marchedst through the wilderness,

The heavens dropped" -

[Psa 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004.md), [Psa
68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007.md).

Let us now see how Isaiah treats the subject of the return of the people
from Babylon. They were to march through the wilderness with Jehovah at
their head, who was to lead them, to smooth the way before them, and to
supply them with water in the thirsty desert; with perpetual allusion to
the exodus: -

"Come ye forth from Babylon, flee ye from the land of the Chaldeans with
the voice of joy: Publish ye this, and make it heard; utter it forth
even to the end of the earth; Say ye, Jehovah hath redeemed his servant
Jacob: They thirsted not in the deserts, through which he made them go;
Waters from the rock he caused to flow for them; Yea, he clave the rock,
and forth gushed the waters." [Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020.md), [Isa
48:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#021.md).

"Remember not the former things;

And the things of ancient times regard not:"

(That is, the deliverance from Egypt):

"Behold, I make a new thing;

Even now shall it spring forth; will ye not regard it?

Yea, I will make in the wilderness a way;

In the desert streams of water."

[Isa 43:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#018.md), [Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019.md).

"But he that trusteth in me shall inherit the land,

And shall possses my holy mountain.

Then will I say: Cast up, cast up the causeway; make clear the way;

Remove every obstruction from the road of my people."

[Isa 57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013.md), [Isa
57:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014.md).

"How beautiful appear on the mountains

The feet of the joyful messenger, of him that announceth peace;

Of the joyful messenger of good tidings, of him that announceth
salvation;

Of him that saith to Sion, Thy God reigneth!

All thy watchmen lift up their voice, they shout together;

For face to face shall they see, when Jehovah returneth to Sion.

Verily not in haste shall ye go forth,

And not by flight shall ye march along:

For Jehovah shall march in your front;

And the God of Israel shall bring up your rear."

[Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md), [Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008.md), [Isa
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#012.md).

Babylon was separated from Judea by an immense tract of country which
was one continued desert; that large part of Arabia called very properly
Deserta. It is mentioned in history as a remarkable occurrence, that
Nebuchadnezzar, having received the news of the death of his father, in
order to make the utmost expedition in his journey to Babylon from Egypt
and Phoenicia, set out with a few attendants, and passed through this
desert. Berosus apud Joseph., Antiq. [Isa
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#011.md). This was the nearest way
homewards for the Jews; and whether they actually returned by this way
or not, the first thing that would occur on the proposal or thought of
their return would be the difficulty of this almost impracticable
passage. Accordingly the proclamation for the preparation of the way is
the most natural idea, and the most obvious circumstance, by which the
prophet could have opened his subject.

These things considered, I have not the least doubt that the return at
the Jews from the captivity of Babylon is the first, though not the
principal, thing in the prophet's view. The redemption from Babylon is
clearly foretold and at the same time is employed as an image to shadow
out a redemption of an infinitely higher and more important nature. I
should not have thought it necessary to employ so many words in
endeavoring to establish what is called the literal sense of this
prophecy, which I think cannot be rightly understood without it, had I
not observed that many interpreters of the first authority, in
particular the very learned Vitringa, have excluded it entirely.

Yet obvious and plain as I think this literal sense is, we have
nevertheless the irrefragable authority of John the Baptist, and of our
blessed Savior himself, as recorded by all the Evangelists, for
explaining this exordium of the prophecy of the opening of the Gospel by
the preaching of John, and of the introduction of the kingdom of
Messiah; who was to effect a much greater deliverance of the people of
God, Gentiles as well as Jews, from the captivity of sin and the
dominion of death. And this we shall find to be the case in many
subsequent parts also of this prophecy, where passages manifestly
relating to the deliverance of the Jewish nation, effected by Cyrus,
are, with good reason, and upon undoubted authority, to be understood of
the redemption wrought for mankind by Christ.

If the literal sense of this prophecy, as above explained, cannot be
questioned, much less surely can the spiritual; which, I think, is
allowed on all hands, even by Grotius himself. If both are to be
admitted, here is a plain example of the mystical allegory, or double
sense, as it is commonly called, of prophecy; which the sacred writers
of the New Testament clearly suppose, and according to which they
frequently frame their interpretation of passages from the Old
Testament. Of the foundation and properties of this sort of allegory,
see De S. Poes. Hebr. Praelect. xi.

[Isaiah 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 40:1</span></span>

Comfort ye, comfort ye - "The whole of this prophecy," says Kimchi,
"belongs to the days of the Messiah."

[Isaiah 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 40:2</span></span>

Double for all her sins "Blessings double to the punishment" - It does
not seem reconcilable to our notions of the Divine justice, which always
punishes less than our iniquities deserve, to suppose that God had
punished the sins of the Jews in double proportion; and it is more
agreeable to the tenor of this consolatory message to understand it as a
promise of ample recompense for the effects of past displeasure, on the
reconciliation of God to his returning people. To express this sense of
the passage, which the words of the original will very well bear, it was
necessary to add a word or two in the version to supply the elliptical
expression of the Hebrew. Compare [Isa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#007.md); [Job
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010.md); [Zac
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012.md). חטאה chattaah signifies
punishment for sin, [Lam 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039.md); [Zac
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#019.md). But Kimchi says, "Double here
means the two captivities and emigrations suffered by the Israelites.
The first, the Babylonish captivity; the second, that which they now
endure." This is not a bad conjecture.

[Isaiah 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 40:3</span></span>

The voice of him that crieth to the wilderness "A voice crieth, In the
wilderness" - The idea is taken from the practice of eastern monarchs,
who, whenever they entered upon an expedition or took a journey,
especially through desert and unpractised countries, sent harbingers
before them to prepare all things for their passage, and pioneers to
open the passes, to level the ways, and to remove all impediments. The
officers appointed to superintend such preparations the Latins call
stratores. Ipse (Johannes Baptista) se stratorem vocat Messiae, cujus
esset alta et elata voce homines in desertis locis habitantes ad itinera
et vias Regi mox venturo sternendas et reficiendas hortari. - Mosheim,
Instituta, Majora, p. 96. "He (John the Baptist) calls himself the
pioneer of the Messiah, whose business it was with a loud voice to call
upon the people dwelling in the deserts to level and prepare the roads
by which the King was about to march."

Diodorus's account of the marches of Semiramis into Media and Persia
will give us a clear notion of the preparation of the way for a royal
expedition: "In her march to Ecbatana she came to the Zarcean mountain,
which, extending many furlongs, and being full of craggy precipices and
deep hollows, could not be passed without taking a great compass about.
Being therefore desirous of leaving an everlasting memorial of herself,
as well as of shortening the way, she ordered the precipices to be
digged down, and the hollows to be filled up; and at a great expense she
made a shorter and more expeditious road, which to this day is called
from her the road of Semiramis. Afterward she went into Persia, and all
the other countries of Asia subject to her dominion; and wherever she
went, she ordered the mountains and precipices to be levelled, raised
causeways in the plain country, and at a great expense made the ways
passable." - Diod. Sic. lib. ii.

The writer of the apocryphal book called Baruch expresses the same
subject by the same images, either taking them from this place of
Isaiah, or from the common notions of his countrymen: "For God hath
appointed that every high hill, and banks of long continuance, should be
cast down, and valleys filled up, to make even the ground, that Israel
may go safely in the glory of God." Baruch 5:7.

The Jewish Church, to which John was sent to announce the coming of
Messiah, was at that time in a barren and desert condition, unfit,
without reformation, for the reception of her King. It was in this
desert country, destitute at that time of all religious cultivation, in
true piety and good works unfruitful, that John was sent to prepare the
way of the Lord by preaching repentance. I have distinguished the parts
of the sentence according to the punctuation of the Masoretes, which
agrees best both with the literal and the spiritual sense; which the
construction and parallelism of the distich in the Hebrew plainly
favors, and of which the Greek of the Septuagint and of the evangelists
is equally susceptible. John was born in the desert of Judea, and passed
his whole life in it, till the time of his being manifested to Israel.
He preached in the same desert: it was a mountainous country; however
not entirely and properly a desert; for though less cultivated than
other parts of Judea, yet it was not uninhabited. Joshua ([Jos
15:61](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061.md), [Jos
15:62](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#062).md) reckons six cities in it. We
are so prepossessed with the idea of John's living and preaching in the
desert, that we are apt to consider this particular scene of his
preaching as a very important and essential part of history: whereas I
apprehend this circumstance to be no otherwise important, than as giving
us a strong idea of the rough character of the man, which was answerable
to the place of his education; and as affording a proper emblem of the
rude state of the Jewish Church at that time, which was the true
wilderness meant by the prophet, in which John was to prepare the way
for the coming of the Messiah.

[Isaiah 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 40:4</span></span>

Crooked - The word עקב akob is very generally rendered crooked: but this
sense of the word seems not to be supported by any good authority.
Ludolphus, Comment. ad Hist. Aethiop. p. 206, says "that in the Ethiopia
language it signifies clivus, locus editus:" and so the Syriac Version
renders it in this place, ערמא arama: Hebrew, ערמה aramah, tumulus,
acervus. Thus the parallelism would be more perfect:" the hilly country
shall be made level, and the precipices a smooth plain."

[Isaiah 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 40:5</span></span>

"The salvation of our God" - These words are added here by the
Septuagint: το σωτηριον του Θεου, את ישועת אלהינו eth yesuath Eloheynu,
as it is in the parallel place, [Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010.md). The sentence is abrupt without
it, the verb wanting its object; and I think it is genuine. Our English
translation has supplied the word it, which is equivalent to this
addition, from the Septuagint.

This omission in the Hebrew text is ancient, being prior to the Chaldee,
Syriac, and Vulgate Versions: but the words stand in all the copies of
the Septuagint, and they are acknowledged by Luke, [Luk
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006.md). The whole of this verse is
wanting in one of my oldest MSS.

[Isaiah 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 40:6</span></span>

The voice saint Cry "A voice saith Proclaim" - To understand rightly
this passage is a matter of importance; for it seems designed to give us
the true key to the remaining part of Isaiah's prophecies, the general
subject of which is the restoration of the people and Church of God. The
prophet opens the subject with great clearness and elegance: he declares
at once God's command to his messengers, (his prophets, as the Chaldee
rightly explains it), to comfort his people in captivity, to impart to
them the joyful tidings, that their punishment has now satisfied the
Divine justice, and the time of reconciliation and favor is at hand. He
then introduces a harbinger giving orders to prepare the way for God,
leading his people from Babylon, as he did formerly from Egypt, through
the wilderness, to remove all obstacles, and to clear the way for their
passage.

Thus far nothing more appears to be intended than a return from the
Babylonish captivity; but the next words seem to intimate something much
greater: -

"And the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed;

And all flesh shall see together the salvation of our God."

He then introduces a voice commanding him to make a solemn proclamation.
And what is the import of it? that the people - the flesh, is of a vain
temporary nature; that all its glory fadeth, and is soon gone; but that
the word of God endureth for ever. What is this, but a plain opposition
of the flesh to the spirit; of the carnal Israel to the spiritual; of
the temporary Mosaic economy to the eternal Christian dispensation? You
may be ready to conclude, (the prophet may be disposed to say), by this
introduction to my discourse, that my commission is only to comfort you
with a promise of the restoration of your religion and polity, of
Jerusalem, of the temple, and its services and worship in all its
ancient splendor. These are earthly, temporary, shadowy, fading things,
which shall soon pass away, and be destroyed for ever; these are not
worthy to engage your attention in comparison of the greater blessings,
the spiritual redemption, the eternal inheritance, covered under the
veil of the former, which I have it in charge to unfold unto you. The
law has only a shadow of good things; the substance is the Gospel. I
promise you a restoration of the former, which, however, is only for a
time, and shall be done away, according to God's original appointment:
but under that image I give you a view of the latter, which shall never
be done away, but shall endure for ever. This I take to be agreeable to
St. Peter's interpretation of this passage of the prophet, quoted by
him, [Pe1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024.md), [Pe1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025.md) : "All flesh is as grass, and all
the glory of man as the flower of grass. The grass withereth and the
flower thereof falleth away; but the word of the Lord endureth for ever.
And this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you." This is
the same word of the Lord of which Isaiah speaks, which hath now been
preached unto you by the Gospel. The law and the Gospel are frequently
opposed to one another by St. Paul, under the images of flesh and
spirit: "Having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the
flesh?" [Gal 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003.md). - L.

All the Godliness thereof - "All its glory" - For חסדו chasdo read חדו
chadu; the Septuagint and Vulgate, and [Pe1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024.md).

[Isaiah 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 40:7</span></span>

The grass withereth - The whole of this verse is wanting in three of
Kennicott's and five of De Rossi's MSS., and in a very correct and
ancient MS. of my own, and also in the Septuagint and Arabic.

Surely the people "Verily this people" - So the Syriac; who perhaps read
העם הזה haam hazzeh.

Because the spirit of the Lord "When the wind of Jehovah" - רוח יהוה
ruach Jehovah, a wind of Jehovah, is a Hebraism, meaning no more than a
strong wind. It is well known that a hot wind in the east destroys every
green thing. Compare [Psa 103:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#016.md). Two
MSS. omit the word יהוה Yehovah, Jehovah.

[Isaiah 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 40:9</span></span>

O Zion, that bringest good tidings "O daughter, that bringest glad
tidings to Zion" - That the true construction of the sentence is this,
which makes Zion the receiver, not the publisher, of the glad tidings,
which latter has been the most prevailing interpretation, will, I think,
very clearly appear, if we rightly consider the image itself, and the
custom and common practice from which it is taken. I have added the word
daughter to express the feminine gender of the Hebrew participle, which
I know not how to do otherwise in our language; and this is absolutely
necessary in order to ascertain the image. For the office of announcing
and celebrating such glad tidings as are here spoken of, belongs
peculiarly to the women. On occasion of any great public success, a
signal victory, or any other joyful event, it was usual for the women to
gather together, and with music, dances, and songs, to publish and
celebrate the happy news. Thus after the passage of the Red Sea, Miriam,
and all the women, with timbrels in their hands, formed a chorus, and
joined the men in their triumphant song, dancing, and throwing in
alternately the refrain or burden of the song: -

"Sing ye to Jehovah, for he is greatly exalted;

The horse and his rider hath he cast into the sea."

[Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020.md), [Exo
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021.md).

So Jephthah's daughter collected a chorus or virgins, and with dances
and songs came out to meet her father, and to celebrate his victory,
[Jdg 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034.md). After David's conquest of
Goliath, "all the women came out of the cities of Israel singing and
dancing to meet Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of
music;" and, forming themselves into two choruses, they sang
alternately: -

"Saul has slain his thousands:

And David his ten thousands."

[Sa1 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006.md), [Sa1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007.md).

And this gives us the true sense of a passage in the sixty-eighth Psalm,
which has frequently been misunderstood: -

"Jehovah gave the word, (that is, the joyful news),

The women, who published the glad tidings, were a great company;

The kings of mighty armies did flee, did flee:

And even the matron, who stayed at home, shared the spoil."

The word signifying the publishers of glad tidings is the same, and
expressed in the same form by the feminine participle, as in this place,
and the last distich is the song which they sang. So in this place,
Jehovah having given the word by his prophet, the joyful tidings of the
restoration of Zion, and of God's returning to Jerusalem, (see [Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008).md), the women are exhorted by the
prophet to publish the joyful news with a loud voice from eminences,
whence they might best be heard all over the country; and the matter and
burden of their song was to be, "Behold your God!" See on [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011) (note.md).

[Isaiah 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 40:10</span></span>

His reward is with him, and his work before him. "His reward is with
him, and the recompense of his work before him" - That is, the reward
and the recompense which he bestows, and which he will pay to his
faithful servants; this he has ready at hand with him, and holds it out
before him, to encourage those who trust in him and wait for him.

[Isaiah 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 40:11</span></span>

Shall gently lead those that are with young "The nursing ewes shall he
gently lead" - A beautiful image, expressing, with the utmost propriety
as well as elegance, the tender attention of the shepherd to his flock.
That the greatest care in driving the cattle in regard to the dams and
their young was necessary, appears clearly from Jacob's apology to his
brother Esau, [Gen 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#013.md) : "The flocks
and the herds giving suck to their young are with me; and if they should
be overdriven, all the flock will die." Which is set in a still stronger
light by the following remark of Sir John Chardin: "Their flocks," says
he, speaking of those who now live in the east after the patriarchal
manner, "feed down the places of their encampments so quick, by the
great numbers that they have, that they are obliged to remove them too
often, which is very destructive to their flocks, on account of the
young ones, who have not strength enough to follow." Harmer's Observ.
i., p. 126.

[Isaiah 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 40:16</span></span>

And Lebanon is not sufficient - The image is beautiful and uncommon. It
has been imitated by an apocryphal writer, who however comes far short
of the original: -

"For all sacrifice is too little for a sweet savor unto thee:

And all the fat is not sufficient for thy burnt-offering."

Judith 16:16.

Does not the prophet mean here that all the burnt-offerings and
sacrifices that could be offered were insufficient to atone for sin?
That the nations were as nothing before him, not merely because of his
immensity, but because of their insufficiency to make any atonement by
their oblations for the iniquities which they had committed? Therefore
the Redeemer was to come to Zion, etc.

[Isaiah 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 40:19</span></span>

And casteth silver chains "And forgeth for it chains of silver" - For
צורף tsoreph, the participle, twenty-seven MSS., five ancient, and three
editions, read צרף tsaraph, pret. third person.

[Isaiah 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 40:20</span></span>

Chooseth a tree that will not rot - For what? To make a god out of it!
The rich we find made theirs of gold and silver; the poor man was
obliged to put up with a wooden god! From the words "he that hath no
oblation chooseth a tree," we may learn that the gold and silver
necessary to make the graven image was first dedicated, and then formed
into a god! How stupid is idolatry! Strange that these people did not
perceive that there could be no help in these molten and wooden idols!

[Isaiah 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 40:21</span></span>

Have ye not known - On this verse Kimchi has a very interesting comment,
an extract of which I subjoin. "The whole world may be considered as a
house built up; heaven its roof; the stars its lamps; and the fruits of
the earth its table spread. The Master of the house is God, blessed for
ever; and man is the steward into whose hand all the business of the
house is given. If he always consider in his heart that the Master of
the house is continually over him, and that he keeps his eye upon his
work, and if in consequence he acts wisely, he shall find favor in the
eyes of the Master of the house. But if he find wickedness in the house,
then will he remove him מן פקידתו min pekidutho, 'from his stewardship.'
The foolish steward does not think of this; for as his eyes do not see
the Master of the house, he saith in his heart, 'I will eat and drink
what I find in this house, and will take my pleasure in it; nor shall I
be careful whether there be a master over this house or not.' When the
Lord of the house marks this, he comes and expels him from the house
speedily, and with great anger; therefore it is said, [Isa
40:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#023.md), He bringeth the princes to
nothing." It seems that this parable had been long in use among the
Jews, as our blessed Lord alludes to it in his parable of the unjust
steward. Or did the rabbin, finding it to his purpose, steal the parable
from the Gospel? In both places it has great and peculiar beauties.

Have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth "Have ye not
understood it from the foundations of the earth?" - The true reading
seems to be ממוסדות mimmosedoth, to answer to מראש merosh in the
foregoing line. It follows a word ending with מ mem, and out of three
mems concurring, it was an easy mistake to drop the middle one.

[Isaiah 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 40:22</span></span>

As a curtain "As a thin veil" - "It is usual in the summer season, and
upon all occasions when a large company is to be received, to have the
court sheltered from heat or inclemency of the weather by a velum,
umbrella, or veil, as I shall call it; which being expanded on ropes
from one side of the parapet wall to the other, may be folded or
unfolded at pleasure. The psalmist seems to allude to some covering of
this kind in that beautiful expression of spreading out the heavens like
a curtain." - Shaw's Travels, p. 274.

[Isaiah 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 40:24</span></span>

And he shall also blow upon them "And if he but blow upon them" - The
Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and MS. Bodl., with another, have גם gam,
only, without the conjunction ו vau, and.

[Isaiah 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 40:26</span></span>

Left up your eyes on high - The rabbins say, He who is capable of
meditating on the revolutions of the heavenly bodies, and does not
meditate on them, is not worthy to have his name mentioned among men.

[Isaiah 40:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 40:28</span></span>

There is no searching of his understanding "And that his understanding
is unsearchable" - Twenty-four MSS., two editions, the Septuagint and
Vulgate, read ואין veein, with the conjunction ו vau.

[Isaiah 40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 40:31</span></span>

They shall mount zap with wings as eagles "They shall put forth fresh
feathers like the moulting eagle" - It has been a common and popular
opinion that the eagle lives and retains his vigor to a great age; and
that, beyond the common lot of other birds, he moults in his old age,
and renews his feathers, and with them his youth. "Thou shalt renew thy
youth like the eagle, "says the psalmist, [Psa
103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005.md); on which place St. Ambrose
notes, Aquila longam aetatem ducit, dum, vetustis plumis fatiscentibus,
nova pennarum successione juvenescit: "The eagle lives to a very
advanced age; and in moulting his youth is renewed with his new
feathers." Phile, De Animalibus, treating of the eagle, and addressing
himself to the emperor Michael Palaeologus junior, raises his compliment
upon the same notion: -

Τουτου συ, βασιλευ, τον πολυν ζωοις βιον,

Αει νεουργων, και κρατυνων την φυσιν.

"Long may'st thou live, O king; still like the eagle

Renew thy youth, and still retain thy vigor."

To this many fabulous and absurd circumstances are added by several
ancient writers and commentators on Scripture; see Bochart, Hieroz. 2
ii. 1. Rabbi Saadias says, Every tenth year the eagle flies near the
sun; and when not able any longer to bear the burning heat, she falls
down into the sea, and soon loses her feathers, and thus renews her
vigor. This she does every tenth year till the hundredth, when, after
she has ascended near the sun, and fallen into the sea, she rises no
more. How much proof do such stories require! Whether the notion of the
eagle's renewing his youth is in any degree well founded or not, I need
not inquire; it is enough for a poet, whether profane or sacred, to have
the authority of popular opinion to support an image introduced for
illustration or ornament. - L

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 41](isa041.md)

</div>
