<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa046)  [Next](isa048.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 47:0</span></span>

The destruction of Babylon is denounced by a beautiful selection of
circumstances, in which her prosperous is contrasted with her adverse
condition. She is represented as a tender and delicate female reduced to
the work and abject condition of a slave, and bereaved of every
consolation, [Isa 47:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001.md). And that on
account of her cruelty, particularly to God's people, her pride,
voluptuousness, sorceries, and incantations, [Isa
47:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#005.md). The folly of these last
practices elegantly exposed by the prophet, [Isa
47:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012.md). It is worthy of observation
that almost all the imagery of this chapter is applied in the book of
the Revelation, (in nearly the same words), to the antitype of the
illustrious capital of the Chaldean empire, viz., Babylon the Great.

[Isaiah 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 47:1</span></span>

Come down, and set in the dust "Descend, and sit on the dust" - See note
on [Isa 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#026.md), and on [Isa
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#002) (note.md).

[Isaiah 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 47:2</span></span>

Take the millstones, and grind meal "Take the mill, and grind corn" - It
was the work of slaves to grind the corn. They used hand-mills:
water-mills were not invented till a little before the time of Augustus,
(see the Greek epigram of Antipater, which seems to celebrate it as a
new invention, Anthol. Cephalae, 653); wind-mills, not until long after.
It was not only the work of slaves, but the hardest work; and often
inflicted upon them as a severe punishment: -

Molendum in pistrino; vapulandum; habendae compedes.

Terent. Phorm. 2:1. 19.

Hominem pistrino dignum.

Id. Heaut. 3:2. 19.

To grind in the mill, to be scourged, to be put in the stocks, were
punishments for slaves. Hence a delinquent was said to be a man worthy
of the mill. The tread-mill, now in use in England, is a revival of this
ancient usage. But in the east grinding was the work of the female
slaves. See [Exo 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005.md); [Exo
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029.md), (in the version of the
Septuagint;) [Mat 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#041.md); Homer, Odyss.
20:105-108. And it is the same to this day. "Women alone are employed to
grind their corn;" Shaw's Algiers and Tunis, p. 287. "They are the
female slaves, that are generally employed in the east at those
hand-mills for grinding corn; it is extremely laborious, and esteemed
the lowest employment in the house;" Sir J. Chardin, Harmer's Observ.
i., p. 153. The words denote that state of captivity to which the
Babylonians should be reduced.

Make bare the leg, uncover the thigh - This is repeatedly seen in
Bengal, where there are few bridges, and both sexes, having neither
shoes nor stockings, truss up their loose garments, and walk across,
where the waters are not deep. In the deeper water they are obliged to
truss very high, to which there seems a reference in the third verse:
Thy nakedness shall be uncovered.

[Isaiah 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 47:3</span></span>

I will not meet thee as a man "Neither will I suffer man to intercede
with me" - The verb should be pointed, or written, אפגיע aphgia, in
Hiphil.

[Isaiah 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 47:4</span></span>

Our Redeemer "Our Avenger" - Here a chorus breaks in upon the midst of
the subject, with a change of construction, as well as sentiment, from
the longer to the shorter kind of verse, for one distich only; after
which the former subject and style are resumed. See note on [Isa
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016) (note.md).

[Isaiah 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 47:6</span></span>

I was wroth with my people - God, in the course of his providence, makes
use of great conquerors and tyrants as his instruments to execute his
judgments in the earth; he employs one wicked nation to scourge another.
The inflicter of the punishment may perhaps be as culpable as the
sufferer; and may add to his guilt by indulging his cruelty in executing
God's justice. When he has fulfilled the work to which the Divine
vengeance has ordained him, he will become himself the object of it; see
[Isa 10:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005.md). God charges the
Babylonians, though employed by himself to chastise his people, with
cruelty in regard to them. They exceeded the bounds of justice and
humanity in oppressing and destroying them; and though they were really
executing the righteous decree of God, yet, as far as it regarded
themselves, they were only indulging their own ambition and violence.
The Prophet Zechariah sets this matter in the same light: "I was but a
little angry and they helped forward the affliction;" [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015.md). - L.

[Isaiah 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 47:7</span></span>

So that thou didst not "Because thou didst not" - For עד ad, read על al;
so two MSS., and one edition. And for, אחריתה acharithah, "the latter
end of it, "read אחריתך acharithecha, "thy latter end;" so thirteen
MSS., and two editions, and the Vulgate. Both the sixth and seventh
verses are wanting in one of my oldest MSS.

[Isaiah 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 47:9</span></span>

These two things shall come to thee in a moment - That is, suddenly.
Belshazzar was slain; thus the city became metaphorically a widow, the
husband - the governor of it, being slain. In the time in which the king
was slain, the Medes and Persians took the city, and slew many of its
inhabitants, see [Dan 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#030.md), [Dan
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031.md). When Darius took the city, he is
said to have crucified three thousand of its principal inhabitants.

In their perfection "On a sudden" - Instead of בתמם bethummam, "in their
perfection," as our translation renders it, the Septuagint and Syriac
read, in the copies from which they translated, פתאם pithom, suddenly;
parallel to רגע rega, in a moment, in the preceding alternate member of
the sentence. The concurrent testimony of the Septuagint and Syriac,
favored by the context, may be safely opposed to the authority of the
present text.

For the multitude "Notwithstanding the multitude" - ברב berob. For this
sense of the particle ב beth, see [Num
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#011.md).

[Isaiah 47:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 47:11</span></span>

Thou shalt not know from whence it riseth "Thou shalt not know how to
deprecate" - שחרה shachrah; so the Chaldee renders it, which is approved
by Jarchi on the place; and Michaelis Epim. in Praelect. xix.; see [Psa
78:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034.md).

Videtur in fine hujus commatis deese verbum, ut hoc membrum prioribus
respondeat. "A word appears to be wanting at the end of this clause to
connect it properly with the two preceding." - Secker.

In order to set in a proper light this judicious remark, it is necessary
to give the reader an exact verbal translation of the whole verse: -

"And evil shall come upon thee, thou shalt not know how to deprecate it;

And mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shalt not be able to expiate it;

And destruction shall come suddenly upon thee, thou shalt not know" -

What? how to escape, to avoid it, to be delivered from it? perhaps צאת
ממנה tseth mimmennah, "they could not go out from it, "[Jer
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#011.md). I am persuaded that a phrase is
here lost out of the text. But as the ancient versions retain no traces
of it, and a wide field lies open to uncertain conjecture, I have not
attempted to fill up the chasm, but have in the translation, as others
have done before me, palliated and disguised the defect, which I cannot
with any assurance pretend to supply. - L.

[Isaiah 47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 47:13</span></span>

From these things "What are the events" - For מאשר measher, read מה אשר
mah asher, so the Septuagint, "what is to happen to thee."

[Isaiah 47:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 47:15</span></span>

To his quarter "To his own business" - לעברו leebro. Expositors give no
very good account of this word in this place. In a MS. it was at first
לעבדו leabdo, to his servant or work, which is probably the true
reading. The sense however is pretty much the same with the common
interpretation: "Every one shall turn aside to his own business; none
shall deliver thee."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 48](isa048.md)

</div>
