<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa021)  [Next](isa023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 22:0</span></span>

Prophecy concerning Jerusalem, [Isa
22:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#001). Sentence against Shebna, who
was over the household, [Isa 22:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#015).
Prophecy concerning Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, [Isa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#020), [Isa
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#021). From Eliakim, Isaiah,
(agreeably to the mode universally adopted in the prophetical writings,
of making the things then present, or which were shortly to be
accomplished, types or representations of things to be fulfilled upon a
larger scale in distant futurity), makes a transition to the Messiah, of
whom Eliakim was a type, to whom the words will best apply, and to whom
some passages in the prophecy must be solely restrained, [Isa
22:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#020). The sentence against Shebna
again confirmed, [Isa 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#025).

This prophecy, ending with the fourteenth verse of this chapter, is
entitled, "The oracle concerning the valley of vision," by which is
meant Jerusalem, because, says Sal. ben Melech, it was the place of
prophecy. Jerusalem, according to Josephus, was built upon two opposite
hills Sion and Acra, separated by a valley in the midst. He speaks of
another broad valley between Acra and Moriah, Bell. Jud. 5:13; 6:6. It
was the seat of Divine revelation; the place where chiefly prophetic
vision was given, and where God manifested himself visibly in the holy
place. The prophecy foretells the invasion of Jerusalem by the Assyrians
under Sennacherib; or by the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar. Vitringa is
of opinion that the prophet has both in view: that of the Chaldeans in
the first part, [Isa 22:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#001), which he
thinks relates to the flight of Zedekiah, [Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004), [Kg2
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#005); and that of the Assyrians in the
latter part, which agrees with the circumstances of that time, and
particularly describes the preparations made by Hezekiah for the defense
of the city, [Isa 22:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#008). Compare
[Ch2 32:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#002). - L.

[Isaiah 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 22:1</span></span>

Art - gone up to the house-tops "Are gone up to the house-tops" - The
houses in the east were in ancient times, as they are still, generally,
built in one and the same uniform manner. The roof or top of the house
is always flat, covered with broad stones, or a strong plaster of
terrace, and guarded on every side with a low parapet wall; see [Deu
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008). The terrace is frequented as
much as any part of the house. On this, as the season favors, they walk,
they eat, they sleep, they transact business, ([Sa1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#025), see also the Septuagint in that
place), they perform their devotions [Act
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009). The house is built with a court
within, into which chiefly the windows open: those that open to the
street are so obstructed with lattice-work that no one either without or
within can see through them. Whenever, therefore, any thing is to be
seen or heard in the streets, any public spectacle, any alarm of a
public nature, every one immediately goes up to the house-top to satisfy
his curiosity. In the same manner, when any one has occasion to make any
thing public, the readiest and most effectual way of doing it is to
proclaim it from the house-tops to the people in the streets. "What ye
hear in the ear, that publish ye on the house-top," saith our Savior,
[Mat 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027). The people running all to
the tops of their houses gives a lively image of a sudden general alarm.
Sir John Chardin's MS. note on this place is as follows: "Dans les
festes pour voir passer quelque chose, et dans les maladies pour les
annoncer aux voisins en allumant des lumieres, le peuple monte sur les
terrasses." "In festivals, in order to see what is going forward, and in
times of sickness, in order to indicate them to neighbors by lighting of
candles, the people go up to the house-tops."

[Isaiah 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 22:3</span></span>

All thy rulers - are bound by the archers "All thy leaders - are fled
from the bow" - There seems to be somewhat of an inconsistency in the
sense according to the present reading. If the leaders were bound, אסרו
usseru, how could they flee away? for their being bound, according to
the obvious construction and course of the sentence, is a circumstance
prior to their flight. I therefore follow Houbigant, who reads הסרו
huseru, remoti sunt, "they are gone off." גלו galu, transmigraverunt,
Chaldee; which seems to confirm this emendation.

[Isaiah 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 22:6</span></span>

Chariots of men "The Syriac" - It is not easy to say what רכב אדם recheb
adam, a chariot of men, can mean. It seems by the form of the sentence,
which consists of three members, the first and the third mentioning a
particular people, that the second should do so likewise. Thus ברכב ארם
ופרשים berecheb aram uparashim, "with chariots the Syrian, and with
horsemen:" the similitude of the letters ד daleth and ר resh is so
great, and the mistakes arising from it are so frequent, that I readily
adopt the correction of Houbigant, ארם aram, Syria, instead of אדם adam,
man; which seems to me extremely probable. The conjunction ו vau, and,
prefixed to פרשים parashim, horsemen, seems necessary in whatever way
the sentence may be taken; and it is confirmed by five MSS., (one
ancient), four of De Rossi's, and two ancient of my own; one by
correction of Dr. Kennicott's, and three editions. Kir was a city
belonging to the Medes. The Medes were subject to the Assyrians in
Hezekiah's time, (see [Kg2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009), and
[Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)); and so perhaps might Elam
(the Persians) likewise be, or auxiliaries to them.

[Isaiah 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 22:8</span></span>

The armor "The arsenal" - Built by Solomon within the city, and called
the house of the forest of Lebanon; probably from the great quantity of
cedar from Lebanon which was employed in the building. See [Kg1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#002), [Kg1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#003).

[Isaiah 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 22:9</span></span>

Ye gathered together the waters "And ye shall collect the waters" -
There were two pools in or near Jerusalem, supplied by springs: the
upper pool, or the old pool, supplied by the spring called Gihon, [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030), towards the higher part of the
city, near Sion, or the city of David, and the lower pool, probably
supplied by Siloam, towards the lower part. When Hezekiah was threatened
with a siege by Sennacherib, he stopped up all the waters of the
fountains without the city; and brought them into the city by a conduit,
or subterranean passage cut through the rock; those of the old pool, to
the place where he had a double wall, so that the pool was between the
two walls. This he did in order to distress the enemy, and to supply the
city during the siege. This was so great a work that not only the
historians have made particular mention of it, [Kg2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020);[Ch2
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#002), [Ch2
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#003), [Ch2
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005), [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030); but the son of Sirach also has
celebrated it in his encomium on Hezekiah. "Hezekiah fortified his city,
and brought in water into the midst thereof: he digged the hard rock
with iron, and made wells for water," Ecclesiasticus 48.

[Isaiah 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 22:11</span></span>

Unto the maker thereof "To him that hath disposed this" - That is, to
God the Author and Disposer of this visitation, the invasion with which
he now threatens you. The very same expressions are applied to God, and
upon the same occasion, [Isa 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#026) : -

"Hast thou not heard of old, that I have disposed it;

And of ancient times, that I have formed it?"

[Isaiah 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 22:13</span></span>

Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die - This has been the
language or all those who have sought their portion in this life, since
the foundation of the world. So the poet: -

Heu, heu nos miserif quam totus homuncio nil est!

Sic erimus cuncti, postquam nos auferet orcus.

Ergo vivamus, dum licet esse, bene.

Alas alas! what miserable creatures are we, oniy the semblances of men!
And so shall we be all when we come to die. Therefore let us live
joyfully while we may.

Domitian had an image of death hung up in his dining-room, to show his
guests that as life was uncertain, they should make the best of it by
indulging themselves. On this Martial, to flatter the emperor, whom he
styles god, wrote the following epigram: -

Frange thoros, pete vina, tingere nardo.

Ipse jubet mortis te meminisse Deus.

Sit down to table - drink heartily - anoint thyself with spikenard; for
God himself commands thee to remember death.

So the adage: -

Ede, bibe, lude

post mortem nulla voluptas.

"Eat, drink, and play, while here ye may:

No revelry after your dying day."

St. Paul quotes the same heathen sentiment, [Co1
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032) : "Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die." Anacreon is full in point, and from him nothing
better can be expected: -

Ὡς ουν ετ' ευδι' εστιν,

Και πινε και κυβευε

Και σπενδε τῳ Λυαιῳ·

Μη νουσος, ην τις ελθῃ,

Λεγῃ, σε μη δει πινειν.

Anac. Od. xv., 50:11.

"While no tempest blots your sky,

Drink, and throw the sportful dye:

But to Bacchus drench the ground,

Ere you push the goblet round;

Lest some fatal illness cry,

'Drink no more the cup of joy.'"

Addison.

[Isaiah 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 22:14</span></span>

It was revealed in mine ears "The voice of Jehovah" - The Vulgate has
vox Domini; as if in his copy he had read קול יהוה kol Yehovah; and in
truth, without the word קול kol, voice, it is not easy to make out the
sense of the passage; as appears from the strange versions which the
rest of the ancients, (except the Chaldee), and many of the moderns,
have given of it; as if the matter were revealed in or to the ears of
Jehovah: εν τοις ωσι Κυριου, in the ears of the Lord, Septuagint.
Vitringa translates it, Revelatus est in auribus meis Jehovah, "Jehovah
hath revealed it in mine ears," and refers to [Sa1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027); [Sa1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#021) : but the construction in those
places is different, and there is no speech of God added; which here
seems to want something more than the verb נגלה nigleh to introduce it.
Compare [Isa 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#009), where the text is
still more imperfect.

The Lord God of hosts - אדני יהוה צבאות Adonai Yehovah tsebaoth. But
אדני Adonai, Lord, is omitted by two of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS.,
and by two of my own; by three editions, and the Septuagint, Syriac and
Arabic.

[Isaiah 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 22:15</span></span>

Go - unto Shebna - The following prophecy concerning Shebna seems to
have very little relation to the foregoing, except that it might have
been delivered about the same time; and Shebna might be a principal
person among those whose luxury and profaneness is severely reprehended
by the prophet in the conclusion of that prophecy, [Isa
22:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011).

Shebna the scribe, mentioned in the history of Hezekiah, chap. 36, seems
to have been a different person from this Shebna, the treasurer or
steward of the household, to whom this prophecy relates. The Eliakim
here mentioned was probably the person who, at the time of Sennacherib's
invasion, was actually treasurer, the son of Hilkiah. If so, this
prophecy was delivered, as the preceding, (which makes the former part
of the chapter), plainly was, some time before the invasion of
Sennacherib. As to the rest, history affords us no information.

"And say unto him" - Here are two words lost out of the text, which are
supplied by two of Dr. Kennicott's MSS., one ancient, which read ואמרת
אליו veamarta elaiv, and thou shalt say unto him; by the Septuagint, και
ειπον αυτῳ, and in the same manner by all the ancient versions. It is to
be observed that this passage is merely historical, and does not admit
of that sort of ellipsis by which in the poetical parts a person is
frequently introduced speaking, without the usual notice, that what
follows was delivered by him.

[Isaiah 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 22:16</span></span>

A sepulcher on high - in a rock - It has been observed before, on Isaiah
14, that persons of high rank in Judea, and in most parts of the east,
were generally buried in large sepulchral vaults, hewn out in the rock
for the use of themselves and their families. The vanity of Shebna is
set forth by his being so studious and careful to have his sepulcher on
high - in a lofty vault; and that probably in a high situation, that it
might be more conspicuous. Hezekiah was buried, למעלה lemalah, εν
αναβασει, Sept.: in the chiefest, says our translation; rather, in the
highest part of the sepulchres of the sons of David, to do him the more
honor, [Ch2 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#033). There are some
monuments still remaining in Persia of great antiquity, called Naksi
Rustam, which give one a clear idea of Shebna's pompous design for his
sepulcher. They consist of several sepulchers, each of them hewn in a
high rock near the top; the front of the rock to the valley below is
adorned with carved work in relievo, being the outside of the sepulcher.
Some of these sepulchers are about thirty feet in the perpendicular from
the valley, which is itself perhaps raised above half as much by the
accumulation of the earth since they were made. See the description of
them in Chardin, Pietro della Valle, Thevenot, and Kempfer. Diodorus
Siculus, lib. 17, mentions these ancient monuments, and calls them the
sepulchres of the kings of Persia. - L.

[Isaiah 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 22:17</span></span>

Cover thee - That is, thy face. This was the condition of mourners in
general, and particularly of condemned persons. See [Est
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012); [Est
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#008).

[Isaiah 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 22:19</span></span>

I will drive thee - אהרסך ehersecha, in the first person, Syr. Vulg.

[Isaiah 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 22:21</span></span>

To the inhabitants - ליושבי leyoshebey, in the plural number, four of
Dr. Kennicott's MSS., (two ancient), and two of De Rossi's, with the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate.

[Isaiah 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 22:22</span></span>

And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder - As the
robe and the baldric, mentioned in the preceding verse, were the ensigns
of power and authority, so likewise was the key the mark of office,
either sacred or civil. The priestess of Juno is said to be the
key-bearer of the goddess, κλειδουχος Ἡρας· Aeschyl. Suppl. 299. A
female high in office under a great queen has the same title: -

Καλλιθοη κλειδουχος Ολυμπιαδος βασιλειης.

"Callithoe was the key-bearer of the Olympian queen."

Auctor Phoronidis ap. Clem. Alex. p. 418, edit. Potter. This mark of
office was likewise among the Greeks, as here in Isaiah, borne on the
shoulder; the priestess of Ceres, κατωμαδιαν εχε κλαιδα, had the key on
her shoulder. Callim. Ceres, verse 45. To comprehend how the key could
be borne on the shoulder, it will be necessary to say something of the
form of it: but without entering into a long disquisition, and a great
deal of obscure learning, concerning the locks and keys of the ancients,
it will be sufficient to observe, that one sort of keys, and that
probably the most ancient, was of considerable magnitude, and as to the
shape, very much bent and crooked. Aratus, to give his reader an idea of
the form of the constellation Cassiopeia, compares it to a key. It must
be owned that the passage is very obscure; but the learned Huetius has
bestowed a great deal of pains in explaining it, Animadvers. in Manilii,
lib. 1:355; and I think has succeeded very well in it. Homer Odyss. [Isa
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006), describes the key of Ulysses'
storehouse as ευκαμπης, of a large curvature; which Eustathius explains
by saying it was δρεπανοειδης, in shape like a reaphook. Huetius says
the constellation Cassiopeia answers to this description; the stars to
the north making the curve part, that is, the principal part of the key;
the southern stars, the handle. The curve part was introduced into the
key-hole; and, being properly directed by the handle, took hold of the
bolts within, and moved them from their places. We may easily collect
from this account, that such a key would lie very well upon the
shoulder; that it must be of some considerable size and weight, and
could hardly be commodiously carried otherwise. Ulysses' key was of
brass, and the handle of ivory: but this was a royal key. The more
common ones were probably of wood. In Egypt they have no other than
wooden locks and keys to this day; even the gates of Cairo have no
better. Baumgarten, Peregr. 1:18. Thevenot, part ii., chap. 10. But was
it not the representation of a key, either cut out in cloth and sewed on
the shoulder of the garment, or embroidered on that part of the garment
itself? The idea of a huge key of a gate, in any kind of metal, laid
across the shoulder, is to me very ridiculous.

In allusion to the image of the key as the ensign of power, the
unlimited extent of that power is expressed with great clearness as well
as force by the sole and exclusive authority to open and shut. Our
Savior, therefore, has upon a similar occasion made use of a like manner
of expression, [Mat 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019); and in [Rev
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007) has applied to himself the very
words of the prophet.

[Isaiah 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 22:23</span></span>

A nail - In ancient times, and in the eastern countries, as the way of
life, so the houses, were much more simple than ours at present. They
had not that quantity and variety of furniture, nor those accommodations
of all sorts, with which we abound. It was convenient and even necessary
for them, and it made an essential part in the building of a house, to
furnish the inside of the several apartments with sets of spikes, nails,
or large pegs, upon which to dispose of and hang up the several movables
and utensils in common use, and proper to the apartment. These spikes
they worked into the walls at the first erection of them, the walls
being of such materials that they could not bear their being driven in
afterwards; and they were contrived so as to strengthen the walls by
binding the parts together, as well as to serve for convenience. Sir
John Chardin's account of this matter is this: "They do not drive with a
hammer the nails that are put into the eastern walls. The walls are too
hard, being of brick; or, if they are of clay, too moldering: but they
fix them in the brick-work as they are building. They are large nails,
with square heads like dice, well made, the ends being bent so as to
make them cramp-irons. They commonly place them at the windows and
doors, in order to hang upon them, when they like, veils and curtains."
Harmer's Observ. 1 p. 191. And we may add, that they were put in other
places too, in order to hang up other things of various kinds; as
appears from this place of Isaiah, and from [Eze
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#003), who speaks of a pin or nail, "to
hang any vessel thereon." The word used here for a nail of this sort is
the same by which they express that instrument, the stake, or large pin
of iron, with which they fastened down to the ground the cords of their
tents. We see, therefore, that these nails were of necessary and common
use, and of no small importance in all their apartments; conspicuous,
and much exposed to observation: and if they seem to us mean and
insignificant, it is because we are not acquainted with the thing
itself, and have no name to express it but by what conveys to us a low
and contemptible idea. "Grace hath been showed from the Lord our God,"
saith Ezra, [Ezr 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008), "to leave us a
remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place:" that is, as
the margin of our Bible explains it, "a constant and sure abode."

"He that doth lodge near her (Wisdom's) house,

Shall also fasten a pin in her walls."

Ecclus. 14:24.

The dignity and propriety of the metaphor appears from the Prophet
Zechariah's use of it: -

"From him shall be the corner-stone, from him the nail,

From him the battle-bow,

From him every ruler together."

[Zac 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004).

And Mohammed, using the same word, calls Pharaoh the lord or master of
the nails, that is, well attended by nobles and officers capable of
administering his affairs. Koran, Sur. 38:11, and 89:9. So some
understand this passage of the Koran. Mr. Sale seems to prefer another
interpretation.

Taylor, in his Concordance, thinks יתד yathed means the pillar or post
that stands in the middle, and supports the tent, in which such pegs are
fixed to hang their arms, etc., upon; referring to Shaw's Travels, p.
287. But יתד yathed is never used, as far as appears to me, in that
sense. It was indeed necessary that the pillar of the tent should have
such pegs on it for that purpose; but the hanging of such things in this
manner upon this pillar does not prove that יתד yathed was the pillar
itself.

A glorious throne "A glorious seat" - That is, his father's house and
all his own family shall be gloriously seated, shall flourish in honor
and prosperity; and shall depend upon him, and be supported by him.

[Isaiah 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 22:24</span></span>

All the glory - One considerable part of the magnificence of the eastern
princes consisted in the great quantity of gold and silver vessels which
they had for various uses. "Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and
all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold;
none were of silver; it was nothing accounted of in Solomon's days;"
[Kg1 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#021). "The vessels in the house
of the forest of Lebanon," the armory of Jerusalem so called, "were two
hundred targets, and three hundred shields of beaten gold." Ibid. [Kg1
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#016), [Kg1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#017). These were ranged in order upon
the walls of the armory, (see [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004)), upon pins worked into the walls
on purpose, as above mentioned. Eliakim is considered as a principal
stake of this sort, immovably fastened in the wall for the support of
all vessels destined for common or sacred uses; that is, as the
principal support of the whole civil and ecclesiastical polity. And the
consequence of his continued power will be the promotion and flourishing
condition of his family and dependents, from the highest to the lowest.

Vessels of flagons "Meaner vessels" - נבלים nebalim seems to mean
earthen vessels of common use, brittle, and of little value, (see [Lam
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002); [Jer
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#012)), in opposition to אגנות
aganoth, goblets of gold and silver used in the sacrifices. [Exo
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006).

[Isaiah 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 22:25</span></span>

The nail that is fastened - This must be understood of Shebna, as a
repetition and confirmation of the sentence above denounced against him.

What is said of Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, [Isa
22:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#020), is very remarkable; and the
literal meaning is not easy to be understood. From [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), and from [Rev
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#007), it seems to belong to our Lord
alone. The removal of Shebna from being over the treasure of the Lord's
house, [Isa 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#019), and the investiture
of Eliakim with his robe, girdle, office, and government, [Isa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#020), etc., probably point out the
change of the Jewish priesthood, and the proclaiming of the unchangeable
priesthood of Christ. See [Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004).
Eliakim signifies The resurrection of the Lord; or, My God, he shall
arise. Hilkiah signifies The Lord my portion or lot. The key of David,
shutting and opening, etc., may intend the way of salvation through
Christ alone. For the hope of salvation and eternal life comes only
through Eliakim, the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

It is said, [Isa 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#024), "They shall
hang upon him all the glory of his father's house" - for, in Jesus
Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; and the offspring
and the issue, הצאצאים hatstseetsaim from יצא yatsa, to go out, - the
suckers from the root; the sideshoots, the apostles and primitive
ministers of his word. The issue, הצפיעות hatstsephioth, probably means
the issue's issue; so the Targum. The grandchildren, all those who
believe on the Lord Jesus through their word.

"The nail that is fastened in the sure place shall be removed," [Isa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#025), Kimchi refers not to Eliakim,
but to Shebna, [Isa 22:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#017). By,
"They shall hang upon him all vessels of small quantity and large
quantity," has been understood the dependence of all souls, of all
capacities, from the lowest in intellect to the most exalted on the Lord
Jesus, as the only Savior of all lost human spirits.

As the literal interpretation of this prophecy has not been found out,
we are justified from parallel texts to consider the whole as referring
to Jesus Christ, and the government of the Church, and the redemption of
the world by him. Nor are there many prophecies which relate to him more
clearly than this, taken in the above sense.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 23](isa023)

</div>
