<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa016)  [Next](isa018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 17:0</span></span>

Judgments of God upon Damascus, [Isa
17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001); and upon Israel, [Isa
17:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004). Good effects of these
judgments on the small remnant or gleaning that should escape them, [Isa
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#007), [Isa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008). The same judgments represented
in other but stronger terms, and imputed to irreligion and neglect of
God, [Isa 17:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009). The remaining
verses are a distinct prophecy, a beautiful detached piece, worked up
with the greatest elegance, sublimity, and propriety; and forming a
noble description of the formidable invasion and sudden overthrow of
Sennacherib, exactly suitable to the event, [Isa
17:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012).

This prophecy by its title should relate only to Damascus; but it full
as much concerns, and more largely treats of, the kingdom of Samaria and
the Israelites, confederated with Damascus and the Syrians against the
kingdom of Judah. It was delivered probably soon after the prophecies of
the seventh and eighth chapters, in the beginning of the reign of Ahaz;
and was fulfilled by Tiglath-pileser's taking Damascus, and carrying the
people captives to Kir, ([Kg2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009)),
and overrunning great part of the kingdom of Israel, and carrying a
great number of the Israelites also captives to Assyria; and still more
fully in regard to Israel, by the conquest of the kingdom, and the
captivity of the people, effected a few years after by Shalmaneser. - L.

[Isaiah 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 17:1</span></span>

The burden of Damascus - Which is, according to the common version, The
cities of Aroer are forsaken. It has already been observed by the
learned prelate that the prophecy, as it relates to Damascus, was
executed in the beginning of the reign of Ahaz, probably about the third
year. If we credit Midrash, the Damascenes were the most extensive and
flagrant of all idolaters. "There were in Damascus three hundred and
sixty-five streets, in each of these was an idol, and each idol had his
peculiar day of worship; so that the whole were worshipped in the course
of the year." This, or any thing like this, was a sufficient reason for
this city's destruction.

A ruinous heap - For מעי mei, "a ruinous heap," the Septuagint reads לעי
lei, "for a ruin," the Vulgate כעי kei, "as a ruin." I follow the
former.

[Isaiah 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 17:2</span></span>

The cities of Aroer are forsaken "The cities are deserted for ever" -
What has Aroer on the river Arnon to do with Damascus? and if there be
another Aroer on the northern border of the tribe of Gad, as Reland
seems to think there might be, this is not much more to the purpose.
Besides, the cities of Aroer, if Aroer itself is a city, makes no good
sense. The Septuagint, for ערער aroer, read עדי עד adey ad, εις τον
αιωνα, for ever, or for a long duration. The Chaldee takes the word for
a verb from ערה arah, translating it חרבו cherebu, devastabuntur, "they
shall be wasted." The Syriac read עדועיר adoeir. So that the reading is
very doubtful. I follow the Septuagint as making the plainest sense.

[Isaiah 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 17:3</span></span>

The remnant of Syria "The pride of Syria" - For שאר shear, "remnant,"
Houbigant reads שאת seeth, "pride," answering, as the sentence seems
evidently to require, to כבוד cabod, "the glory of Israel." The
conjecture is so very probable that I venture to follow it.

As the glory - בכבוד bichbod, "In the glory," is the reading of eight
MSS., and ten editions.

[Isaiah 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 17:4</span></span>

In that day - That is, says Kimchi, the time when the ten tribes of
Israel, which were the glory of Jacob, should be carried into captivity.

[Isaiah 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 17:5</span></span>

As when the harvestman gathereth "As when one gathereth" - That is, the
king of Assyria shall sweep away the whole body of the people, as the
reaper strippeth off the whole crop of corn; and the remnant shall be no
more in proportion than the scattered ears left to the gleaner. The
valley of Rephaim near Jerusalem was celebrated for its plentiful
harvest; it is here used poetically for any fruitful country. One MS.,
and one ancient edition, has באסף beesoph, "In gathering," instead of
כאסף keesoph, "AS the gathering."

[Isaiah 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 17:8</span></span>

The altars, the work of his hands "The altars dedicated to the work of
his hands" - The construction of the words, and the meaning of the
sentence, in this place are not obvious; all the ancient Versions, and
most of the modern, have mistaken it. The word מעשה maaseh, "the work,"
stands in regimine with מזבחות mizbechoth, "altars," not in opposition
to it; it means the, altars of the work of their hand; that is of the
idols, which are the work of their hands. Thus Kimchi has explained it,
and Le Clerc has followed him.

[Isaiah 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 17:9</span></span>

As a forsaken bough, and an uppermost branch "the Hivites and the
Amorites" - החרש והאמיר hachoresh vehaamir. No one has ever yet been
able to make any tolerable sense of these words. The translation of the
Septuagint has happily preserved what seems to be the true reading of
the text, as it stood in the copies of their time; though the words are
now transposed, either in the text or in their Version; οἱ Αμαρῥαιοι και
οἱ Ευαιοι, "the Amorites and the Hivites." It is remarkable that many
commentators, who never thought of admitting the reading of the
Septuagint, understand the passage as referring to that very event which
their Version expresses; so that it is plain that nothing can be more
suitable to the context. "My father," says Bishop Lowth, "saw the
necessity of admitting this variation at a time when it was not usual to
make so free with the Hebrew text." Mr. Parkhurst is not satisfied with
the prelate's adoption of the reading of the Septuagint, "the Hivites
and the Amorites." He thinks the difficult words should be thus
rendered; he takes the whole verse: "And his fortified cities shall be
like the leaving, or what is left כעזובת caazubath, of or in a ploughed
field, החרש hachoresh, or on a branch which they leave coram, before,
the children of Israel." Which he considers a plain reference to the
Mosaic laws relative to the not gleaning of their ploughed fields,
vineyards, and oliveyards, but leaving עזב ozeb, somewhat of the fruits,
for the poor of the land; [Lev 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#009),
[Lev 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#010); [Deu
24:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019), in the Hebrew. I fear that
the text is taken by storm on both interpretations. One MS. has כל ערי
col arey, "all the cities;" and instead of החלש hachalash, "of the
branch," six MSS. have החדש hachodesh, "of the month." But this is
probably a mistake.

[Isaiah 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 17:10</span></span>

Strange slips "Shoots from a foreign soil" - The pleasant plants, and
shoots from a foreign soil, are allegorical expressions for strange and
idolatrous worship; vicious and abominable practices connected with it;
reliance on human aid, and on alliances entered into with the
neighboring nations, especially Egypt; to all which the Israelites were
greatly addicted, and in their expectations from which they should be
grievously disappointed.

[Isaiah 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 17:12</span></span>

Wo to the multitude - The three last verses of this chapter seem to have
no relation to the foregoing prophecy, to which they are joined. It is a
beautiful piece, standing singly and by itself; for neither has it any
connection with what follows: whether it stands in its right place, or
not, I cannot say. It is a noble description of the formidable invasion
and the sudden overthrow of Sennacherib; which is intimated in the
strongest terms and the most expressive images, exactly suitable to the
event.

Like the rushing of mighty waters! - Five words, three at the end of the
twelfth verse, and two at the beginning of the thirteenth, are omitted
in eight MSS., with the Syriac; that is, in effect, the repetition
contained in the first line of [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013) in this translation, is not
made. After having observed that it is equally easy to account for the
omission of these words by a transcriber if they are genuine, or their
insertion if they are not genuine, occasioned by his carrying his eye
backwards to the word לאמים leammim, or forwards to ישאון yeshaon, I
shall leave it to the reader's judgment to determine whether they are
genuine or not. Instead of כהמות cahamoth, "as the roaring," five MSS.
and the Vulgate have כהמון kehamon, "as the multitude."

[Isaiah 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 17:14</span></span>

He is not "He is no more" - For איננו einennu ten MSS. of Dr.
Kennicott's, (three ancient), ten of De Rossi's, and two editions, and
the Septuagint, Syriac, Chaldee, Vulgate, and Arabic, have ואיננו
veeinenno. This particle, authenticated by so many good vouchers,
restores the sentence to its true poetical form, implying a repetition
of some part of the parallel line preceding, thus: -

"At the season of evening, behold terror!

Before the morning, and \[behold\] he is no more!"

That spoil us - For שוסינו shoseynu, them that spoil us, fifteen MSS.,
one edition, and the Syriac have שוסנו shosenu, him that spoileth us.
And for לבזזינו lebozezeynu, them that rob us, six MSS. and the Syriac
have לבוזזנו lebozzeno, him that robbeth us: and these readings make the
place answer better to Sennacherib, according to Lowth's conjecture.
Though God may permit the wicked to prevail for a time against his
people, yet in the end those shall be overthrown, and the glory of the
Lord shall shine brightly on them that fear him; for the earth shall be
subdued, and the universe filled with his glory. Amen, and Amen!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 18](isa018)

</div>
