<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa041)  [Next](isa043.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 42:0</span></span>

The prophet sets forth the meekness of Messiah's character, and the
extent and blessings of his kingdom, particularly among the Gentiles,
[Isa 42:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md). In consequence of this he
calls on the whole creation to join him in one song of praise to God,
[Isa 42:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010.md). After which he seems
again to glance at the deliverance from the captivity; although the
words may full as well apply to the deliverance vouchsafed to the
Church; to the overthrow of her must powerful enemies; and to the
prevalency of true religion over idolatry and error, [Isa
42:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013.md). The prophet then reproves
the Jews for their blindness and infidelity in rejecting the Messiah,
and gives intimations of these judgments which their guilt would draw on
them, [Isa 42:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#018.md).

The prophet, having opened his subject with the preparation for the
return from captivity at Babylon, and intimated that a much greater
deliverance was covered under the veil of that event, proceeded to
vindicate the power of God, as Creator and disposer of all things; and
his infinite knowledge, from his prediction of future events, and in
particular of that deliverance. He went still farther, and pointed out
the instrument by which he should effect the redemption of his people
the Jews from slavery; namely, a great conqueror, whom he would call
forth from the north and the east to execute his orders. In this chapter
he proceeds to the greater deliverance; and at once brings forth into
full view, without throwing any veil of allegory over the subject, the
Messiah. "Behold my servant, Messiah, "says the Chaldee. St. Matthew has
applied it directly to Christ; nor can it with any justice or propriety
be applied to any other person or character whatever. - L

[Isaiah 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 42:1</span></span>

Behold my servant, whom I uphold - אתמך בו ethmach bo, on whom I lean.
Alluding to the custom of kings leaning on the arm of their most beloved
and faithful servant. All, both Jews and Christians, agree, that the
seven first verses of this chapter belong to Christ. Now, as they are
evidently a continuation of the prophecy in the preceding chapter, that
prophecy cannot belong to Cyrus, but to Christ.

He shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles "He shall publish judgment
to the nations" - Four MSS. two ancient, add the conjunction ומשפט
vemishpat. See [Mat 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018.md).

The word משפט mishpat, judgment, like צדקה tsedakah, righteousness, is
taken in a great latitude of signification. It means rule, form, order,
model, plan; rule of right, or of religion; an ordinance, institution;
judicial process, cause, trial, sentence, condemnation, acquittal,
deliverance, mercy, etc. It certainly means in this place the law to be
published by Messiah, the institution of the Gospel.

[Isaiah 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 42:4</span></span>

He shall not fail nor be discouraged "His force shall not be abated nor
broken" - Rabbi Meir ita citat locum istum, ut post ירוץ yaruts, addat
כוחו cocho, robur ejus, quod hodie Ilon comparet in textu Hebraeo, sed
addendum videtur, ut sensus fiat planior.

"Rabbi Meir cites this passage so as to add after ירוץ yarats כוחו
cocho, his force, which word is not found in the present Hebrew text,
but seems necessary to be added to make the sense more distinct."
Capell. Crit. Sac. p. 382. For which reason I had added it in the
translation, before I observed this remark of Capellus. - L.

[Isaiah 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 42:6</span></span>

A covenant of the people "A covenant to the people" - For עם am, two
MSS. of Dr. Kennicott's, and of my own, read עולם olam, the covenant of
the age to come, or the everlasting covenant; which seems to give a
clearer and better sense. But I think the word ברית berith, here, should
not be translated covenant, but covenant sacrifice, which meaning it
often has; and undoubtedly in this place. This gives a still stronger
and clearer sense.

[Isaiah 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 42:7</span></span>

To open the blind eyes - In this verse the prophet seems to set forth
the spiritual redemption, under images borrowed from the temporal
deliverance.

Out of the prison house "And from the dungeon" - The Septuagint, Syriac,
and four MSS., one ancient, add the conjunction ו vau, ומבית umibbeith,
and from the house.

[Isaiah 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 42:8</span></span>

I am the Lord - אני יהוה ani Yehovah. This is the famous tetragrammaton,
or name of four letters, which we write Jehovah Yehovah, Yehveh, Yeveh,
Jhuh, Javah, etc. The letters are Y H U H. The Jews never pronounce it,
and the true pronunciation is utterly unknown.

That is my name - A name peculiar to myself.

[Isaiah 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 42:10</span></span>

Ye that go down to the sea - This seems not to belong to this place; it
does not well consist with what follows, "and the fullness thereof."
They that go down upon the sea means navigators, sailors, traders, such
as do business in great waters; an idea much too confined for the
prophet, who means the sea in general, as it is used by the Hebrews, for
the distant nations, the islands, the dwellers on the sea-coasts all
over the world. I suspect that some transcriber had the [Psa
107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023.md) verse of Psalm 107 running in
his head, יורדי הים באניות yoredey haiyam booniyoth, and wrote in this
place יורדי הים yoredey haiyam instead of ירעם הים yiram haiyam, or יריע
yari, or ירן yaran; "let the sea roar, or shout, or exult." But as this
is so different in appearance from the present reading, I do not take
the liberty of introducing it into the translation. Conjeceram legendum
יגידו yegidu, ut [Isa 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#012.md); sed non
favent Versiones. "I would propose to read יגידו yegidu, as in [Isa
42:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#012.md); but this is not supported by
the Versions." - Secker.

[Isaiah 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 42:11</span></span>

Let the wilderness - The most uncultivated countries, and the most rude
and uncivilized people, shall confess and celebrate with thanksgiving
the blessing of the knowledge of God graciously imparted to them. By the
desert is meant Arabia Deserta; by the rocky country, Arabia Petraea; by
the mountains, probably those celebrated ones, Paran, Horeb, Sinai, in
the same country; to which also belonged Kedar, a clan of Arabians,
dwelling for the most part in tents; but there were others of them who
inhabited or frequented cities and villages, as may be collected from
this place of the prophet. Pietro della Valle, speaking of the people of
Arabia Deserta, says: "There is a sort of Arabs of that country called
Maedi, who with their herds, of buffaloes for the most part, sometimes
live in the deserts, and sometimes in cities; from whence they have
their name, which signifies wandering, going from place to place. They
have no professed houses; nor are they properly Bedaui, or Beduui, that
is, Deserticoli, who are the most noble among them, and never abide
within walls, but always go wandering through the open country with
their black tents; nor are they properly called Hhadesi, as they call
those who dwell in cities, and lands with fixed houses. These by the
latter are esteemed ignoble and base; but both are considered as of low
condition." Viaggi, Parte 3 lett. ii.

The villages that Kedar doth inhabit - The Arabs, according to the
Targum.

The inhabitants of the rock - They who dwell on fortified places. The
Vulgate has habitatores Petraeae, "the inhabitants of Arabia Petraea."
Those who make the rock Jesus Christ, the inhabitants of the rock, true
believers in him; the singing, rejoicing for the salvation they have
received; abuse and disgrace the passage and the pulpit. I have heard a
clergyman, a magistrate, a justice of the quorum, spend an hour in
showing from these words,

1\. That they meant Jesus Christ, and none other.

2\. That he might be fully compared to a rock, as the foundation on
which his Church was built, and on which all true believers rested for
their salvation.

3\. A rock, because of his strength and might in destroying his enemies,
and supporting his friends.

4\. A refreshing rock, like that in the wilderness; and that rock was
Christ.

5\. A perspective rock, from which true believers could discover their
heavenly inheritance: "When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the rock
that is higher than I, "etc. Now all this is true in itself; but false
in respect to the words on which it was professedly built, for they have
no such meaning.

[Isaiah 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 42:14</span></span>

I have been still "Shall I keep silence for ever" - After מעולם meolam,
in the copy which the Septuagint had before them, followed the word
הלעולם, heleolam, εσιωπησα απ' αιωνος· Μη και αει σιωπησομαι· according
to MSS. Pachom. and 50. D. 2 and Edit. Complut., which word, הלעולם
haleolam, has been omitted in the text by an easy mistake of a
transcriber, because of the similitude of the word preceding. Shall I
always keep silences like that of Juvenal: Semper ego auditor tantum?
Shall I always be a hearer only?

[Isaiah 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 42:15</span></span>

I wilt make the rivers islands "I will make the rivers dry deserts" -
Instead of איים iyim, islands, read ציים tsiim; a very probable
conjecture of Houbigant.

[Isaiah 42:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 42:16</span></span>

In paths - The Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and nine MSS., (two
ancient), read ובנתיבות ubenotiboth.

Will I do unto them - עשיתם asitem. This word, so written as it is in
the text, means "thou wilt do, "in the second person. The Masoretes have
indeed pointed it for the first person; but the י yod in the last
syllable is absolutely necessary to distinguish the first person; and so
it is written in forty MSS., עשיתים asithim.

Jarchi, Kimchi, Sal. ben Melec, etc., agree that the past time is here
put for the future, עשיתי asithi for אעשה; and indeed the context
necessarily requires that interpretation. Farther it is to be observed
that עשיתים asithim is put for עשיתי להם asithi lahem, "I have done
them," for "I have done for them;" as עשיתני asitheni is for עשיתי לי
asiti li, "I have made myself," for "I have made for myself," [Eze
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#002.md); and in the celebrated passage of
Jephthah's vow, [Jdg 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#031.md), והעליתיהו
עולה veheelitihu olah for העליתי לו עולה heelithi lo olah, "I will offer
him a burnt-offering, "for "I will offer unto him (that is, unto
Jehovah) a burnt-offering;" by an ellipsis of the preposition of which
Buxtorf gives many other examples, Thes. Grammat. lib. 2:17. See also
note on [Isa 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005.md). A late happy
application of this grammatical remark to that much disputed passage has
perfectly cleared up a difficulty which for two thousand years had
puzzled all the translators and expositors, had given occasion to
dissertations without number, and caused endless disputes among the
learned on the question, whether Jephthah sacrificed his daughter or
not; in which both parties have been equally ignorant of the meaning of
the place, of the state of the fact, and of the very terms of the vow;
which now at last has been cleared up beyond all doubt by my learned
friend Dr. Randolph, Margaret Professor of Divinity in the University of
Oxford, in his Sermon on Jephthah's Vow, Oxford, 1766. - L.

[Isaiah 42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 42:19</span></span>

As my messenger that I sent "As he to whom I have sent my messengers" -
כמלכי אשלח kemalachey eshlach, ut ad quem nuncios meos misi. The Vulgate
and Chaldee are almost the only interpreters who render it rightly, in
consistence with the rest of the sentence, and in perfect agreement with
the Hebrew idiom; according to which the ellipsis is to be thus
supplied: כלאשר מלאכי אשלח kelaasher malachey eshlach; "As he to whom I
have sent my messengers."

As he that is perfect "As he who is perfectly instructed" - See note on
[Isa 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002) (note.md).

And blind as the Lord's servant "And deaf, as the servant of Jehovah" -
For ועור veivver, and blind, we must read וחרש vecheresh, and deaf:
κωφος, Symmachus, and so a MS. The mistake is palpable, and the
correction self-evident, and admissible though there had been no
authority for it.

[Isaiah 42:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 42:20</span></span>

Seeing many things "Thou hast seen indeed" - The text has ראית רבית
raith rabith, which the Masoretes in the marginal Keri have corrected to
ראות רבות reoth rabboth; as indeed one hundred and seven MSS., and five
editions, now have it in the text. This was probably the reading of most
of the MSS. of their time; which, though they approved of it, out of
some superstition they would not admit into their standard text. But
these wretched critics, though they perceived there was some fault, yet
did not know where the fault lay, nor consequently how to amend it; and
yet it was open enough to a judicious eye: רבות rabboth, sic veteres; et
tamen forte legendum, ראות reoth, vide cap. [Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009.md)." - Secker. That is, ראית ראות
raith, reoth, seeing, thou shalt see. I believe no one will doubt of
admitting this as the true reading.

But he heareth not "Yet thou wilt not hear" - For ישמע yishma, read תשמע
tishma, in the second person; so all the ancient Versions and forty MSS.
of Kennicott's, (four of them ancient), and seventeen of De Rossi's, and
perhaps five more. Two others have תשמעו tishmeu, second person plural.

[Isaiah 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 42:21</span></span>

He win magnify the law "He hath exalted his own praise" - For תורה
torah, the law, the Septuagint read תודה todah, praise.

[Isaiah 42:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 42:22</span></span>

They are all of them snared in holes "All their chosen youths are taken
in the toils" - For הפח hapheach read הופחו huphachu, in the plural
number, hophal; as החבאו hochbau, which answers to it in the following
member of the sentence. Le Clerc, Houbigant. הפח huppach, Secker.

[Isaiah 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 42:24</span></span>

We have sinned "They have sinned" - For חטאנו chatanu, "we have sinned,"
first person; the Septuagint and Chaldee read חטאו chateu, "they have
sinned," in the third person.

[Isaiah 42:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 42:25</span></span>

The fury of his anger "The heat of his wrath" - For חמה chammah, the
Bodl. MS. has חמת chammath, in regimine, more regularly.

It hath set him on fire round about - So thoroughly hardened are the
Jewish people, that they are represented as being in a house on fire,
and even scorched with the flames, without perceiving their danger, or
feeling that they are hurt! What a picture of mental induration! and
this is their state to the present day. But by whom shall Jacob arise?
for in this sense he is small indeed. Many efforts have been made to
Christianize them, but without effect; and is this to be wondered at,
while we tell them how great they are, how learned, how wise, how much
we owe to them, that they are still the peculiar people of God, etc.,
etc.? If all this be true, what can they gain by becoming Christians?
Whereas a more stupid, proud, hardened, ignorant people can scarcely be
found in the civilized world, and they are most grossly ignorant of
their own Scriptures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 43](isa043.md)

</div>
