<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa019)  [Next](isa021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 20:0</span></span>

The Prophet Isaiah a sign to Egypt and Cush or Ethiopia, that the
captives and exiles of these countries shall be indignantly treated by
the king of Assyria, [Isa 20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001).

Tartan besieged Ashdod or Azotus, which probably belonged at this time
to Hezekiah's dominions; see [Kg2
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008). The people expected to be
relieved by the Cushites of Arabia and by the Egyptians. Isaiah was
ordered to go uncovered, that is, without his upper garment, the rough
mantle commonly worn by the prophets, (see [Zac
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004)), probably three days to show
that within three years the town should be taken, after the defeat of
the Cushites and Egyptians by the king of Assyria, which event should
make their case desperate, and induce them to surrender. Azotus was a
strong place; it afterwards held out twenty-nine years against
Psammitichus, king of Egypt, Herod. 2:157. Tartan was one of
Sennacherib's generals, [Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017),
and Tirhakah, king of the Cushites, was in alliance with the king of
Egypt against Sennacherib. These circumstances make it probable that by
Sargon is meant Sennacherib. It might be one of the seven names by which
Jerome, on this place, says he was called. He is called Sacherdonus and
Sacherdan in the book of Tobit. The taking of Azotus must have happened
before Sennacherib's attempt on Jerusalem; when he boasted of his late
conquests, [Isa 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#025). And the warning
of the prophet had a principal respect to the Jews also, who were too
much inclined to depend upon the assistance of Egypt. As to the rest
history and chronology affording us no light, it may be impossible to
clear either this or any other hypothesis, which takes Sargon to be
Shalmaneser or Asarhaddon, etc., from all difficulties. - L. Kimchi
says, this happened in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah.

[Isaiah 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 20:2</span></span>

Walking naked and barefoot - It is not probable that the prophet walked
uncovered and barefoot for three years; his appearing in that manner was
a sign that within three years the Egyptians and Cushites should be in
the same condition, being conquered and made captives by the king of
Assyria. The time was denoted as well as the event; but his appearing in
that manner for three whole years could give no premonition of the time
at all. It is probable, therefore, that the prophet was ordered to walk
so for three days to denote the accomplishment of the event in three
years; a day for a year, according to the prophetical rule, [Num
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#034); [Eze
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#006). The words שלש ימים shalosh yamim,
three days, may possibly have been lost out of the text, at the end of
the second verse, after יחף yacheph, barefoot; or after the same word in
the third verse, where, in the Alexandrine and Vatican copies of the
Septuagint, and in MSS. Pachom. and 1. D. 2 the words τρια ετη, three
years, are twice expressed. Perhaps, instead of שלש ימים shalosh yamim,
three days, the Greek translator might read שלש שנים shalosh shanim,
three years, by his own mistake, or by that of his copy, after יחף
yacheph in the third verse, for which stands the first τρια ετη, three
years, in the Alexandrine and Vatican Septuagint, and in the two MSS.
above mentioned. It is most likely that Isaiah's walking naked and
barefoot was done in a vision; as was probably that of the Prophet Hosea
taking a wife of whoredoms. None of these things can well be taken
literally.

From thy foot - רגליך ragleycha, thy feet, is the reading of thirty-four
of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., four ancient editions, with the
Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 21](isa021)

</div>
