<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa044)  [Next](isa046.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 45:0</span></span>

Prophecy concerning Cyrus, the first king of the Persians. Every
obstruction shall be removed out of his way, and the treasures taken
from his enemies shall be immense, [Isa
45:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001.md), To whom, and on what account,
Cyrus was indebted for his wonderful success, [Isa
45:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#004.md). The prophet refutes the absurd
opinion of the Persians, that there were two supreme beings, an evil and
a good one, represented by light and darkness, here declared to be only
the operation of the One true God, [Isa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007.md); and makes a transition to the
still greater work of God displayed in the dispensation of the Gospel,
[Isa 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008.md). Great impiety of those who
call in question the mysterious providence of God towards his children,
[Isa 45:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009.md). The remaining part of
this chapter, interspersed with strictures on the absurdity of idolatry
and some allusions to the dark lying oracles of the heathens, may partly
refer to the deliverance begun by Cyrus, but chiefly to the salvation by
the Messiah, which, it is declared, shall be of universal extent and
everlasting duration, [Isa 45:13-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#013.md).

[Isaiah 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 45:1</span></span>

Loose the loins of kings "ungird the loins of kings" - See the note on
[Isa 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#027.md). Xenophon gives the
following list of the nations conquered by Cyrus: the Syrians,
Assyrians, Arabians, Cappadocians, both the Phrygians, Lydians, Carians,
Phoenicians, Babylonians. He moreover reigned over the Bactrians,
Indians, Cilicians, the Sacae Paphlagones, and ldariandyni. - Cyrop.,
lib. 1 p. 4, Edit. Hutchinson, Quarto. All these kingdoms he
acknowledges, in his decree for the restoration of the Jews, to have
been given to him by Jehovah, the God of heaven. [Ezr
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002.md).

To open before him the two leaved gates, etc. "That I may open before
him the valves; and the gates shall not be shut" - The gates of Babylon
within the city leading from the streets to the river, were
providentially left open, when Cyrus's forces entered the city in the
night through the channel of the river, in the general disorder
occasioned by the great feast which was then celebrated; otherwise, says
Herodotus, 1:191, the Persians would have been shut up in the bed of the
river, and taken as in a net, and all destroyed. And the gates of the
palace were opened imprudently by the king's orders, to inquire what was
the cause of the tumult without; when the two parties under Gobrias and
Gadatas rushed in, got possession of the palace, and slew the king. -
Xenoph., Cyrop. 7 p. 528.

[Isaiah 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 45:2</span></span>

The crooked places "The mountains" - For הדורים hodurim, crooked places,
a word not easily accounted for in this place, the Septuagint read הררים
hararim, τα ορη, the mountains. Two MSS. have הדרים hadarim, without the
ו vau, which is hardly distinguishable from the reading of the
Septuagint. The Divine protection that attended Cyrus, and rendered his
expedition against Babylon easy and prosperous is finely expressed by
God's going before him, and making the mountains level. The image is
highly poetical: -

At vos, qua veniet, tumidi subsidite montes,

Et faciles curvis vallibus este viae.

Ovid, Amor. 2:16.

"Let the lofty mountains fall down,

and make level paths in the crooked valleys."

The gates of brass "The valves of brass" - Abydenus, apud, Euseb. Praep.
Evang. 9:41, says, that the wall of Babylon had brazen gates. And
Herodotus, i, 179. more particularly: "In the wall all round there are a
hundred gates, all of brass; and so in like manner are the sides and the
lintels." The gates likewise within the city, opening to the river from
the several streets, were of brass; as were those also of the temple of
Belus. - Herod. i., 180, 181.

[Isaiah 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 45:3</span></span>

I will gave thee the treasures of darkness - Sardes and Babylon, when
taken by Cyrus, were the wealthiest cities in the world. Croesus,
celebrated beyond all the kings of that age for his riches, gave up his
treasures to Cyrus, with an exact account in writing of the whole,
containing the particulars with which each wagon was loaded when they
were carried away; and they were delivered to Cyrus at the palace of
Babylon. - Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 7 p. 503, 515, 540.

Pliny gives the following account of the wealth taken by Cyrus in Asia.
Jam Cyrus devicta Asia, pondo 34 millia auri invenerat; praeter vasa
aurea, aurumque factum, et in eo folia, ac platanum, vitemque. Qua
victoria argenti quingenta millia talentorum reportavit; et craterem
Semiramidis, cuius pondus quindecim talents colligebat. Talentum autem
Aegyptium pondo lxxx. patere 50 capere Varro tradit. - Nat. Hist. 33:15.
"When Cyrus conquered Asia, he found thirty-four thousand pounds weight
of gold, besides golden vessels and articles in gold; and leaves,
(folia, perhaps solia, bathing vessels, Hol.), a plane, and vine tree,
(of gold.) By which victory he carried away fifteen thousand talents of
silver; and the cup of Semiramis, the weight of which was fifteen
tatents. The Egyptian talent, according to Varro, was eighty pounds."
This cup was the crater, or large vessel, out of which they filled the
drinking cups at great entertainments. Evidently it could not be a
drinking vessel, which, according to what Varro and Pliny say, must have
weighed 1, 200 pounds!

The gold and silver estimated by weight in this account, being converted
into pounds sterling, amount to one hundred and twenty-six millions two
hwndred and twenty-four thousand pounds. - Brerewood, De Ponderibus,
cap. x.

Treasures of darkness may refer to the custom of burying their jewels
and money under the ground in their house floors, fearing robbers.

[Isaiah 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 45:7</span></span>

I form the light, and create darkness - It was the great principle of
the Magian religion, which prevailed in Persia in the time of Cyrus, and
in which probably he was educated, that there are two supreme,
co-eternal, and independent causes always acting in opposition one to
the other; one the author of all good, the other of all evil. The good
being they called Light; the evil being, Darkness. That when Light had
the ascendant, then good and happtness prevailed among men; when
Darkness had the superiority, then eviI and misery abounded. An opinion
that contradicts the clearest evidence of our reason, which plainly
leads us to the acknowledgment of one only Supreme Being, infinitely
good as well as powerful. With reference to this absurd opinion, held by
the person to whom this prophecy is addressed, God, by his prophet, in
the most significant terms, asserts his omnipotence and absolute
supremacy: -

"I am Jehovah, and none else;

Forming light, and creating darkness,

Making peace, and creating evil:

I Jehovah am the author of all these things."

Declaring that those powers whom the Persians held to be the original
authors of good and evil to mankind, representing them by light and
darkness, as their proper emblems, are no other than creatures of God,
the instruments which he employs in his government of the world,
ordained or permitted by him in order to execute his wise and just
decrees; and that there is no power, either of good or evil, independent
of the one supreme God, infinite in power and in goodness.

There were, however, some among the Persians whose sentiments were more
moderate as to this matter; who held the evil principle to be in some
measure subordinate to the good; and that the former would at length be
wholly subdued by the latter. See Hyde, De Relig. Vet. Pers. cap. xxii.

That this opinion prevailed among the Persians as early as the time of
Cyrus we may, I think, infer not only from this passage of Isaiah, which
has a manifest reference to it, but likewise from a passage in
Xenophon's Cyropaedia, where the same doctrine is applied to the human
mind. Araspes, a noble young Persian, had fallen in love with the fair
captive Panthea, committed to his charge by Cyrus. After all his
boasting that he was superior to the assaults of that passion, he
yielded so far to it as even to threaten violence if she would not
comply with his desires. Awed by the reproof of Cyrus, fearing his
displeasure, and having by cool reflection recovered his reason; in his
discourse with him on this subject he says: "O Cyrus, I have certainly
two souls; alld this piece of philosophy I have learned from that wicked
sophist, Love. For if I had but one soul, it would not be at the same
time good and evil, it would not at the same time approve of honorable
and base actions; and at once desire to do, and refuse to do, the very
same things. But it is plain that I am animated by two souls, and when
the good soul prevails, I do what is virtuous; and when the evil one
prevails, I attempt what is vicious. But now the good soul prevails,
having gotten you for her assistant, and has clearly gained the
superiority." Lib. 6 p. 424.

I make peace, and create evil - Evil is here evidently put for war and
its attendant miseries. I will procure peace for the Israelites, and
destroy Babylon by war. I form light, and create darkness. Now, as
darkness is only the privation of light, so the evil of war is the
privation of peace.

[Isaiah 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 45:8</span></span>

Drop down, ye heavens - The eighty-fifth psalm is a very elegant ode on
the same subject with this part of Isaiah's prophecies, the restoration
of Judah from captivity; and is, in the most beautiful part of it, a
manifest imitation of this passage of the prophet: -

"Verily his salvation is nigh unto them that fear him,

That glory may dwell in our land.

Mercy and truth have met together;

Righteousness and peace have kissed each other.

Truth shall spring from the earth,

And righteousness shall look down from heaven.

Even Jehovah: will give that which is good,

And our land shall yield her produce.

Righteousness shall go before him,

And shall direct his footsteps in the way."

Psalm 85:10-14.

See the notes on these verses.

These images of the dew and the rain descending from heaven and making
the earth fruitful, employed by the prophet, and some of those nearly of
the same kind which are used by the psalmist, may perhaps be primarily
understood as designed to set forth in a splendid manner the happy state
of God's people restored to their country, and flourishing in peace and
plenty, in piety and virtue; but justice and salvation, mercy and truth,
righteousness and peace, and glory dwelling in the land, cannot with any
sort of propriety, in the one or the other, be interpreted as the
consequences of that event; they must mean the blessings of the great
redemption by Messiah.

Let the earth open, etc. - Jonathan, in his Targum, refers this to the
resurrection of the dead; the earth shall be opened, ויחון מיתיא
veyechon meiteiya, and the dead shall revive. A plain proof that the
ancient Jews believed in a future state, and acknowledged the
resurrection of the dead.

Let them bring forth salvation "Let salvation produce her fruit" - For
ויפרו vaiyiphru, the Septuagint, Vulgate, and Syriac read ויפרה
vaiyiphrah; and one MS. has a rasure close after the latter ו vau, which
probably was ה he at first.

[Isaiah 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 45:9</span></span>

Wo unto him that striveth with his Maker "To unto him that contendeth
with the power that formed him" - The prophet answers or prevents the
objections and cavils of the unbelieving Jews, disposed to murmur
against God, and to arraign the wisdom and justice of his dispensations
in regard to them; in permitting them to be oppressed by their enemies,
and in promising them deliverance instead of preventing their captivity.
St. Paul has borrowed the image, and has applied it to the like purpose
with equal force and elegance: "Nay, but, O man! who art thou that
repliest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
Why hast thou made me thus? Hath not the potter power over the clay, out
of the same lump to make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor?"
[Rom 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020.md), [Rom
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021.md). This is spoken says Kimchi,
against the king of Babylon, who insulted the Most High, bringing forth
the sacred vessels, drinking out of them, and magnifying himself against
God.

Or thy work, He hath no hands "And to the workman, Thou hast no hands" -
The Syriac renders, as if he had read, ולא היתי פעל ידיך velo hayithi
pheal yadeycha, "neither am I the work of thy hands;" the Septuagint, as
if they had reads ולא פעלת ואין ודים לך velo phaalta veeyn yaadim lecha,
"neither hast thou made me; and thou hast no hands." But the fault seems
to be in the transposition of the two pronouns; for ופעלך uphoolcha,
read ופעלו uphoolo: and for לו lo, read לך lecha. So Houbigant corrects
it; reading also ופעלו uphoolo; which last correction seems not
altogether necessary. The Septuagint, in MSS. Pachom. and 1. D. 2 have
it thus, και το εργον ουκ εχεις χειρας, which favors the reading here
proposed.

[Isaiah 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 45:11</span></span>

Ask me of things to come "And he that formeth the things which are to
come" - I read ויוצר veyotser, without the ו vau suffixed; from the
Septuagint, who join it in construction with the following word, ὁ
ποιησας τα επερχομενα.

"Do ye question me." - תשאלוני tishaluni, Chald. recte; praecedit ת tau;
et sic forte legerunt reliqui Intt. - Secker. "The Chaldee has, more
properly, תשאלוני tishaluni, with a ת tau preceding; and thus the other
interpreters probably read." The learned bishop therefore reads the
passage thus: -

"Thus saith Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel;

And he that formeth the things which are to come;

Do ye question me concerning my children?

And do ye give me directions concerning the work of my hands?"

[Isaiah 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 45:13</span></span>

I have raised him up - This evidently refers to Cyrus, and to what he
did for the Jews; and informs us by whom he was excited to do it.

[Isaiah 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 45:14</span></span>

The labor of Egypt "The wealth of Egypt" - This seems to relate to the
future admission of the Gentiles into the Church of God. Compare [Psa
68:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032.md); [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010.md); [Psa
60:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md). And perhaps these particular
nations may be named, by a metonymy common in all poetry, for powerful
and wealthy nations in general. See note on [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001.md).

The Sabeans, men of stature "The Sabeans, tall of stature" - That the
Sabeans were of a more majestic appearance than common, is particularly
remarked by Agatharchides, an ancient Greek historian quoted by Bochart,
Phaleg, 2:26, τα σωματα εστι των κατοικουντων αξιολογωτερα. So also the
Septuagint understand it, rendering it ανδρες ὑψηλοι, "tall men." And
the same phrase, אנשי מדה anshey middah, is used for persons of
extraordinary stature, [Num 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#032.md), and
[Ch1 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#006.md).

They shall make supplication unto thee "They shall in suppliant guise
address thee" - The conjunction ו vau is supplied by the ancient
Versions, and confirmed by fifteen MSS. of Kennicott's, (seven ancient),
thirteen of De Rossi's, and six editions, ואליך veelayich. Three MSS.
(two ancient) omit the ו vau before אליך elaylch at the beginning of the
line.

[Isaiah 45:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 45:15</span></span>

Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself - At present, from the nations
of the world.

O God of Israel, the Savior - While thou revealest thyself to the
Israelites and savest them.

[Isaiah 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 45:16</span></span>

They shall be ashamed "They are ashamed" - The reader cannot but observe
the sudden transition from the solemn adoration of the secret and
mysterious nature of God's counsels in regard to his people, to the
spirited denunciation of the confusion of idolaters, and the final
destruction of idolatry; contrasted with the salvation of Israel, not
from temporal captivity, but the eternal salvation by the Messiah,
strongly marked by the repetition and augmentation of the phrase, to the
ages of eternity. But there is not only a sudden change in the
sentiment, the change is equally observable in the construction of the
sentences; which from the usual short measure, runs out at once into two
distichs of the longer sort of verse. See Prelim. Dissert. p. 66, etc.
There is another instance of the same kind and very like to this, of a
sudden transition in regard both to the sentiment and construction in
[Isa 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#017.md).

"His adversaries" - This line, to the great diminution of the beauty of
the distich, is imperfect in the present text: the subject of the
proposition is not particularly expressed, as it is in the line
following. The version of the Septuagint happily supplies the word that
is lost: οἱ αντικειμενοι αυτῳ, "his adversaries," the original word was
צריו tsaraiv. - L.

[Isaiah 45:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 45:18</span></span>

He formed it to be inhabited "For he formed it to be inhabited" - An
ancient MS. has כי ki before לשבת lashebeth; and so the ancient
Versions.

[Isaiah 45:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 45:19</span></span>

I have not spoken tn secret, in a dark place of the earth - In
opposition to the manner in which the heathen oracles gave their
answers, which were generally delivered from some deep and obscure
cavern. Such was the seat of the Cumean Sybil: -

Excisum Euboicae latus ingens rupis in antrum.

Virg. Aen. 6:42.

"A cave cut in the side of a huge rock."

Such was that of the famous oracle at Delphi; of which, says Strabo,
lib. ix., φασι δ' ειναι το μαντειον αντρον κοιλον μετα βαθους, ου μαλα
ευρυστομον. "The oracle is said to be a hollow cavern of considerable
depth, with an opening not very wide." And Diodorus, giving an account
of the origin of this oracle, says "that there was in that place a great
chasm or cleft in the earth; in which very place is now situated what is
called the Adytum of the temple." Αδυτον· σπηλαιον, η το αποκρυφον μερος
του ἱερου. Mesych. "Adytum means a cavern, or the hidden part of the
temple."

I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right "I am
Jehovah, who speak truth, who give direct answers" - This also is said
in opposition to the false and ambiguous answers given by the heathen
oracles, of which there are many noted examples; none more so than that
of the answer given to Croesus when he marehed against Cyrus, which
piece of history has some connection with this part of Isaiah's
prophecies. Let us hear Cicero's account of the Delphic answers in
general, and of this in particular: Sed jam ad te venio,

O sancte Apollo, qui umbilicum certum terrarum obsides,

Unde superstitiosa primum saeva evasit vox fera.

Tuis enim oraculis Chrysippus totum volumen implevit, partim falsis, ut
ego opinor; partim casu veris, ut fit in omni oratione saepissime;
partim flexiloquis et obscuris, ut interpres egeat interprete, et sors
ipsa ad sortes referenda sit; partim ambiguis, et quae ad dialecticum
deferenda sint. Nam cum sors illa edita est opulentissimo regi Asiea,
Croesus Halym penetrans magnam pervertet opum vim: hostium vim sese
perversurum putavit; pervertit autem suam. Utrum igitur eorum
accidisset, verum oraculum fuisset. De Divinat. 2:56. Mountainous
countries, and those which abounded in chasms, caves, and grottos, were
the places in which oracles were most frequent. The horror and gloom
inspired by such places were useful to the lying priests in their system
of deception. The terms in which those oracles were conceived, (they
were always ambiguous, or equivocal, or false, or illusory), sometimes
the turn of a phrase, or a peculiarity in idiom or construction which
might be turned pro or con, contained the essence of the oracular
declaration. Sometimes, in the multitude of guesses, one turned out to
be true; at other times, so equivocal was the oracle, that, however the
thing fell out, the declaration could be interpreted in that way, as in
the above to Croesus, from the oracle at Delphi, which was: If Croeses
march against Cyrus, he shall overthrow a great empire: he, supposing
that this promised him success, fought, and lost his own, while he
expected to destroy that of his enemy. Here the quack demon took refuge
in his designed ambiguity. He predicted the destruction of a great
empire, but did not say which it was; and therefore he was safe,
howsoever the case fell out. Not one of the predictions of God's
prophets is conceived in this way.

[Isaiah 45:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 45:21</span></span>

Bring them near; yea, let them take counsel together - For יועצו yoatsu
or yivvaatsu, let them consult, the Septuagint read ידעו yedau, let them
know. but an ancient MS. has יועדו yoedu, let them come together by
appointment; which may probably be the true reading.

[Isaiah 45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 45:22</span></span>

Look unto me, and be ye saved, etc. - This verse and the following
contain a plain prediction of the universal spread of the knowledge of
God through Christ; and so the Targum appears to have understood it; see
[Rom 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011.md); [Phi
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010.md). The reading of the Targum is
remarkable, viz., אתפנו למימרי ithpeno lemeymri, look to my Word, ὁ
Λογος, the Lord Jesus.

[Isaiah 45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 45:23</span></span>

I have sworn by myself - במימרי bemeymri, by my Word: and the word -
פתגם pithgam, or saying, to distinguish it from the personal substantial
Word meymra, mentioned before. See the Targum.

The word is gone out of my mouth "Truth is gone forth from my mouth; the
word" - So the Septuagint distinguish the members of the sentence,
preserving the elegance of the construction and the clearness of the
sense.

[Isaiah 45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 45:24</span></span>

Surely, shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength
"Saying, Only to Jehovah belongeth salvation and power" - A MS. omits לי
li, unto me; and instead of לי אמר li amar, he said or shall say unto
me, the Septuagint read, in the copy which they used, לאמר lemor,
saying. For יבא yabo, He shall come, in the singular, twelve MSS. three
ancient) read יבאו yabeu, plural; and a letter is erased at the end of
the word in two others: and so the Alexandrine copy of the Septuagint,
Syriac, and Vulgate read it. For צדקות tsedakoth plural, two MSS. read
צדקת tsidkath, singular; and so the Septuagint, Syriac, and Chaldee.

Probably these are the words of Cyrus, who acknowledged that all his
success came from Jehovah. And this sentiment is in effect contained in
his decree or proclamation, [Ezr 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002.md) :
"Thus saith Cyrus, king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me
all the kingdoms of the earth, "etc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 46](isa046.md)

</div>
