<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa048)  [Next](isa050.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 49:0</span></span>

In this chapter the Messiah is introduced, declaring the full extent of
his commission, which is not only to be Savior to the Jews, but also to
the Gentiles. The power and efficacy of his word is reprehended by apt
images; the ill success of his ministry among the Jews is intimated, and
the great success of the Gospel among the Gentiles, [Isa
49:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md). But the prophet, then casting
his eye on the happy, though distant, period of Israel's restoration,
makes a beautiful apostrophe to the whole creation to shout forth the
praises of God on the prospect of this remarkable favor, [Isa
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#013.md). The tender mercies of God to
his people, with the prosperity of the Church in general, and the final
overthrow of all its enemies, make the subject of the remaining verses,
[Isa 49:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014.md).

[Isaiah 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 49:1</span></span>

Listen, O isles, unto me "Hearken unto me, O ye distant lands" -
Hitherto the subject of the prophecy has been chiefly confined to the
redemption from the captivity of Babylon; with strong intimations of a
more important deliverance sometimes thrown in, to the refutation of
idolatry, and the demonstration of the infinite power, wisdom, and
foreknowledge of God. The character and office of the Messiah was
exhibited in general terms at the beginning of chap. 42.; but here he is
introduced in person, declaring the full extent of his commission, which
is not only to restore the Israelites, and reconcile them to their Lord
and Father, from whom they had so often revolted, but to be a light to
lighten the Gentiles, to call them to the knowledge and obedience of the
true God, and to bring them to be one Church together with the
Israelites, and to partake with them of the same common salvation
procured for all by the great Redeemer and Reconciler of man to God.

[Isaiah 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 49:2</span></span>

And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword "And he hath made my mouth
a sharp sword" - The servant of God, who speaks in the former part of
this chapter, must be the Messiah. If any part of this character can in
any sense belong to the prophet, yet in some parts it must belong
exclusively to Christ; and in all parts to him in a much fuller and more
proper sense. Isaiah's mission was to the Jews, not to the distant
nations, to whom the speaker in this place addresses himself. "He hath
made my mouth a sharp sword;" "to reprove the wicked, and to denounce
unto them punishment," says Jarchi, understanding it of Isaiah. But how
much better does it suit him who is represented as having "a sharp
two-edged sword going out of his mouth," [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016.md); who is himself the Word of God;
which word is "quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart;" [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md). This mighty Agent
and Instrument of God, "long laid up in store with him, and sealed up
among his treasures," is at last revealed and produced by his power, and
under his protection, to execute his great and holy purposes. He is
compared to a polished shaft stored in his quiver for use in his due
time. The polished shaft denotes the same efficacious word which is
before represented by the sharp sword. The doctrine of the Gospel
pierced the hearts of its hearers, "bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ." The metaphor of the sword and the
arrow, applied to powerful speech, is bold, yet just. It has been
employed by the most ingenious heathen writers, if with equal elegance,
not with equal force. It is said of Pericles by Aristophanes, (see
Cicero, Epist. ad Atticum, 12:6): -

Οὑτως εκηλει, και μονος των ῥητορων

Το κεντρον εγκατελειπε τοις ακροωμενοις.

Apud. Diod. lib. xii.

His powerful speech

Pierced the hearer's soul, and left behind

Deep in his bosom its keen point infixed.

Pindar is particularly fond of this metaphor, and frequently applies it
to his own poetry: -

Επεχε νυν σκοπῳ τοξον,

Αγε, θυμε. τινα βαλλομεν

Εκ μαλθακας αυτε φρε-

νος ευκλεας οΐστους

Ἱεντες - ;

Olymp. 2:160.

"Come on! thy brightest shafts prepare,

And bend, O Muse, thy sounding bow;

Say, through what paths of liquid air

Our arrows shall we throw?'

West.

See also ver. 149 of the same ode, and Olymp. [Heb
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017.md), on the former of which places
the Scholiast says, τροπικος ὁ λογος· βελη δε τους λογους εορηκε, δια το
οξυ και καιριον των εγκωμιων. "He calls his verses shafts, by a
metaphor, signifying the acuteness and the apposite application of his
panegyric."

This person, who is ([Isa 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003).md) called
Israel, cannot in any sense be Isaiah. That name, in its original design
and full import, can only belong to him who contended powerfully with
God in behalf of mankind, and prevailed, [Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028.md). After all that Vitringa, Bp.
Lowth, and others have said in proof of this chapter speaking of the
Messiah, and of him alone, I have my doubts whether sometimes Isaiah,
sometimes Cyrus, and sometimes the Messiah, be not intended; the former
shadowing out the latter, of whom, in certain respects, they may be
considered the types. The literal sense should be sought out first; this
is of the utmost importance both in reading and interpreting the oracles
of God.

[Isaiah 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 49:5</span></span>

And now, saith the Lord "And now, thus saith Jehovah" - The word כה coh,
before אמר amar, is dropped out of the text: it is supplied by eight
MSS. (two ancient) of Dr. Kennicott's, two of De Rossi's, and the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate.

Though Israel be not gathered "And that Israel unto him might be
gathered" - Five MSS. (two ancient) confirm the Keri, or marginal
correction of the Masoretes, לו lo, unto him, instead of לא lo, not, in
the text; and so read Aquila; and the Chaldee, Septuagint, and Arabic
omit the negative. But the Septuagint, MSS. Pachom, and 1. D. 2 express
also the Keri לו lo by προς αυτον, to him.

[Isaiah 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 49:6</span></span>

And to restore the preserved of Irsrae "And to restore the branches of
Israel" - נצירי netsirey, or נצורי netsurey, as the Masoretes correct it
in the marginal reading. This word has been matter of great doubt with
interpreters: the Syriac renders it the branch, taking it for the same
with נצר netser, [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001.md). See
Michaelis Epim. in Praelect. xix.

[Isaiah 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 49:7</span></span>

The Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One "The Redeemer of Israel, his
Holy One" - "Perhaps we should read לקדושו likdosho," Secker: that is,
to his Holy One. The preceding word ends with a ל lamed, which might
occasion that letter's being lost here. The Talmud of Babylon has וקדושו
ukedosho, and his Holy One.

To him whom man despiseth "To him whose person is despised" - "Perhaps
we should read נבזה nibzeh," Secker; or בזוי bazui, Le Clerc; that is,
instead of the active, the passive form, which seems here to be
required.

[Isaiah 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 49:9</span></span>

To them that are in darkness "And to those that are in darkness" -
Fifteen MSS. (five ancient) of Dr. Kennicott's, eleven of De Rossi's,
and one ancient of my own, and the two old editions of 1486 and 1488,
and three others, add the conjunction ו vau at the beginning of this
member. Another MS. had it so at first, and two others have a rasure at
the place: and it is expressed by the Septuagint, Syriac, Chaldee, and
Vulgate.

[Isaiah 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 49:12</span></span>

Behold, these shall come from far - "Babylon was far and east, ממזרח
mimmizrach, (non sic Vett.), Sinim, Pelusians, to the south." - Secker.

The land of Sinim - Prof. Doederlein thought of Syene, the southern
limit of Egypt, but does not abide by it. Michaelis thinks it is right,
and promises to give his reasons for so thinking in the second part of
his Spicilegium Geographiae Hebraeorum Exterae. See Biblioth. Oriental.
Part 11 p. 176.

סין sin signifies a bush, and סינים sinim, bushes, woods, etc. Probably
this means that the land where several of the lost Jews dwell is a
woodland. The ten tribes are gone, no one knows whither. On the slave
coast in Africa, some Jewish rites appear among the people, and all the
males are circumcised. The whole of this land, as it appears from the
coast, may be emphatically called ארץ שינים erets sinim, the land of
bushes, as it is all covered with woods as far as the eye can reach.
Many of the Indians in North America, which is also a woodland, have a
great profusion of rites, apparently in their basis Jewish. Is it not
possible that the descendants of the ten lost tribes are among those in
America, or among those in Africa, whom European nations think they have
a right to enslave? It is of those lost tribes that the twenty-first
verse speaks: "And these, where had they been?"

[Isaiah 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 49:13</span></span>

Break forth into singing, O mountains "Ye mountains, burst forth into
song" - Three ancient MSS. are without the י yod or the conjunction ו
vau before the verb: and so the Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate.

[Isaiah 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 49:14</span></span>

The Lord (יהוה Yehovah) hath forsaken me, and my Lord (אדני Adonai) hath
forgotten me - But a multitude of MSS. and several ancient editions read
יהוה Yehovah in both places.

[Isaiah 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 49:16</span></span>

Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands "Behold, on the
palms of my hands have I delineated thee" - This is certainly an
allusion to some practice, common among the Jews at that time, of making
marks on their hands or arms by punctures on the skin, with some sort of
sign or representation of the city or temple, to show their affection
and zeal for it. They had a method of making such punctures indelible by
fire, or by staining. See note on [Isa
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006) (note.md). It is well known, that
the pilgrims at the holy sepulcher get themselves marked in this manner
with what are called the ensigns of Jerusalem. See Maundrell, p. 75,
where he tells us how it is performed: and this art is practiced by
travelling Jews all over the world at this day.

[Isaiah 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 49:17</span></span>

Thy children shall make haste "They that destroyed thee shall soon
become thy builders" - Auctor Vulgatae pro בניך banayich, videtur
legisse בוניך bonayich, unde vertit, structores tui; cui et Septuaginta
fere consentiunt, qui verterunt ῳκοδομηθης, aedificata es, prout in
Plantiniana editione habetur; in Vaticana sive Romana legitur,
οικοδομηθησῃ, aedificaberis. Hisce etiam Targum Jonathanis aliquatenus
consentit, ubi, et aedificabunt. Confer infra Esai. [Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013.md), ad quem locum rabbini quoque
notarunt en tractatu Talmudico Berachot, c. ix., quod non legendum sit
בניך banayich, id est. filii tui; sed בניך bonayich, aedificatores tui.
Confer not. ad librum Prec. Jud. part ii., p. 226, ut et D Wagenseil
Sot. p. 253, n. 9. "The author of the Vulgate appears to have read בוניך
bonayich for בניך banayich, as he translates it by structures tui, 'thy
builders.' The Septuagint is almost the same with the Vulgate, having
ῳκοδομηθης, art built, as in the Plantin edition: but the Vatican or
Roman copy reads οικοδομηθησῃ, those shalt be built. To these readings
the Targum of Jonathan has some sort of correspondence, translating et
aedificabunt, 'and they shall build.' See [Isa
54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013.md); on which place the rabbins also
remark, in the Talmudic tract Berachoth, c. 9, that we should not read
בניך banayich, thy sons, but בניך bonayich, thy builders. See the note
in Prae. Jud. part ii., p. 226, and also D. Wagenseil, Sot. p. 253, n.
9. "See also Breithaupt. not. ad Jarchi in loc.; and the note on this
place in De Sac. Poes. Hebr. Praelect. 31. Instead of בוניך or בניך
bonayich, thy builders, several MSS. read בניך baneycha, thy sons. So
also the Syriac: see the above note.

Shall go forth of thee "Shall become thine offspring" - ממך יצאו mimmech
yetseu, shall proceed, spring, issue, from thee, as thy children. The
phrase is frequently used in this sense: see [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001.md); [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md); [Nah
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#011.md). The accession of the Gentiles to
the Church of God is considered as an addition made to the number of the
family and children of Sion: see [Isa
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021.md), [Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022.md), and [Isa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004.md). The common rendering, "shall go
forth of thee, or depart from thee," is very flat, after their zeal had
been expressed by "shall become thy builders:" and as the opposition is
kept up in one part of the sentence, one has reason to expect it in the
other, which should be parallel to it.

[Isaiah 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 49:18</span></span>

Bind them on thee, as a bride doeth "Bind them about thee, as a bride
her jewels" - The end of the sentence is manifestly imperfect. Does a
bride bind her children, or her new subjects, about her? Sion clothes
herself with her children, as a bride clothes herself, - with what? some
other thing certainly. The Septuagint help us out in this difficulty,
and supply the lost word: ὡς κοσμον νυμφη· as a bride her ornaments.
ככליה כלה kichleyha callah, or ככלה כליה kecallah keleyha. The great
similitude of the two words has occasioned the omission of one of them.
See [Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010.md).

[Isaiah 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 49:21</span></span>

These, where had they been "These then, where were they?" - The
conjunction is added before אלה elleh, that is, ואלה veelleh. in
thirty-two MSS. (nine ancient) of Kennicott's, and fifty-four of De
Rossi's, and so the Septuagint, Chaldee, and Vulgate. See the note on
[Isa 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#012) (note.md).

[Isaiah 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 49:22</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God - אדני יהוה Adonai Yehovah. Adonai is wanting in
one MS., in the Alexandrine copy of the Septuagint, and in the Arabic.

[Isaiah 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 49:23</span></span>

With their face toward the earth "With their faces to the earth" - It is
well known that expressions of submission, homage, and reverence always
have been and are still carried to a great degree of extravagance in the
eastern countries. When Joseph's brethren were introduced to him, "they
bowed down themselves before him with their faces to the earth," [Gen
42:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#006.md). The kings of Persia never
admitted any one to their presence without exacting this act of
adoration; for that was the proper term for it. Necesse est, says the
Persian courtier to Conon, si in conspectum veneris, venerari te regem;
quod προσκυνειν illi vocant. "It is necessary, if thou shouldest come in
sight, to venerate thee as king; which they call worshipping." - Nepos
in Conone. Alexander, intoxicated with success, affected this piece of
oriental pride: Itaque more Persarum Macedonas venerabundos ipsum
salutare, prosternentes humi corpora. "The Macedonians after the manner
of the Persians, saluted their monarch with the ceremony of
prostration." - Curtius, lib. 8. The insolence of eastern monarchs to
conquered princes, and the submission of the latter, is astonishing. Mr.
Warmer, Observ. 2:43, gives the following instance of it from
D'Herbelot: "This prince threw himself one day on the ground, and kissed
the prints that his victorious enemy's horse had made there; reciting
some verses in Persian, which he had composed, to this effect: -

"The mark that the foot of your horse has left upon the dust, serves me
now for a crown."

"The ring which I wear as the badge of my slavery, is become my richest
ornament."

"While I shall have the happiness to kiss the dust of your feet, I shall
think that fortune favors me with its tenderest caresses, and its
sweetest kisses."

These expressions therefore of the prophet are only general poetical
images, taken from the manners of the country, to denote great respect
and reverence: and such splendid poetical images, which frequently occur
in the prophetical writings, were intended only as general
amplifications of the subject, not as predictions to be understood and
fulfilled precisely according to the letter. For the different kinds of
adoration in the east, see the note on [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017.md).

[Isaiah 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 49:24</span></span>

Shall the prey be taken from the mighty "Shall the prey seized by the
terrible be rescued" - For צדיק tsaddik, read עריץ arits. A palpable
mistake, like that in [Isa 42:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#019.md). The
correction is self-evident from the very terms of the sentence; from the
necessity of the strict correspondence in the expressions between the
question and the answer made to it, - and it is apparent to the blindest
and most prejudiced eye. However, if authority is also necessary, there
is that of the Syriac and Vulgate for it; who plainly read עריץ arits,
in [Isa 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#024.md) as well as in [Isa
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#025.md), rendering it in the former
place by the same word as in the latter. - L.

These two last verses contain a glorious promise of deliverance to the
persecuted Church of Christ from the terrible one - Satan, and all his
representatives and vicegerents, persecuting antichristian rulers. They
shall at last cease from destroying the Church of God, and destroy one
another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 50](isa050.md)

</div>
