<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa065)  [Next](jer000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 66:0</span></span>

This chapter treats of the same subject with the foregoing. God, by his
prophet, tells the Jews, who valued themselves much on their temple and
pompous worship, that the Most High dwelleth not in temples made with
hands; and that no outward rites of worship, while the worshippers are
idolatrous and impure, can please him who looketh at the heart, [Isa
66:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001). This leads to a threatening of
vengeance for their guilt, alluding to their making void the law of God
by their abominable traditions, their rejection of Christ, persecution
of his followers, and consequent destruction by the Romans. But as the
Jewish ritual and people shadow forth the system of Christianity and its
professors; so, in the prophetical writings, the idolatries of the Jews
are frequently put for the idolatries afterwards practiced by those
bearing the Christian name. Consequently, if we would have the plenitude
of meaning in this section of prophecy, which the very content requires,
we must look through the type into the antitype, viz., the very gross
idolatries practiced by the members of Antichrist, the pompous heap of
human intentions and traditions with which they have encumbered the
Christian system, their most dreadful persecution of Christ's spiritual
and true worshippers, and the awful judgments which shall overtake them
in the great and terrible day of the Lord, [Isa
66:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004). The mighty and sudden increase
of the Church of Jesus Christ at the period of Antichrist's fall
represented by the very strong figure of Sion being delivered of a
man-child before the time of her travail, the meaning of which symbol
the prophet immediately subjoins in a series of interrogations for the
sake of greater force and emphasis, [Isa
66:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007). Wonderful prosperity and
unspeakable blessedness of the world when the posterity of Jacob, with
the fullness of the Gentiles, shall be assembled to Messiah's standard,
[Isa 66:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#010). All the wicked of the
earth shall be gathered together to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty, and the slain of Jehovah shall be many, [Isa
66:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015). Manner of the future
restoration of the Israelites from their several dispersions throughout
the habitable globe, [Isa 66:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019).
Perpetuity of this new economy of grace to the house of Israel, [Isa
66:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022). Righteousness shall be
universally diffused in the earth; and the memory of those who have
transgressed against the Lord shall be had in continual abhorrence, [Isa
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023), [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024). Thus this great prophet, after
tracing the principal events of time, seems at length to have terminated
his views in eternity, where all revolutions cease, where the
blessedness of the righteous shall be unchangeable as the new heavens,
and the misery of the wicked as the fire that shall not be quenched.

This chapter is a continuation of the subject of the foregoing. The Jews
valued themselves much upon their temple, and the pompous system of
services performed in it, which they supposed were to be of perpetual
duration; and they assumed great confidence and merit to themselves for
their strict observance of all the externals of their religion. And at
the very time when the judgments denounced in [Isa
65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006) and [Isa
65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012) of the preceding chapter were
hanging over their heads, they were rebuilding, by Herod's munificence,
the temple in a most magnificent manner. God admonishes them, that "the
Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands;" and that a mere
external worship, how diligently soever attended, when accompanied with
wicked and idolatrous practices in the worshippers, would never be
accepted by him. This their hypocrisy is set forth in strong colors,
which brings the prophet again to the subject of the former chapter; and
he pursues it in a different manner, with more express declaration of
the new economy, and of the flourishing state of the Church under it.
The increase of the Church is to be sudden and astonishing. They that
escape of the Jews, that is, that become converts to the Christian
faith, are to be employed in the Divine mission to the Gentiles, and are
to act as priests in presenting the Gentiles as an offering to God; see
[Rom 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016). And both, now collected
into one body, shall be witnesses of the final perdition of the
obstinate and irreclaimable.

These two chapters manifestly relate to the calling of the Gentiles, the
establishment of the Christian dispensation, and the reprobation of the
apostate Jews, and their destruction executed by the Romans. - L.

[Isaiah 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 66:2</span></span>

And all those things have been "And all these things are mine" - A word
absolutely necessary to the sense is here lost out of the text: לי li,
mine. It is preserved by the Septuagint and Syriac.

[Isaiah 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 66:3</span></span>

He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man "He that slayeth an ox
killeth a man" - These are instances of wickedness joined with
hypocrisy; of the most flagitious crimes committed by those who at the
same time affected great strictness in the performance of all the
external services of religion. God, by the Prophet Ezekiel, upbraids the
Jews with the same practices: "When they had slain their children to
their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane
it," [Eze 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039). Of the same kind was
the hypocrisy of the Pharisees in our Savior's time:" who devoured
widows' houses, and for a pretense made long prayers," [Mat
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014).

The generality of interpreters, by departing from the literal rendering
of the text, have totally lost the true sense of it, and have
substituted in its place what makes no good sense at all; for it is not
easy to show how, in any circumstances, sacrifice and murder, the
presenting of legal offerings and idolatrous worship, can possibly be of
the same account in the sight of God.

He that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine's blood "That
maketh an oblation offereth swine's blood" - A word here likewise,
necessary to complete the sense, is perhaps irrecoverably lost out of
the text. The Vulgate and Chaldee add the word offereth, to make out the
sense; not, as I imagine, from any different reading, (for the word
wanted seems to have been lost before the time of the oldest of them as
the Septuagint had it not in their copy,; but from mere necessity.

Le Clerc thinks that מעלה maaleh is to be repeated from the beginning of
this member; but that is not the case in the parallel members, which
have another and a different verb in the second place, "דם dam, sic
Versiones; putarem tamen legendum participium aliquod, et quidem זבח
zabach, cum sequatur ח cheth, nisi jam praecesserat." - Secker.
Houbigant supplies אכל achal, eateth. After all, I think the most
probable word is that which the Chaldee and Vulgate seem to have
designed to represent; that is, מקריב makrib, offereth.

In their abominations - ובשקוציהם ubeshikkutseyhem, "and in their
abominations;" two copies of the Machazor, and one of Kennicott's MSS.
have ובגלוליהם ubegilluleyhem, "and in their idols." So the Vulgate and
Syriac.

[Isaiah 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 66:5</span></span>

Your brethren that hated you - said "Say ye to your brethren that hate
you" - The Syriac reads אמרו לאחיכם imru laacheychem; and so the
Septuagint, Edit. Comp. ειπατε αδελφοις ὑμων· and MS. Marchal. has
αδελφοις· and so Cyril and Procopius read and explain it. It is not easy
to make sense of the reading of the Septuagint in the other editions;
ειπατε αδελφοι ἡμων τοις μισουσιν ὑμας· but for ἡμων, our, MS. 1. D. 2
also has ὑμων, your.

[Isaiah 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 66:6</span></span>

A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the
Lord - It is very remarkable that similar words were spoken by Jesus,
son of Ananias, previously to the destruction of Jerusalem. See his very
affecting history related by Josephus, War, B. vi., chap. v.

[Isaiah 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 66:8</span></span>

Who hath seen "And who hath seen" - Twenty MSS., (four ancient), of
Kennicott's, and twenty-nine of De Rossi's, and two ancient of my own,
and the two oldest editions, with two others, have ומי umi, adding the
conjunction ו vau; and so read all the ancient versions. And who hath
seen?

[Isaiah 66:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 66:9</span></span>

Shall I bring to the birth - האני אשביר haani ashbir, num ego matricem
frangam; Montanus. The word means that which immediately precedes the
appearance of the fetus - the breaking forth of the liquor amnii. This
also is an expression that should be studiously avoided in prayers and
sermons.

[Isaiah 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 66:11</span></span>

With the abundance of her glory "From her abundant stores" - For מזיז
mizziz, from the splendor, two MSS. and the old edition of 1488, have
מזיו mizziv; and the latter ז zain is upon a rasure in three other MSS.
It is remarkable that Kimchi and Sal. ben Melec, not being able to make
any thing of the word as it stands in the text, say it means the same
with מזיו mizziv; that is, in effect, they admit of a various reading,
or an error in the text. But as Vitringa observes, what sense is there
in sucking nourishment from the splendor of her glory? He therefore
endeavors to deduce another sense of the word זיז ziz; but, as far as it
appears to me, without any authority. I am more inclined to accede to
the opinion of those learned rabbins, and to think that there is some
mistake in the word; for that in truth is their opinion, though they
disguise it by saying that the corrupted word means the very same with
that which they believe to be genuine. So in [Isa
41:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#024) they say that אפע apha, a viper,
means the same with אפס ephes, nothing; instead of acknowledging that
one is written by mistake instead of the other. I would propose to read
in this place מזין mizzin or מזן mizzen, which is the reading of one of
De Rossi's MS., (instead of מזיז meziz), from the stores, from זון zun,
to nourish, to feed; see [Gen
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#023);[Ch2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#023); [Psa
144:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013). And this perhaps may be meant
by Aquila, who renders the word by απο παντοδαπιας· with which that of
the Vulgate, ab omnimoda gloria, and of Symmachus and Theodotion, nearly
agree. The Chaldee follows a different reading, without improving the
sense; מיין meyin, from the wine. - L.

[Isaiah 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 66:12</span></span>

Like a river, and - like a flowing stream "Like the great river, and
like the overflowing stream" - That is, the Euphrates, (it ought to have
been pointed כנהר cannahar, ut fluvius ille, as the river), and the
Nile.

Then shall ye suck "And ye shall suck at the breast" - These two words
על שד al shad, at the breast, seem to have been omitted in the present
text, from their likeness to the two words following; על צד al tsad, at
the side. A very probable conjecture of Houbigant. The Chaldee and
Vulgate have omitted the two latter words instead of the two former. See
note on [Isa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004) (note).

[Isaiah 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 66:15</span></span>

The Lord will come with fire "Jehovah shall come as a fire" - For באש
baesh, in fire, the Septuagint had in their copy קאש kaesh, as a fire;
ὡς πυρ.

To render his anger with fury "To breathe forth his anger in a burning
heat" - Instead of להשב lehashib, as pointed by the Masoretes, to
render, I understand it as להשב lehashshib, to breathe, from נשב nashab.

[Isaiah 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 66:17</span></span>

Behind one tree "After the rites of Achad" - The Syrians worshipped a
god called Adad, Plin. Nat. Hist. 37:11; Macrob. Sat. 1:23. They held
him to be the highest and greatest of the gods, and to be the same with
Jupiter and the sun; and the name Adad, says Macrobius, signifies one;
as likewise does the word Achad in Isaiah. Many learned men therefore
have supposed, and with some probability, that the prophet means the
same pretended deity. אחד achad, in the Syrian and Chaldean dialects, is
חד chad; and perhaps by reduplication of the last letter to express
perfect unity, it may have become חדד chadad, not improperly expressed
by Macrobius Adad, without the aspirate. It was also pronounced by the
Syrians themselves, with a weaker aspirate, הדד hadad, as in Benhadad,
Hadadezer, names of their kings, which were certainly taken from their
chief object of worship. This seems to me to be a probable account of
this name.

But the Masoretes correct the text in this place. Their marginal reading
is אחת achath which is the same word, only in the feminine form; and so
read thirty MSS. (six ancient) and the two oldest editions. This Le
Clerc approves, and supposes it to mean Hecate, or the moon; and he
supports his hypothesis by arguments not at all improbable. See his note
on the place.

Whatever the particular mode of idolatry which the prophet refers to
might be, the general sense of the place is perfectly clear. But the
Chaldee and Syriac, and after them Symmachus and Theodotion, cut off at
once all these difficulties, by taking the word אחד achad in its common
meaning, not as a proper name; the two latter rendering the sentence
thus: Οπισω αλληλων εν μεσῳ εσθιοντων το κρεας το χοιρειον; "One after
another, in the midst of those that eat swine's flesh." I suppose they
all read in their copies אחד אחד achad achad, one by one, or perhaps אחד
אחר אחד achad achar achad, one after another. See a large dissertation
on this subject in Davidis Millii Dissertationes Selectae, Dissert. vi.
- L.

I know not what to make of this place; it is certain that our
translation makes no sense, and that of the learned prelate seems to me
too refined. Kimchi interprets this of the Turks, who are remarkable for
ablutions. "Behind one in the midst" he understands of a large fish-pond
placed in the middle of their gardens. Others make אחד achad a deity, as
above; and a deity of various names it is supposed to be, for it is
Achad, and Chad, and Hadad, and Achath, and Hecat, an Assyrian idol.
Behynd the fyrst tree or the gate withine forth. - Old MS. Bible.

[Isaiah 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 66:18</span></span>

For I know their works - A word is here lost out of the present text,
leaving the text quite imperfect. The word is יודע yodea, knowing,
supplied from the Syriac. The Chaldee had the same word in the copy
before him, which he paraphrases by קדמי גלן kedemi gelon, their deeds
are manifest before me; and the Aldine and Complutensian editions of the
Septuagint acknowledge the same word επισταμαι, which is verified by MS.
Pachom. and the Arabic version. I think there can be little doubt of its
being genuine. The concluding verses of this chapter refer to the
complete restoration of the Jews, and to the destruction of all the
enemies of the Gospel of Christ, so that the earth shall be filled with
the knowledge and glory of the Lord. Talia saecla currite! Lord, hasten
the time!

It shall come "And I come" - For באה baah, which will not accord with
any thing in the sentence, I read בא ba, with a MS.; the participle
answering to יודע yodea, with which agree the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Vulgate. Perhaps it ought to be ובא veba, when I shall come, Syr.; and
so the Septuagint, according to Edit. Ald. and Complut., and Cod.
Marchal.

[Isaiah 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 66:19</span></span>

That draw the bow - I much suspect that the words משכי קשת moshechey
kesheth, who draw the bow, are a corruption of the word משך meshek,
Moschi, the name of a nation situated between the Euxine and Caspian
seas; and properly joined with תבל tubal, the Tibareni. See Bochart,
Phaleg. [Isa 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012). The Septuagint have
μοσοχ, without any thing of the drawers of the bow: the word being once
taken for a participle, the bow was added to make sense of it קשת
kesheth, the bow, is omitted in a MS. and by the Septuagint.

That have not heard my fame "Who never heard my name" - For שמעי shimi,
my fame, I read, with the Septuagint and Syriac, שמי shemi, my name.

[Isaiah 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 66:20</span></span>

And in chariots "And in counes" - There is a sort of vehicle much used
in the east, consisting of a pair of hampers or cradles, thrown across a
camel's back, one on each side; in each of which a person is carried.
They have a covering to defend them from the rain and the sun. Thevenot
calls them counes, 1 p. 356. Maillet describes them as covered cages
hanging on both sides of a camel. "At Aleppo," says Dr. Russell, "women
of inferior condition in longer journeys are commonly stowed, one on
each side of a mule, in a sort of covered cradles." Nat. Hist. of
Aleppo, p. 89. These seem to be what the prophet means by the word צבים
tsabbim. Harmer's Observations, 1 p. 445.

[Isaiah 66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 66:21</span></span>

And for Levites - For ללוים laleviyim, fifty-nine MSS., (eight ancient),
have וללוים velaleviyim, adding the conjunction ו vau, which the sense
seems necessarily to require: and so read all the ancient versions. See
[Jos 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#003), and the various readings on
that place in Kennicott's Bible.

[Isaiah 66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 66:24</span></span>

For their worm shall not die - These words of the prophet are applied by
our blessed Savior, [Mar 9:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044), to
express the everlasting punishment of the wicked in Gehenna, or in hell.
Gehenna, or the valley of Hinnom, was very near to Jerusalem to the
south-east: it was the place where the idolatrous Jews celebrated that
horrible rite of making their children pass through the fire, that is,
of burning them in sacrifice to Moloch. To put a stop to this abominable
practice, Josiah defiled, or desecrated, the place, by filling it with
human bones, [Kg2 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010), [Kg2
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#014); and probably it was the custom
afterwards to throw out the carcasses of animals there, when it also
became the common burying place for the poorer people of Jerusalem. Our
Savior expressed the state of the blessed by sensible images; such as
paradise, Abraham's bosom, or, which is the same thing, a place to
recline next to Abraham at table in the kingdom of heaven. See [Mat
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011). Coenabat Nerva cum paucis.
Veiento proxies, atque etiam in sinu recumbebat. "The Emperor Nerva
supped with few. Veiento was the first in his estimation, and even
reclined in his bosom." Plin. Epist. 4:22. Compare [Joh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023); for we could not possibly have
any conception of it but by analogy from worldly objects. In like manner
he expressed the place of torment under the image of Gehenna; and the
punishment of the wicked by the worm which there preyed on the
carcasses, and the fire that consumed the wretched victims. Marking
however, in the strongest manner, the difference between Gehenna and the
invisible place of torment; namely, that in the former the suffering is
transient: - the worm itself which preys upon the body, dies; and the
fire which totally consumes it, is soon extinguished: - whereas in the
figurative Gehenna the instruments of punishment shall be everlasting,
and the suffering without end; "for there the worm dieth not, and the
fire is not quenched."

These emblematical images, expressing heaven and hell, were in use among
the Jews before our Savior's time; and in using them he complied with
their notions. "Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of
God," says the Jew to our Savior, [Luk
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015). And in regard to Gehenna, the
Chaldee paraphrase as I observed before on [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033), renders everlasting or
continual burnings by "the Gehenna of everlasting fire." And before his
time the son of Sirach, 7:17, had said, "The vengeance of the ungodly is
fire and worms." So likewise the author of the book of Judith, chap.
16:17: "Wo to the nations rising up against my kindred: the Lord
Almighty will take vengeance of them in the day of judgment, in putting
fire and worms in their flesh;" manifestly referring to the same emblem.
- L.

Kimchi's conclusion of his notes on this book is remarkable: -

"Blessed be God who hath created the mountains and the hills,

And hath endued me with strength to finish the book of salvation:

He shall rejoice us with good tidings and reports;

He shall show us a token for good: -

And the end of his miracles he shall cause to approach us."

Several of the Versions have a peculiarity in their terminations: -

And they shall be to a satiety of sight to all flesh.

Vulgate.

And thei schul ben into fyllyng of sigt to all fleshe.

Old MS. Bible.

And they shall be as a vision to all flesh.

Septuagint.

And the wicked shall be punished in hell till the righteous shall say, -
It is enough.

Chaldee.

They shall be an astonishment to all flesh; So that they shall be a
spectacle to all beings.

Syriac.

The end of the prophecy of Isaiah the prophet.

Praise to God who is truly praiseworthy.

Arabic.

One of my old Hebrew MSS. after the twenty-first verse repeats the
twenty-third: "And it shall come to pass that from one new moon to
another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to
worship before me, saith the Lord."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Introduction](jer000)

</div>
