<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](heb013)  [Next](jam001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the General Epistle of James

There have been more doubts, and more diversity of opinion, concerning
the author of this epistle, and the time in which it was written, than
about most other parts of the New Testament. To enter at large into a
discussion of the opinions of ancient and modern writers on this subject
would tend but little to the establishment of truth, or to the
edification of the reader.

Lardner, Michaelis, and Macknight, have entered considerably into the
controversy relative to the author, the time, and the canonical
authority of this book; and to them the reader who wishes to see the
difficulties with which the subject is pressed may have recourse.

This epistle, with those of Peter, John, and Jude, is termed catholic,
καθολικη , from κατα, through, and ὁλος, the whole; for the application
of which term Ecumenius, in cap. i. Jacobi, gives the following reason:
Καθολικαι λεγονται αυται, οἱονει εγκυκλιοι· ου γαρ αφωρισμενως εθνει ἑνι
η πολει, αλλα καθολου τοις πιστοις· "These epistles are called catholic,
universal, or circular, because they were not written to one nation or
city, but to believers everywhere."

Yet, as these epistles had some difficulty at first to get into general
circulation, but at last were everywhere received, it is more likely
that they obtained the term catholic from the circumstance of their
being at last universally acknowledged as canonical; so that the word
catholic is to be understood here in the same sense as canonical.

Who the writer of the epistle in question was, is difficult to say; all
that we know certainly is, from his own words, that his name was James,
and that he was a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus. Two persons of
this name are mentioned in the New Testament; James the son of Zebedee,
called also James the elder; and James του μικρου, the less or the
little one, called the son of Alpheus, and brother of our Lord: but
whether one of these, or if one of them, which, or whether one of the
same name different from both, are points that cannot be satisfactorily
determined. Michaelis, who has examined the subject with his usual
ability, leaves the matter in doubt; but leans to the opinion that James
the son of Zebedee was the author, and that this epistle was written
before any of those in the New Testament. Other great authorities
ascribe it to James, called the brother of our Lord, who was president,
or bishop, of the Church in Jerusalem. Even allowing this opinion to be
correct, it is not agreed in what sense James is called our Lord's
brother, there being four or five different opinions concerning the
meaning of this term. From [Mat 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055),
[Mat 13:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#056), we learn that there were
four persons called brethren of our Lord: "Is not this the carpenter's
son? Is not his mother called Mary? And his brethren James, and Joses,
and Simon, and Judas? And his sisters, are they not all with us?" Now,
it is generally allowed that the James here is the author of this
epistle, and the Jude or Judas, mentioned with him, the author of that
which stands last in this collection. But with respect to the meaning of
the term brother, as here used, it will be necessary to state the
opinions of learned men: -

1\. It is supposed that these were children of Joseph, by a former
marriage; this is a very ancient opinion; as there is nothing improbable
in the supposition that Joseph was a widower when he married the blessed
virgin.

2\. They are supposed to have been children of Joseph and his wife Mary;
all born after the birth of our Lord. This is an opinion extremely
probable: see some reasons for it in the note on [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055) (note); see also on [Mat
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025) (note).

3\. That they were called our Lord's brethren, because children of
Joseph by the wife of one of his brothers, who had died childless, and
whose widow Joseph took, according to the Mosaic law, to raise up seed
to his deceased brother. This is very unlikely, because, in this case,
it would have been only requisite for Joseph to have had one male by his
brother's wife; but here we find four, besides several sisters.

4\. That Cleophas, called also Alpheus, married a sister of the blessed
virgin, called also Mary, by whom he had the above issue; and that these
were called brethren of our Lord, from the common custom among the
Hebrews, to term all the more immediately cognate branches of the same
family, brothers' and sisters' children, i.e. cousins-german, brethren.
These, therefore, being aunt's children of our Lord, are, according to
this usage, called his brethren. The first and second of these opinions
appear to me the most probable; though most modern writers are of the
latter opinion.

That of the two James's, James the less was the author of this epistle,
Dr. Macknight thinks, following Lardner and others, is incontestable: I
shall quote his abridgment of Lardner's arguments; but the point in
question is not, in my opinion, made out by any of these writers.

"In the catalogue of the apostles, [Mat
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002); [Mar
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017); [Luk
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#014); [Act
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#013); we find two persons of the name
of James; the first was the son of Zebedee, [Mat
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002); the second in all the catalogues
is called the son of Alpheus: one of these apostles is called, [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019), the Lord's brother. Wherefore,
as there were only twelve apostles, and as James the son of Zebedee, so
far as we know, was in no respect related to our Lord, the apostle
called James, the Lord's brother, must have been James the son of
Alpheus, called also James the less or younger, whose relation to Christ
will appear by comparing [Mar 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040),
with [Joh 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025). In the former
passage, Mark, speaking of the women who were present at the
crucifixion, says: 'There were also women looking on afar off, among
whom were Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James the less and of
Joses, and Salome.' In the latter passage, John, speaking of the same
women, says: 'There stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary, the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen:'
wherefore, our Lord's mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas,
mentioned by John, is in all probability the person whom Mark calls Mary
the mother of James the less, and of Joses; consequently, her sons,
James and Joses, were our Lord's cousins-german by his mother. And as
the Hebrews called all near relations brethren, it is more than probable
that James the son of Alpheus, who was our Lord's cousin-german, is
James the Lord's brother, mentioned [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019). Three circumstances confirm this
opinion:

1\. James and Joses, the sons of Mary, our Lord's mother's sister, are
expressly called the brethren of Jesus, [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055); [Mar
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003).

2\. James, the son of our Lord's mother's sister, being distinguished
from another James by the appellation of the less, [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040), there is good reason to suppose
that he is the James whom Mark, in his catalogue, distinguishes from
James the son of Zebedee, by the appellation of the son of Alpheus. It
is true, Mary the mother of James and of Joses, is called the wife of
Cleophas, [Joh 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025) : but Cleophas
and Alpheus are the same name differently pronounced; the one according
to the Hebrew, and the other according to the Greek, orthography.

3\. Of the persons called the brethren of Jesus, [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055), there are three mentioned in
the catalogue as Apostles: James, and Simon, and Judas. They, I suppose,
are the brethren of the Lord, who are said, as apostles, to have had a
right to lead about a sister or a wife, etc.; [Co1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005).

Jerome likewise thought James the Lord's brother was so called because
he was the son of Mary, our Lord's mother's sister; Art. Jacobus.
Lardner, Canon., vol. iii. p. 63, says: 'Jerome seems to have been the
first who said our Lord's brethren were the sons of his mother's sister;
and this opinion was at length embraced by Augustine, and has prevailed
very much of late, being the opinion of the Romanists in general, and of
Lightfoot, Witsius, Lampe, and many of the Protestants. On the other
hand, Origen, Epiphanius, and other ancient writers, both Greeks and
Latins, were of opinion that James, the Lord's brother, was not the son
of the virgin's sister, but of Joseph, our Lord's reputed father, by a
former wife, who died before he espoused the virgin. Of the same opinion
were Vossius, Basnage, and Cave, among the Protestants; and Valesius
among the Romanists. Epiphanius and Theophylact supposed that Joseph's
first wife was the widow of Alpheus, who, being Joseph's brother, Joseph
married her to raise up seed to him; and therefore James, the issue of
that marriage, was fitly called the won of Alpheus, and brother of our
Lord.' But these suppositions might have been spared, if the ancients
and moderns had recollected that near relations were called brethren by
the Hebrews, and that Alpheus and Cleophas are the same names
differently written; James the less, the son of Alpheus, being not only
the Lord's near relation, but an apostle, whom, as is generally
supposed, he honored in a particular manner, by appearing to him alone,
after his resurrection; [Co1 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#007).
These circumstances, together with his own personal merit, rendered him
of such note among the apostles that they appointed him to reside at
Jerusalem, and to superintend the Church there. This appointment,
Lardner says, was made soon after the martyrdom of Stephen; and, in
support of this opinion, observes, 'that Peter always speaks first, as
president among the apostles, until after the choice of the seven
deacons. Every thing said of St. James, after that, implies his
presiding in the Church at Jerusalem.' Canon., vol. iii. p. 28. For
example, when the apostles and elders at Jerusalem came together to
consider whether it was needful to circumcise the Gentiles, after there
had been much disputing, Peter spake, [Act
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007), then Barnabas and Paul, [Act
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012). And when they had ended, James
summed up the whole, and proposed the terms on which the Gentiles were
to be received into the Church, [Act
15:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019); to which the whole assembly
agreed, and wrote letters to the Gentiles, conformably to the opinion of
James, [Act 15:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022). From this it is
inferred, that James presided in the council of Jerusalem, because he
was president of the Church in that city.

"Chrysostom, in his Homily on Acts 15, says: 'James was bishop of
Jerusalem, and therefore spoke last:' In the time of this council, Paul
communicated the Gospel which he preached among the Gentiles to three of
the apostles, whom he calls pillars; and tells us that, when they
perceived the inspiration and miraculous powers which he possessed, they
gave him the right hand of fellowship, mentioning James first, [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009) : 'And knowing the grace that was
bestowed on me, James, Cephas, and John, who were pillars, gave to me
and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship.' This implies that James,
whom, in the first chapter, he had called the Lord's brother, was not
only an apostle, but the presiding apostle in the Church at Jerusalem.
In the same chapter, Paul, giving an account of what happened after the
council, says, [Gal 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011) : 'When Peter
was come to Antioch, before that certain came from James, he did eat
with the Gentiles; but when they were come he withdrew, and separated
himself, fearing them who were of the circumcision.' This shows that
James resided at Jerusalem, and presided in the Church there, and was
greatly respected by the Jewish believers. The same circumstance appears
from [Act 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#017), where, giving an
account of Paul's journey to Jerusalem, with the collections from the
saints in Judea, Luke says, [Act 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018)
: 'Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present.'
Farther, the respect in which James was held by the apostles appears
from two facts recorded by Luke: the first is, when Paul came to
Jerusalem, three years after his conversion, Barnabas took him, and
brought him Peter and James, as the chief apostles. Compare [Act
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#027) with [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019). The second fact is, after Peter
was miraculously delivered out of prison, about the time of the
passover, in the year 44, 'he came to the house of Mary - where many
were gathered together praying; ([Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012)); and when he had declared to
them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison, he said, Go, show
these things to James, and to the brethren;' [Act
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#017). These particulars are mentioned
by Lardner, and before him by Whitby and Cave, to show that James, the
Lord's brother, was really an apostle, in the strict acceptation of the
word; consequently, that Eusebius was mistaken when he placed him among
the seventy disciples; E. H., lib. vii. c. 12.

"That the Epistle of James was early esteemed an inspired writing, is
evident from the following fact: that while the Second Epistle of Peter,
the second and third of John, the Epistle of Jude, and the Revelation,
are omitted in the first Syriac translation of the New Testament, (the
Peshito), which was made in the beginning of the second century for the
use of the converted Jews; the Epistle of James has found a place in it,
equally with the books which were never called in question. This is an
argument of great weight; for certainly the Jewish believers, to whom
that epistle was addressed and delivered, were much better judges of its
authenticity than the converted Gentiles, to whom it was not sent, and
who perhaps had no opportunity of being acquainted with it till long
after it was written. Wherefore its being received by the Jewish
believers is an undeniable proof that they knew it to be written by
James the apostle; whereas the ignorance of the Gentile believers,
concerning this epistle, is not even a presumption against its
authenticity.

"That the converted Gentiles had little knowledge of the Epistle of
James in the first ages, may have been owing to various causes; such as,
that it was addressed to the Jews, and that the matters contained in it
were personal to the Jews. For on these accounts the Jewish believers
may have thought it not necessary to communicate it to the Gentiles. And
when it was made known to them, they may have scrupled to receive it as
an inspired writing for the following reasons:

1\. The writer does not, in the inscription, take the title of an
apostle, but calls himself simply James, a servant of God, and of the
Lord Jesus Christ.

2\. Many of the ancients, by calling the writer of this epistle James
the Just, have rendered his apostleship doubtful.

3\. As they have done, likewise, by speaking of him commonly as bishop
of Jerusalem, and not as an apostle of Christ.

It is little wonder, therefore, that this epistle was not received
generally by the converted Gentiles; consequently that it was not often
quoted by them in their writings. But afterwards, when it was considered
that this epistle was from the beginning received by the Jewish
believers, and that it was translated into the Syriac language for their
use; and that Paul, though an apostle, sometimes contented himself with
the appellation of a servant of Christ, [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001); [Plm
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001); and sometimes took no appellation
but his own name; [Th1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001); [Th2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001); and that the apostle John did
not, in any of his epistles, call himself an apostle; the title which
the author of the Epistle of James had to be an apostle was no longer
doubted, but he was generally acknowledged to be James, the son of
Alpheus, and the Lord's brother; and his epistle, after an accurate
examination, was received as an inspired writing. So Estius tells us,
who affirms that after the fourth century no Church nor ecclesiastical
writer is found who ever doubted of the authority of this epistle; but,
on the contrary; all the catalogues of the books of Scripture published,
whether by general or provincial councils, or by Roman bishops, or other
orthodox writers, since the fourth century, constantly number it among
the canonical Scriptures.

"With respect to what is remarked by Eusebius, that there are not many
ancient writers who have quoted the Epistle of James, learned men have
observed that Clement of Rome has quoted it four several times; and so
does Ignatius in his genuine Epistle to the Ephesians, sec. 10, 12, 17,
30; and Origen in his thirteenth Homily on Genesis, sec. 5. That it was
not more generally quoted by the ancients, besides the things already
mentioned, may have been owing to the following reasons:

1\. Being written to the whole Jewish nation to correct the errors and
vices which prevailed among them, the Gentiles may have thought
themselves little concerned with it, and may have been at no pains to
procure copies of it; by which means it was not so generally known among
them as some other books of Scripture.

2\. The seeming opposition of the doctrine of this epistle to the
doctrine of Paul, concerning justification by faith without the works of
the law, may have occasioned it to be less regarded by the most ancient
writers; just as it was in later times, on the same account, rejected by
Luther, who, to show his contempt of it, called it (epistola straminea)
a strawy or chaffy epistle.

"To conclude, the authority of the Epistle of James, as an inspired
writing, is abundantly established, in Mill's opinion, by the Apostles
Paul and Peter, who have in their writings many sentiments and
expressions similar to those contained in this epistle; for example: -

[Pe1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003) : Who hath begotten us again
to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ. [Jam
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018) : Having willed it, he hath
begotten us by the word. [Rom 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003),
[Rom 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#004) : Knowing that affliction
worketh out patience; and patience experience. [Jam
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#003) : Knowing that the proving of your
faith worketh out patience. [Rom 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)
: That the hearers of the law are not just before God, but the doers of
the law shall be justified. [Jam 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022)
: And be ye doers of the law, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves
by false reasoning. [Rom 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023) : I see
another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind.

[Pe1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011) : Lusts which war against
the soul. [Jam 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#001) : Come they not
hence, even from your lusts, which war in your members? [Pe1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008), [Pe1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#009) : Your adversary the devil; whom
resist, steadfast in the faith. [Jam
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#007) : Resist the devil, and he will
flee from you. [Pe1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006) : Be humbled
under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you. [Jam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#010) : Be humbled in the presence of
God, and he will lift you up. [Rom
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004) : Who art thou that condemnest
another man's household servant? [Jam
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012) : Thou, who art thou that
condemnest another? [Pe1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008) : Love
covereth a multitude of sins. [Jam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020) : Will cover a multitude of
sins."

See Macknight's preface.

That James the less may have been our Lord's cousin-german, or even our
Lord's brother by a former wife of Joseph, or even by the virgin, is
perfectly possible; and that he was an apostle, and an eminent man among
both Jews and Christians, may be readily credited; and that he was
author of this epistle, is also possible: but I must still assert that
we have neither decisive nor satisfactory evidence on this subject; and
that it is arguing in a circle to deduce the evidence of its
authenticity from the apostleship of James the less, because this person
is not proved to be its author. The chief and proper evidence of its
being canonical must be taken from the fact that it was universally
received by the Church of Christ, and without scruple incorporated with
those writings, which were, on all hands, allowed to have been given by
the inspiration of God.

Before I conclude, I shall mention the opinion of Michaelis relative to
the author of this epistle. "All things considered," says he, "I see no
ground for the assertion that James, the son of Zebedee, was not the
author of this epistle. One circumstance affords, at least, a
presumptive argument in favor of the opinion that it was really written
by the elder James, and at a time when the Gospel had not been
propagated among the Gentiles; namely, that it contains no exhortations
to harmony between the Jewish and Gentile converts, which, after the
time that the Gentiles were admitted into the Church, became absolutely
necessary. Had it been written after the apostolic council of Jerusalem,
mentioned Acts 15, and by the younger James, we might have expected
that, at least, some allusion would be made in it to the decree of that
council, which was propounded by the younger James in favor of the
Gentile converts; and that the epistle would contain an admonition to
the Jewish converts, to consider the Gentile converts as their
brethren." - Introduction to the New Testament.

The epistle itself is entirely different in its complexion from all
those in the sacred canon; the style and manner are more that of a
Jewish prophet than a Christian apostle. It scarcely touches on any
subject purely Christian. Our blessed Lord is only mentioned twice in
it, [Jam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001); [Jam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001); but it has nothing of his
miracles or teaching, of his death or resurrection, nor of any
redemption by him. It begins without any apostolical salutation, and
ends without any apostolical benediction. In short, had it not been for
the two slight notices of our blessed Lord, we had not known it was the
work of any Christian writer. It may be considered a sort of connecting
link between Judaism and Christianity, as the ministry of John Baptist
was between the old covenant and the new. There is neither plan nor
arrangement in it; but it contains many invaluable lessons which no
serious person can read without profit.

James the less was martyred at Jerusalem about a.d. 62: and the epistle
is supposed to have been written a short time before his death. Though I
believe it to be the work of an unknown author, not long after the
ascension of our Lord, I shall follow the usual chronology, and date it
in the year 61; not because I think that to be the true date, but
because it is what is generally adopted.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 1](jam001)

</div>
