<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[James Index](jam.md)  
  [Previous](jam004)  [Next](pe1000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 5:0</span></span>

The profligate rich are in danger of God's judgments, because of their
pride, fraudulent dealings, riotous living, and cruelty, [Jam
5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md). The oppressed followers of God
should be patient, for the Lord's coming is nigh; and should not grudge
against each other, [Jam 5:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007.md). They
should take encouragement from the example of the prophets, and of Job,
[Jam 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010.md), [Jam
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011.md). Swearing forbidden, [Jam
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012.md). Directions to the afflicted,
[Jam 5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013.md). They should confess
their faults to each other, [Jam 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016.md).
The great prevalence of prayer instanced in Elijah, [Jam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017.md), [Jam
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018.md). The blessedness of converting a
sinner from the error of his way, [Jam
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019.md), [Jam
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020.md).

[James 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 5:1</span></span>

Go to now - See on [Jam 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013.md).

Weep and howl for your miseries - St. James seems to refer here, in the
spirit of prophecy, to the destruction that was coming upon the Jews,
not only in Judea, but in all the provinces where they sojourned. He
seems here to assume the very air and character of a prophet; and in the
most dignified language and peculiarly expressive and energetic images,
foretells the desolations that were coming upon this bad people.

[James 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 5:2</span></span>

Your riches are corrupted - Σεσηπε· Are putrefied. The term πλουτος,
riches, is to be taken here, not for gold, silver, or precious stones,
(for these could not putrefy), but for the produce of the fields and
flocks, the different stores of grain, wine, and oil, which they had
laid up in their granaries, and the various changes of raiment which
they had amassed in their wardrobes.

[James 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 5:3</span></span>

Your gold and silver is cankered - Instead of helping the poor, and thus
honoring God with your substance, ye have, through the principle of
covetousness, kept all to yourselves.

The rust of them shall be a witness against you - Your putrefied stores,
your moth-eaten garments, and your tarnished coin, are so many proofs
that it was not for want of property that you assisted not the poor, but
through a principle of avarice; loving money, not for the sake of what
it could procure, but for its own sake, which is the genuine principle
of the miser. This was the very character given to this people by our
Lord himself; he called them φιλαργυροι, lovers of money. Against this
despicable and abominable disposition, the whole of the 12th chapter of
St. Luke is levelled; but it was their easily besetting sin, and is so
to the present day.

Shall eat your flesh as it were fire - This is a very bold and sublime
figure. He represents the rust of their coin as becoming a canker that
should produce gangrenes and phagedenous ulcers in their flesh, till it
should be eaten away from their bones.

Ye have heaped treasure together - This verse is variously pointed. The
word ὡς, like as, in the preceding clause, is left out by the Syriac,
and some others; and πυρ, fire, is added here from that clause; so that
the whole verse reads thus: "Your gold and your silver is cankered; and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall consume your
flesh. Ye have treasured up Fire against the last days." This is a bold
and fine image: instead of the treasures of corn, wine, and oil, rich
stuffs, with silver and gold, which ye have been laying up, ye shall
find a treasure, a magazine of fire, that shall burn up your city, and
consume even your temple. This was literally true; and these solemn
denunciations of Divine wrath were most completely fulfilled. See the
notes on Matthew 24 (note), where all the circumstances of this
tremendous and final destruction are particularly noted.

By the last days we are not to understand the day of judgment, but the
last days of the Jewish commonwealth, which were not long distant from
the date of this epistle, whether we follow the earlier or later
computation, of which enough has been spoken in the preface.

[James 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 5:4</span></span>

The hire of the laborers - The law, [Lev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013.md), had ordered: The wages of him
that is hired shall not abide with thee all night until the morning,
every day's labor being paid for as soon as ended. This is more clearly
stated in another law, [Deu 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015.md) : At
his day thou shalt give him his hire; neither shall the sun go down upon
it; - lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee.
And that God particularly resented this defrauding of the hireling we
see from [Mal 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005.md) : I will come near
to you in judgment, and will be a swift witness against those who
oppress the hireling in his wages. And on these laws and threatenings is
built what we read in Synopsis Sohar, p. 100, l. 45: "When a poor man
does any work in a house, the vapor proceeding from him, through the
severity of his work, ascends towards heaven. Wo to his employer if he
delay to pay him his wages." To this James seems particularly to allude,
when he says: The cries of them who have reaped are entered into the
ears of the Lord of hosts; and the rabbins say, "The vapor arising from
the sweat of the hard-worked laborer ascends up before God." Both images
are sufficiently expressive.

The Lord of sabaoth - St. James often conceives in Hebrew though he
writes in Greek. It is well known that יהוה צבאות Yehovah tsebaoth, Lord
of hosts, or Lord of armies, is a frequent appellation of God in the Old
Testament; and signifies his uncontrollable power, and the infinitely
numerous means he has for governing the world, and defending his
followers, and punishing the wicked.

[James 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 5:5</span></span>

Ye have lived in pleasure - Ετρυφησατε. Ye have lived luxuriously;
feeding yourselves without fear, pampering the flesh.

And been wanton - Εσπαταλησατε· Ye have lived lasciviously. Ye have
indulged all your sinful and sensual appetites to the uttermost; and
your lives have been scandalous.

Ye have nourished your hearts - Εθρεψατε· Ye have fattened your hearts,
and have rendered them incapable of feeling, as in a day of slaughter,
ἡμερᾳ σφαγης, a day of sacrifice, where many victims are offered at
once, and where the people feast upon the sacrifices; many, no doubt,
turning, on that occasion, a holy ordinance into a riotous festival.

[James 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 5:6</span></span>

Ye have condemned and killed the just; and he doth not resist you -
Several by τον δικαιον, the just one, understand Jesus Christ, who is so
called, [Act 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014.md); [Act
7:52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052.md); [Act
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#014.md); but the structure of the
sentence, and the connection in which it stands, seem to require that we
should consider this as applying to the just or righteous in general,
who were persecuted and murdered by those oppressive rich men; and their
death was the consequence of their dragging them before the judgment
seats, [Jam 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006.md), where, having no
influence, and none to plead their cause, they were unjustly condemned
and executed.

And he doth not resist you. - In this, as in τον δικαιον, the just,
there is an enallege of the singular for the plural number. And in the
word ουκ αντιτασσεται, he doth not resist, the idea is included of
defense in a court of justice. These poor righteous people had none to
plead their cause; and if they had it would have been useless, as their
oppressors had all power and all influence, and those who sat on these
judgment seats were lost to all sense of justice and right. Some think
that he doth not resist you should be referred to God; as if he had
said, God permits you to go on in this way at present, but he will
shortly awake to judgment, and destroy you as enemies of truth and
righteousness.

[James 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 5:7</span></span>

Be patient, therefore - Because God is coming to execute judgment on
this wicked people, therefore be patient till he comes. He seems here to
refer to the coming of the Lord to execute judgment on the Jewish
nation, which shortly afterwards took place.

The husbandman waiteth - The seed of your deliverance is already sown,
and by and by the harvest of your salvation will take place. God's
counsels will ripen in due time.

The early and latter rain - The rain of seed time; and the rain of
ripening before harvest: the first fell in Judea, about the beginning of
November, after the seed was sown; and the second towards the end of
April, when the ears were filling, and this prepared for a full harvest.
Without these two rains, the earth would have been unfruitful. These God
had promised: I will give you the rain of your land in his due season,
the first rain and the latter rain, that thou mayest gather in thy corn,
and thy wine, and thy oil, [Deu 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014.md).
But for these they were not only to wait patiently, but also to pray,
Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain; so shall the
Lord make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one
grass in the field; [Zac 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001.md).

[James 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 5:8</span></span>

Be ye also patient - Wait for God's deliverance, as ye wait for his
bounty in providence.

Stablish your hearts - Take courage; do not sink under your trials.

The coming of the Lord draweth nigh - Ηγγικε· Is at hand. He is already
on his way to destroy this wicked people, to raze their city and temple,
and to destroy their polity for ever; and this judgment will soon take
place.

[James 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 5:9</span></span>

Grudge not - Μη στεναζετε· Groan not; grumble not; do not murmur through
impatience; and let not any ill treatment which you receive, induce you
to vent your feelings in imprecations against your oppressors. Leave all
this in the hands of God.

Lest ye be condemned - By giving way to a spirit of this kind, you will
get under the condemnation of the wicked.

The judge standeth before the door - His eye is upon every thing that is
wrong in you, and every wrong that is done to you; and he is now
entering into judgment with your oppressors.

[James 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 5:10</span></span>

Take - the prophets - The prophets who had spoken to their forefathers
by the authority of God, were persecuted by the very people to whom they
delivered the Divine message; but they suffered affliction and
persecution with patience, commending their cause to him who judgeth
righteously; therefore, imitate their example.

[James 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 5:11</span></span>

We count them happy which endure - According to that saying of our
blessed Lord, Blessed are ye when men shall persecute and revile you -
for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you. [Mat
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011.md), [Mat
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012.md), etc.

Ye have heard of the patience of Job - Stripped of all his worldly
possessions, deprived at a stroke of all his children, tortured in body
with sore disease, tempted by the devil, harassed by his wife, and
calumniated by his friends, he nevertheless held fast his integrity,
resigned himself to the Divine dispensations, and charged not God
foolishly.

And have seen the end of the Lord - The issue to which God brought all
his afflictions and trials, giving him children, increasing his
property, lengthening out his life, and multiplying to him every kind of
spiritual and secular good. This was God's end with respect to him; but
the devil's end was to drive him to despair, and to cause him to
blaspheme his Maker. This mention of Job shows him to have been a real
person; for a fictitious person would not have been produced as an
example of any virtue so highly important as that of patience and
perseverance. The end of the Lord is a Hebraism for the issue to which
God brings any thing or business.

The Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy - Instead of
πολυσπλαγχνος, which we translate very pitiful, and which might be
rendered of much sympathy, from πολυς, much, and σπλαγχνον, a bowel,
(because any thing that affects us with commiseration causes us to feel
an indescribable emotion of the bowels), several MSS. have
πολυευσπλαγχνος, from παλυς, much, ευ, easily, and σπλαγχνον, a bowel, a
word not easy to be translated; but it signifies one whose commiseration
is easily excited, and whose commiseration is great or abundant.

[James 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 5:12</span></span>

Above all things - swear not - What relation this exhortation can have
to the subject in question, I confess I cannot see. It may not have been
designed to stand in any connection, but to be a separate piece of
advice, as in the several cases which immediately follow. That the Jews
were notoriously guilty of common swearing is allowed on all hands; and
that swearing by heaven, earth, Jerusalem, the temple, the altar,
different parts of the body, was not considered by them as binding
oaths, has been sufficiently proved. Rabbi Akiba taught that "a man
might swear with his lips, and annul it in his heart; and then the oath
was not binding." See the notes on [Mat
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033.md), etc., where the subject is
considered in great detail.

Let your yea be yea, etc. - Do not pretend to say yea with your lips,
and annul it in your heart; let the yea or the nay which you express be
bona fide such. Do not imagine that any mental reservation can cancel
any such expressions of obligation in the sight of God.

Lest ye fall into condemnation - Ἱνα μη ὑπο κρισιν πεσητε· Lest ye fall
under judgment. Several MSS. join ὑπο and κρισιν together, ὑποκρισιν,
and prefix εις, into, which makes a widely different reading: Lest ye
fall into hypocrisy. Now, as it is a fact, that the Jews did teach that
there might be mental reservation, that would annul the oath, how
solemnly soever it was taken; the object of St. James, if the last
reading be genuine, and it is supported by a great number of excellent
MSS., some versions, and some of the most eminent of the fathers, was to
guard against that hypocritical method of taking an oath, which is
subversive of all moral feeling, and must make conscience itself
callous.

[James 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 5:13</span></span>

Is any among you afflicted? let him pray - The Jews taught that the
meaning of the ordinance, [Lev 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#045.md),
which required the leper to cry, Unclean! unclean! was, "that thus
making known his calamity, the people might be led to offer up prayers
to God in his behalf," Sota, page 685, ed. Wagens. They taught also,
that when any sickness or affliction entered a family, they should go to
the wise men, and implore their prayers. Bava bathra, fol. 116, 1.

In Nedarim, fol. 40, 1, we have this relation: "Rabba, as often as he
fell sick, forbade his domestics to mention it for the first day; if he
did not then begin to get well, he told his family to go and publish it
in the highways, that they who hated him might rejoice, and they that
loved him might intercede with God for him."

Is any merry? let him sing psalms - These are all general but very
useful directions. It is natural for a man to sing when he is cheerful
and happy. Now no subject can be more noble than that which is Divine:
and as God alone is the author of all that good which makes a man happy,
then his praise should be the subject of the song of him who is merry.
But where persons rejoice in iniquity, and not in the truth, God and
sacred things can never be the subject of their song.

[James 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 5:14</span></span>

Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders - This was also a
Jewish maxim. Rabbi Simeon, in Sepher Hachaiyim, said: "What should a
man do who goes to visit the sick? Ans. He who studies to restore the
health of the body, should first lay the foundation in the health of the
soul. The wise men have said, No healing is equal to that which comes
from the word of God and prayer. Rabbi Phineas, the son of Chamma, hath
said, 'When sickness or disease enters into a man's family, let him
apply to a wise man, who will implore mercy in his behalf.'" See
Schoettgen.

St. James very properly sends all such to the elders of the Church, who
had power with God through the great Mediator, that they might pray for
them.

Anointing him with oil - That St. James neither means any kind of
incantation, any kind of miracle, or such extreme unction as the Romish
Church prescribes, will be sufficiently evident from these
considerations:

1\. Be was a holy man, and could prescribe nothing but what was holy.

2\. If a miracle was intended, it could have been as well wrought
without the oil, as with it.

3\. It is not intimated that even this unction is to save the sick man,
but the prayer of faith, [Jam 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015.md).

4\. What is here recommended was to be done as a natural means of
restoring health, which, while they used prayer and supplication to God,
they were not to neglect.

5\. Oil in Judea was celebrated for its sanative qualities; so that they
scarcely ever took a journey without carrying oil with them, (see in the
case of the Samaritan), with which they anointed their bodies, healed
their wounds, bruises, etc.

6\. Oil was and in frequently used in the east as a means of cure in
very dangerous diseases; and in Egypt it is often used in the cure of
the plague. Even in Europe it has been tried with great success in the
cure of dropsy. And pure olive oil is excellent for recent wounds and
bruises; and I have seen it tried in this way with the best effects.

7\. But that it was the custom of the Jews to apply it as a means of
healing, and that St. James refers to this custom, is not only evident
from the case of the wounded man ministered to by the good Samaritan,
[Luk 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034.md), but from the practice of
the Jewish rabbins. In Midrash Koheleth, fol. 73, 1, it is said:
"Chanina, son of the brother of the Rabbi Joshua, went to visit his
uncle at Capernaum; he was taken ill; and Rabbi Joshua went to him and
anointed him with oil, and he was restored." They had, therefore,
recourse to this as a natural remedy; and we find that the disciples
used it also in this way to heal the sick, not exerting the miraculous
power but in cases where natural means were ineffectual. And they cast
out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed
them; [Mar 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013.md). On this latter place
I have supposed that it might have been done symbolically, in order to
prepare the way for a miraculous cure: this is the opinion of many
commentators; but I am led, on more mature consideration, to doubt its
propriety, yet dare not decide. In short, anointing the sick with oil,
in order to their recovery, was a constant practice among the Jews. See
Lightfoot and Wetstein on [Mar 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013.md).
And here I am satisfied that it has no other meaning than as a natural
means of restoring health; and that St. James desires them to use
natural means while looking to God for an especial blessing. And no wise
man would direct otherwise.

8\. That the anointing recommended here by St. James cannot be such as
the Romish Church prescribes, and it is on this passage principally that
they found their sacrament of extreme unction, is evident from these
considerations:

1\. St. James orders the sick person to be anointed in reference to his
cure; but they anoint the sick in the agonies of death, when there is no
prospect of his recovery; and never administer that sacrament, as it is
called, while there is any hope of life.

2\. St James orders this anointing for the cure of the body, but they
apply it for the cure of the soul; in reference to which use of it St.
James gives no directions: and what is said of the forgiveness of sins,
in [Jam 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015.md), is rather to be referred
to faith and prayer, which are often the means of restoring lost health,
and preventing premature death, when natural means, the most skillfully
used, have been useless.

3\. The anointing with oil, if ever used as a means or symbol in working
miraculous cures, was only applied in some cases, perhaps very few, if
any; but the Romish Church uses it in every case; and makes it necessary
to the salvation of every departing soul. Therefore, St. James' unction,
and the extreme unction of the Romish Church, are essentially different.
See below.

[James 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 5:15</span></span>

And the prayer of faith; shall save the sick - That is, God will often
make these the means of a sick man's recovery; but there often are cases
where faith and prayer are both ineffectual, because God sees it will be
prejudicial to the patient's salvation to be restored; and therefore all
faith and prayer on such occasions should be exerted on this ground: "If
it be most for thy glory, and the eternal good of this man's soul, let
him be restored; if otherwise, Lord, pardon, purify him, and take him to
thy glory."

The Lord shall raise him up - Not the elders, how faithfully and
fervently soever they have prayed.

And if he have committed sins - So as to have occasioned his present
malady, they shall be forgiven him; for being the cause of the
affliction it is natural to conclude that, if the effect be to cease,
the cause must be removed. We find that in the miraculous restoration to
health, under the powerful hand of Christ, the sin of the party is
generally said to be forgiven, and this also before the miracle was
wrought on the body: hence there was a maxim among the Jews, and it
seems to be founded in common sense and reason, that God never restores
a man miraculously to health till he has pardoned his sins; because it
would be incongruous for God to exert his miraculous power in saving a
body, the soul of which was in a state of condemnation to eternal death,
because of the crimes it had committed against its Maker and Judge. Here
then it is God that remits the sin, not in reference to the unction, but
in reference to the cure of the body, which he is miraculously to
effect.

[James 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 5:16</span></span>

Confess your faults one to another - This is a good general direction to
Christians who endeavor to maintain among themselves the communion of
saints. This social confession tends much to humble the soul, and to
make it watchful. We naturally wish that our friends in general, and our
religious friends in particular, should think well of us; and when we
confess to them offenses which, without this confession, they could
never have known, we feel humbled, are kept from self-applause, and
induced to watch unto prayer, that we may not increase our offenses
before God, or be obliged any more to undergo the painful humiliation of
acknowledging our weakness, fickleness, or infidelity to our religious
brethren.

It is not said, Confess your faults to the Elders that they may forgive
them, or prescribe penance in order to forgive them. No; the members of
the Church were to confess their faults to each other; therefore
auricular confession to a priest, such as is prescribed by the Romish
Church, has no foundation in this passage. Indeed, had it any foundation
here it would prove more than they wish, for it would require the priest
to confess his sins to the people, as well as the people to confess
theirs to the priest.

And pray one for another - There is no instance in auricular confession
where the penitent and the priest pray together for pardon; but here the
people are commanded to pray for each other that they may be healed.

The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much - The
words δεησις ενεργουμενη signify energetic supplication, or such a
prayer as is suggested to the soul and wrought in it by a Divine energy.
When God designs to do some particular work in his Church he pours out
on his followers the spirit of grace and supplication; and this he does
sometimes when he is about to do some especial work for an individual.
When such a power of prayer is granted, faith should be immediately
called into exercise, that the blessing may be given: the spirit of
prayer is the proof that the power of God is present to heal. Long
prayers give no particular evidence of Divine inspiration: the following
was a maxim among the ancient Jews, שתפלת צדיקים קצדה the prayers of the
righteous are short. This is exemplified in almost every instance in the
Old Testament.

[James 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 5:17</span></span>

Elias was a man subject to like passions - This was Elijah, and a
consistency between the names of the same persons as expressed in the
Old and the New Testaments should be kept up.

The word ὁμοιοπαθης signifies of the same constitution, a human being
just as ourselves are. See the same phrase and its explanation in [Act
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015.md), and the note there. There was
some reason to apprehend that because Elijah was translated, that
therefore he was more than human, and if so, his example could be no
pattern for us; and as the design of St. James was to excite men to
pray, expecting the Divine interference whenever that should be
necessary, therefore he tells them that Elijah was a man like
themselves, of the same constitution, liable to the same accidents, and
needing the same supports.

And he prayed earnestly - Προσευχῃ προσηυξατο· He prayed with prayer; a
Hebraism for, he prayed fervently.

That it might not rain - See this history, [Kg1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001.md), etc.

And it rained not on the earth - Επι της γης· On that land, viz. the
land of Judea; for this drought did not extend elsewhere.

Three years and six months - This is the term mentioned by our Lord,
[Luk 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025.md); but this is not specified
in the original history. In [Kg1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001.md),
it is said, In the third year the word of the Lord came to Elijah, that
is, concerning the rain; but this third year is to be computed from the
time of his going to live at Zarephath, which happened many days after
the drought began, as is plain from this, that he remained at the brook
Cherith till it was dried up, and then went to Zarephath, in the country
of Zidon; [Kg1 17:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#007.md). Therefore the
three years and six months must be computed from his denouncing the
drought, at which time that judgment commenced. Macknight.

[James 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 5:18</span></span>

And he prayed again - This second prayer is not mentioned in the history
in express words, but as in [Kg1
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042.md), it is said, He cast himself
down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees; that was
probably the time of the second praying, namely, that rain might come,
as this was the proper posture of prayer.

[James 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 5:19</span></span>

Err from the truth - Stray away from the Gospel of Christ; and one
convert him - reclaim him from his error, and bring him back to the fold
of Christ.

[James 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 5:20</span></span>

Let him know - Let him duly consider, for his encouragement, that he who
is the instrument of converting a sinner shall save a soul from eternal
death, and a body from ruin, and shall hide a multitude of sins; for in
being the means of his conversion we bring him back to God, who, in his
infinite mercy, hides or blots out the numerous sins which he had
committed during the time of his backsliding. It is not the man's sins
who is the means of his conversion, but the sins of the backslider,
which are here said to be hidden. See more below.

1\. Many are of opinion that the hiding a multitude of sins is here to
be understood of the person who converts the backslider: this is a
dangerous doctrine, and what the Holy Spirit never taught to man. Were
this true it would lead many a sinner to endeavor the reformation of his
neighbor, that himself might continue under the influence of his own
beloved sins and conversion to a particular creed would be put in the
place of conversion to God, and thus the substance be lost in the
shadow. Bishop Atterbury, (Ser. vol. i. p. 46), and Scott, (Christian
Life, vol. i. p. 368), contend "that the covering a multitude of sins
includes also, that the pious action of which the apostle speaks engages
God to look with greater indulgence on the character of the person that
performs it, and to be less severe in marking what he has done amiss."
See Macknight. This from such authorities may be considered doubly
dangerous; it argues however great ignorance of God, of the nature of
Divine justice, and of the sinfulness of sin. It is besides completely
antievangelical; it teaches in effect that something besides the blood
of the covenant will render God propitious to man, and that the
performance of a pious action will induce God's justice to show greater
indulgence to the person who performs it, and to be less severe in
marking what he has done amiss. On the ground of this doctrine we might
confide that, had he a certain quantum of pious acts, we might have all
the sins of our lives forgiven, independently of the sacrifice of
Christ; for if one pious act can procure pardon for a multitude of sins,
what may not be expected from many?

2\. The Jewish doctrine, to which it is possible St. James may allude,
was certainly more sound than that taught by these Christian divines.
They allowed that the man who was the means of converting another had
done a work highly pleasing to God, and which should be rewarded; but
they never insinuate that this would atone for sin. I shall produce a
few examples: -

In Synopsis Sohzar, p. 47, n. 17, it is said: Great is his excellence
who persuades a sick person to turn from his sins. Ibid, p. 92, n. 18:
Great is his reward who brings back the pious into the way of the
blessed Lord.

Yoma, fol. 87, 1: By his hands iniquity is not committed, who turns many
to righteousness; i.e. God does not permit him to fall into sin. What is
the reason? Ans. Lest those should be found in paradise, while their
instructer is found in hell.

This doctrine is both innocent and godly in comparison of the other. It
holds out a motive to diligence and zeal, but nothing farther. In short,
if we allow any thing to cover our sins beside the mercy of God in
Christ Jesus, We shall err most dangerously from the truth, and add this
moreover to the multitude of Our sins, that we maintained that the gift
of God could be purchased by our puny acts of comparative righteousness.

3\. As one immortal soul is of more worth than all the material creation
of God, every man who knows the worth of his own should labor for the
salvation of others. To be the means of depriving hell of her
expectation, and adding even one soul to the Church triumphant, is a
matter of infinite moment; and he who is such an instrument has much
reason to thank God that ever he was born. He who lays out his accounts
to do good to the souls of men, will ever have the blessing of God in
his own. Besides, God will not suffer him to labor in vain, or spend his
strength for naught. At first he may see little fruit; but the bread
cast upon the waters shall be found after many days: and if he should
never see it in this life, he may take for granted that whatsoever he
has done for God, in simplicity and godly sincerity, has been less or
more effectual.

After the last word of this epistle ἁμαρτιων, of sins, some versions add
his, others theirs; and one MS. and the later Syriac have Amen. But
these additions are of no authority.

The subscriptions to this epistle, in the Versions, are the following:
The end of the Epistle of James the apostle. - Syriac. The catholic
Epistle of James the apostle is ended. - Syriac Philoxenian. The end. -
Aethiopic. Praise be to God for ever and ever; and may his mercy be upon
us. Amen. - Arabic. The Epistle of James the son of Zebedee, is ended. -
Itala, one copy. Nothing. - Coptic. Nothing. - Printed Vulgate. The
Epistle of James is ended. - Bib. Vulg. Edit. Eggestein. The Epistle of
St. James the apostle is ended. - Complutensian.

In the Manuscripts: Of James. - Codex Vaticanus, B. The Epistle of
James. - Codex Alexandrinus. The end of the catholic Epistle of James. -
Codex Vaticanus, 1210. The catholic Epistle of James the apostle. - A
Vienna MS. The catholic Epistle of the holy Apostle James. - An ancient
MS. in the library of the Augustins, at Rome. The end of the Epistle of
the holy Apostle James, the brother of God. - One of Petavius's MSS.,
written in the thirteenth century. The same is found in a Vatican MS. of
the eleventh century. The most ancient MSS. have little or no
subscription.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Introduction](pe1000.md)

</div>
