<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[James Index](jam.md)  
  [Previous](jam000)  [Next](jam002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

He addresses the dispersed of the twelve tribes, [Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md). Shows that they should rejoice
under the cross, because of the spiritual good which they may derive
from it, especially in the increase and perfecting of their patience,
[Jam 1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002.md). They are exhorted to ask
wisdom of God, who gives liberally to all, [Jam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005.md). But they must ask in faith, and
not with a doubting mind, [Jam 1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006.md).
Directions to the rich and the poor, [Jam
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#009.md). The blessedness of the man
that endures trials, [Jam 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012.md). How
men are tempted and drawn away from God, [Jam
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013.md). God is the Father of lights,
and all good proceeds from him, [Jam
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#016.md). Cautions against hasty words
and wrong tempers, [Jam 1:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019.md). We
should be doers of the word, and not hearers merely, lest we resemble
those who, beholding their natural face in a glass, when it is removed
forget what manner of persons they were, [Jam
1:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022.md). We should look into the
perfect law of liberty, and continue therein, [Jam
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025.md). The nature and properties of
pure religion, [Jam 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026.md), [Jam
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027.md).

[James 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 1:1</span></span>

James, a servant of God - For an account of this person, or rather for
the conjectures concerning him, see the preface. He neither calls
himself an apostle, nor does he say that he was the brother of Christ,
or bishop of Jerusalem; whether he was James the elder, son of Zebedee,
or James the less, called our Lord's brother, or some other person of
the same name, we know not. The assertions of writers concerning these
points are worthy of no regard. The Church has always received him as an
apostle of Christ.

To the twelve tribes - scattered abroad - To the Jews, whether converted
to Christianity or not, who lived out of Judea, and sojourned among the
Gentiles for the purpose of trade or commerce. At this time there were
Jews partly traveling, partly sojourning, and partly resident in most
parts of the civilized world; particularly in Asia, Greece, Egypt, and
Italy. I see no reason for restricting it to Jewish believers only; it
was sent to all whom it might concern, but particularly to those who had
received the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ; much less must we confine
it to those who were scattered abroad at the persecution raised
concerning Stephen, [Act 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001.md), etc.;
[Act 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019.md), etc. That the twelve
tribes were in actual existence when James wrote this epistle, Dr.
Macknight thinks evident from the following facts:

"1. Notwithstanding Cyrus allowed all the Jews in his dominions to
return to their own land, many of them did not return. This happened
agreeably to God's purpose, in permitting them to be carried captive
into Assyria and Babylonia; for he intended to make himself known among
the heathens, by means of the knowledge of his being and perfections,
which the Jews, in their dispersion, would communicate to them. This
also was the reason that God determined that the ten tribes should never
return to their own land, [Hos 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006.md);
[Hos 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008.md); [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003.md), [Hos
9:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015.md).

2\. That, comparatively speaking, few of the twelve tribes returned in
consequence of Cyrus's decree, but continued to live among the Gentiles,
appears from this: that in the days of Ahasuerus, one of the successors
of Cyrus, who reigned from India to Ethiopia, over one hundred and
twenty-seven provinces, [Est 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008.md), The
Jews were dispersed among the people in all the provinces of his
kingdom, and their laws were diverse from the laws of all other people,
and they did not keep the king's laws; so that, by adhering to their own
usages, they kept themselves distinct from all the nations among whom
they lived.

3\. On the day of pentecost, which happened next after our Lord's
ascension, [Act 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005.md), [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009.md), There were dwelling at Jerusalem
Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven; Parthians, Medes,
and Elamites, etc.; so numerous were the Jews, and so widely dispersed
through all the countries of the world.

4\. When Paul traveled through Asia and Europe, he found the Jews so
numerous, that in all the noted cities of the Gentiles they had
synagogues in which they assembled for the worship of God, and were
joined by multitudes of proselytes from among the heathens, to whom
likewise he preached the Gospel.

5\. The same apostle, in his speech to King Agrippa, affirmed that the
twelve tribes were then existing, and that they served God day and
night, in expectation of the promise made to the fathers, [Act
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#006.md).

6\. Josephus, Ant. i. 14, cap. 12, tells us that one region could not
contain the Jews, but they dwelt in most of the flourishing cities of
Asia and Europe, in the islands and continent, not much less in number
than the heathen inhabitants. From all this it is evident that the Jews
of the dispersion were more numerous than even the Jews in Judea, and
that James very properly inscribed this letter to the twelve tribes
which were in the dispersion, seeing the twelve tribes really existed
then, and do still exist, although not distinguished by separate
habitations, as they were anciently in their own land.

Greeting - Χαιρειν· Health; a mere expression of benevolence, a wish for
their prosperity; a common form of salutation; see [Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023.md); [Act
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#026.md); [Jo2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011.md).

[James 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 1:2</span></span>

Count it all joy - The word πειρασμος, which we translate temptation,
signifies affliction, persecution, or trial of any kind; and in this
sense it is used here, not intending diabolic suggestion, or what is
generally understood by the word temptation.

[James 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 1:3</span></span>

The trying of your faith - Trials put religion, and all the graces of
which it is composed to proof; the man that stands in such trials gives
proof that his religion is sound, and the evidence afforded to his own
mind induces him to take courage, bear patiently, and persevere.

[James 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 1:4</span></span>

Let patience have her perfect work - That is, Continue faithful, and
your patience will be crowned with its full reward; for in this sense is
εργον, which we translate work, to be understood. It is any effect
produced by a cause, as interest from money, fruit from tillage, gain
from labor, a reward for services performed; the perfect work is the
full reward. See many examples in Kypke.

That ye may be perfect and entire - Τελειοι, Fully instructed, in every
part of the doctrine of God, and in his whole will concerning you.
Ὁλοκληροι, having all your parts, members, and portions; that ye may
have every grace which constitutes the mind that was in Christ, so that
your knowledge and holiness may be complete, and bear a proper
proportion to each other. These expressions in their present application
are by some thought to be borrowed from the Grecian games: the man was
τελειος, perfect, who in any of the athletic exercises had got the
victory; he was ὁλοκληρος, entire, having every thing complete, who had
the victory in the pentathlon, in each of the five exercises. Of this
use in the last term I do not recollect an example, and therefore think
the expressions are borrowed from the sacrifices under the law. A victim
was τελειος, perfect, that was perfectly sound, having no disease; it
was ὁλοκληρος, entire, if it had all its members, having nothing
redundant, nothing deficient. Be then to the Lord what he required his
sacrifices to be; let your whole heart, your body, soul, and spirit, be
sanctified to the Lord of hosts, that he may fill you with all his
fullness.

[James 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 1:5</span></span>

If any of you lack wisdom - Wisdom signifies in general knowledge of the
best end, and the best means of attaining it; but in Scripture it
signifies the same as true religion, the thorough practical knowledge of
God, of one's self, and of a Savior.

Let him ask of God - Because God is the only teacher of this wisdom.

That giveth to all men liberally - Who has all good, and gives all
necessary good to every one that asks fervently. He who does not ask
thus does not feel his need of Divine teaching. The ancient Greek maxim
appears at first view strange, but it is literally true: -

Αρχη γνωσεως της αγνοιας ἡ γνωσις.

"The knowledge of ignorance is the beginning of knowledge."

In knowledge we may distinguish these four things: -

1\. Intelligence, the object of which is intuitive truths.

2\. Wisdom, which is employed in finding out the best end.

3\. Prudence, which regulates the whole conduct through life.

4\. Art, which provides infallible rules to reason by.

[James 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 1:6</span></span>

Let him ask in faith - Believing that God IS; that he has all good; and
that he is ever ready to impart to his creatures whatever they need.

Nothing wavering - Μηδεν διακρινομενος· Not judging otherwise; having no
doubt concerning the truth of these grand and fundamental principles,
never supposing that God will permit him to ask in vain, when he asks
sincerely and fervently. Let him not hesitate, let him not be
irresolute; no man can believe too much good of God.

Is like a wave of the sea - The man who is not thoroughly persuaded that
if he ask of God he shall receive, resembles a wave of the sea; he is in
a state of continual agitation; driven by the wind, and tossed: now
rising by hope, then sinking by despair.

[James 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 1:7</span></span>

Let not that man think - The man whose mind is divided, who is not
properly persuaded either of his own wants or God's sufficiency. Such
persons may pray, but having no faith, they can get no answer.

[James 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 1:8</span></span>

A double-minded man - Ανηρ διψυχος· The man of two souls, who has one
for earth, and another for heaven; who wishes to secure both worlds; he
will not give up earth, and he is loth to let heaven go. This was a
usual term among the Jews, to express the man who attempted to worship
God, and yet retained the love of the creature. Rabbi Tanchum, fol. 84,
on [Deu 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017.md), said: "Behold, the
Scripture exhorts the Israelites, and tells them when they pray, לא יהיה
להם שתי לבבות lo yiyeh lahem shetey lebaboth, that they should not have
two hearts, one for the holy blessed God, and one for something else." A
man of this character is continually distracted; he will neither let
earth nor heaven go, and yet he can have but one. Perhaps St. James
refers to those Jews who were endeavoring to incorporate the law with
the Gospel, who were divided in their minds and affections, not willing
to give up the Levitical rites, and yet unwilling to renounce the
Gospel. Such persons could make no progress in Divine things.

[James 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 1:9</span></span>

Let the brother of low degree - The poor, destitute Christian may glory
in the cross of Christ, and the blessed hope laid up for him in heaven;
for, being a child of God, he is an heir of God, and a joint heir with
Christ.

[James 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 1:10</span></span>

But the rich, in that he is made low - Εν τῃ ταπεινωσει· In his
humiliation - in his being brought to the foot of the cross to receive,
as a poor and miserable sinner, redemption through the blood of the
cross: and especially let him rejoice in this, because all outward glory
is only as the flower of the field, and, like that, will wither and
perish.

[James 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 1:11</span></span>

For the sun is no sooner risen - We need not pursue this metaphor, as
St. James' meaning is sufficiently clear: All human things are
transitory; rise and fall, or increase and decay, belong to all the
productions of the earth, and to all its inhabitants. This is
unavoidable, for in many cases the very cause of their growth becomes
the cause of their decay and destruction. The sun by its genial heat
nourishes and supports all plants and animals; but when it arises with a
burning heat, the atmosphere not being tempered with a sufficiency of
moist vapours, the juices are exhaled from the plants; the earth, for
lack of moisture, cannot afford a sufficient supply; vegetation becomes
checked; and the plants soon wither and die. Earthly possessions are
subject to similar mutations. God gives and resumes them at his
pleasure, and for reasons which he seldom explains to man. He shows them
to be uncertain, that they may never become an object of confidence to
his followers, and that they may put their whole trust in God. If for
righteousness' sake any of those who were in affluence suffer loss, or
spoiling of their goods, they should consider that, while they have
gained that of infinite worth, they have lost what is but of little
value, and which in the nature of things they must soon part with,
though they should suffer nothing on account of religion.

[James 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 1:12</span></span>

Blessed is the man that endureth temptation - This is a mere Jewish
sentiment, and on it the Jews speak some excellent things. In Shemoth
Rabba, sec. 31, fol. 129, and in Rab. Tanchum, fol. 29, 4, we have these
words: "Blessed is the man שהיה עומד בנסיונו shehayah omed benisyono who
stands in his temptation; for there is no man whom God does not try. He
tries the rich, to see if they will open their hands to the poor. He
tries the poor, to see if they will receive affliction and not murmur.
If, therefore, the rich stand in his temptation, and give alms to the
poor, he shall enjoy his riches in this world, and his horn shall be
exalted in the world to come, and the holy blessed God shall deliver him
from the punishment of hell. If the poor stand in his temptation, and do
not repine, (kick back), he shall have double in the world to come."
This is exactly the sentiment of James. Every man is in this life in a
state of temptation or trial, and in this state he is a candidate for
another and a better world; he that stands in his trial shall receive
the crown of life, which the Lord hath promised to them that love him.
It is only love to God that can enable a man to endure the trials of
life. Love feels no loads; all practicable things are possible to him
who loveth.

There may be an allusion here to the contests in the Grecian games. He
is crowned who conquers; and none else.

[James 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 1:13</span></span>

Let no man say - Lest the former sentiment should be misapplied, as the
word temptation has two grand meanings, solicitation to sin, and trial
from providential situation or circumstances, James, taking up the word
in the former sense, after having used it in the latter, says: Let no
man say, when he is tempted, (solicited to sin), I am tempted of God;
for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempteth he (thus) any man.
Thus the author has explained and guarded his meaning.

[James 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 1:14</span></span>

But every man is tempted - Successfully solicited to sin, when he is
drawn away of his own lust - when, giving way to the evil propensity of
his own heart, he does that to which he is solicited by the enemy of his
soul.

Among the rabbins we find some fine sayings on this subject. In Midrash
hanaalam, fol. 20, and Yalcut Rubeni, fol. 17, it is said: "This is the
custom of evil concupiscence, יצר הרע yetser hara: To-day it saith, Do
this; to-morrow, Worship an idol. The man goes and worships. Again it
saith, Be angry."

"Evil concupiscence is, at the beginning, like the thread of a spider's
web; afterwards it is like a cart rope." Sanhedrim, fol. 99.

In the words, drawn away by his own lust and enticed, ὑπο της ιδιας
επιθυμιας εξελκομενος και δελεαζομενος, there is a double metaphor; the
first referring to the dragging a fish out of the water by a hook which
it had swallowed, because concealed by a bait; the second, to the
enticements of impure women, who draw away the unwary into their snares,
and involve them in their ruin. Illicit connections of this kind the
writer has clearly in view; and every word that he uses refers to
something of this nature, as the following verse shows.

[James 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 1:15</span></span>

When lust hath conceived - When the evil propensity works unchecked, it
bringeth forth sin - the evil act between the parties is perpetrated.

And sin, when it is finished - When this breach of the law of God and of
innocence has been a sufficient time completed, it bringeth forth death
- the spurious offspring is the fruit of the criminal connection, and
the evidence of that death or punishment due to the transgressors.

Any person acquainted with the import of the verbs συλλαμβανειν, τικτειν
, and αποκυειν, will see that this is the metaphor, and that I have not
exhausted it. Συλλαμβανω signifies concipio sobolem, quae comprehenditur
utero; concipio foetum; - τικτω, pario, genero, efficio; - αποκυεω ex
απο et κυω, praegnans sum, in utero gero. Verbum proprium praegnantium,
quae foetum maturum emittunt. Interdum etiam gignendi notionem habet. -
Maius, Obser. Sacr., vol. ii., page 184. Kypke and Schleusner.

Sin is a small matter in its commencement; but by indulgence it grows
great, and multiplies itself beyond all calculation. To use the
rabbinical metaphor lately adduced, it is, in the commencement, like the
thread of a spider's web - almost imperceptible through its extreme
tenuity or fineness, and as easily broken, for it is as yet but a simple
irregular imagination; afterwards it becomes like a cart rope - it has,
by being indulged produced strong desire and delight; next consent;
then, time, place, and opportunity serving, that which was conceived in
the mind, and finished in that purpose, is consummated by act.

"The soul, which the Greek philosophers considered as the seat of the
appetites and passions, is called by Philo το θηλυ, the female part of
our nature; and the spirit το αρῥεν, the male part. In allusion to this
notion, James represents men's lust as a harlot; which entices their
understanding and will into its impure embraces, and from that
conjunction conceives sin. Sin, being brought forth, immediately acts,
and is nourished by frequent repetition, till at length it gains such
strength that in its turn it begets death. This is the true genealogy of
sin and death. Lust is the mother of sin, and sin the mother of death,
and the sinner the parent of both." See Macknight.

[James 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 1:16</span></span>

Do not err - By supposing that God is the author of sin, or that he
impels any man to commit it.

[James 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 1:17</span></span>

Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above - Whatever is good
is from God; whatever is evil is from man himself. As from the sun,
which is the father or fountain of light, all light comes; so from God,
who is the infinite Fountain, Father, and Source of good, all good
comes. And whatever can be called good, or pure, or light, or excellence
of any kind, must necessarily spring from him, as he is the only source
of all goodness and perfection.

With whom is no variableness - The sun, the fountain of light to the
whole of our system, may be obscured by clouds; or the different bodies
which revolve round him, and particularly the earth, may from time to
time suffer a diminution of his light by the intervention of other
bodies eclipsing his splendor; and his apparent tropical variation,
shadow of turning; when, for instance, in our winter, he has declined to
the southern tropic, the tropic of Capricorn, so that our days are
greatly shortened, and we suffer in consequence a great diminution both
of light and heat. But there is nothing of this kind with God; he is
never affected by the changes and chances to which mortal things are
exposed. He occupies no one place in the universe; he fills the heavens
and the earth, is everywhere present, sees all, pervades all, and shines
upon all; dispenses his blessings equally to the universe; hates nothing
that he has made; is loving to every man; and his tender mercies are
over all his works: therefore he is not affected with evil, nor does he
tempt, or influence to sin, any man. The sun, the source of light, rises
and sets with a continual variety as to the times of both, and the
length of the time in which, in the course of three hundred and
sixty-five days, five hours, forty-eight minutes, and forty-eight
seconds, it has its revolution through the ecliptic, or rather the earth
has its revolution round the sun; and by which its light and heat are,
to the inhabitants of the earth, either constantly increasing or
decreasing: but God, the Creator and Preserver of all things, is
eternally the same, dispensing his good and perfect gifts - his earthly
and heavenly blessings, to all his creatures, ever unclouded in himself,
and ever nilling Evil and willing Good. Men may hide themselves from his
light by the works of darkness, as owls and bats hide themselves in dens
and caves of the earth during the prevalency of the solar light: but his
good will to his creatures is permanent; he wills not the death of a
sinner, but rather that he may come unto him and live; and no man walks
in wretchedness or misery but he who will not come unto God that he may
have life. See diagram and notes at the end of this chapter.

[James 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 1:18</span></span>

Of his own will begat he us - God's will here is opposed to the lust of
man, [Jam 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015.md); his truth, the means
of human salvation, to the sinful means referred to in the above verse;
and the new creatures, to the sin conceived and brought forth, as above.
As the will of God is essentially good, all its productions must be good
also; as it is infinitely pure, all its productions must be holy. The
word or doctrine of truth, what St. Paul calls the word of the truth of
the Gospel, [Col 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005.md), is the means
which God uses to convert souls.

A kind of first fruits - By creatures we are here to understand the
Gentiles, and by first fruits the Jews, to whom the Gospel was first
sent; and those of them that believed were the first fruits of that
astonishing harvest which God has since reaped over the whole Gentile
world. See the notes on [Rom 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019.md),
etc. There is a remarkable saying in Philo on this subject, De
Allegoris, lib. ii. p. 101: God begat Isaac, for he is the father of the
perfect nature, σπειρων εν ταις ψυχαις, sowing seed in souls, and
begetting happiness.

[James 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 1:19</span></span>

Swift to hear - Talk little and work much, is a rabbinical adage. -
Pirkey Aboth, cap. i. 15.

The righteous speak little, and do much; the wicked speak much, and do
nothing. - Bava Metzia, fol. 87.

The son of Sirach says, cap. v. 11: Γινου ταχυς εν τῃ ακροασει σου, και
εν μακροθυμιᾳ φθεγγου αποκρισιν. "Be swift to hear, and with deep
consideration give answer."

Slow to wrath - "There are four kinds of dispositions," says the Midrash
hanaalam, cap. v. 11: "First, Those who are easily incensed, and easily
pacified; these gain on one hand, and lose on the other. Secondly, Those
who are not easily incensed, but are difficult to be appeased; these
lose on the one hand, and gain on the other. Thirdly, Those who are
difficult to be incensed, and are easily appeased; these are the good.
Fourthly, Those who are easily angered, and difficult to be appeased;
these are the wicked." Those who are hasty in speech are generally of a
peevish or angry disposition. A person who is careful to consider what
he says, is not likely to be soon angry.

[James 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 1:20</span></span>

The wrath of man - A furious zeal in matters of religion is detestable
in the sight of God; he will have no sacrifice that is not consumed by
fire from his own altar. The zeal that made the Papists persecute and
burn the Protestants, was kindled in hell. This was the wrath of man,
and did not work any righteous act for God; nor was it the means of
working righteousness in others; the bad fruit of a bad tree. And do
they still vindicate these cruelties? Yes: for still they maintain that
no faith is to be kept with heretics, and they acknowledge the
inquisition.

[James 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jam 1:21</span></span>

All filthiness - Πασαν ῥυπαριαν. This word signifies any impurity that
cleaves to the body; but applied to the mind, it implies all impure and
unholy affections, such as those spoken of [Jam
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015.md), which pollute the soul; in this
sense it is used by the best Greek writers.

Superfluity of naughtiness - Περισσειαν κακιας· The overflowing of
wickedness. Perhaps there is an allusion here to the part cut off in
circumcision, which was the emblem of impure desire; and to lessen that
propensity, God, in his mercy, enacted this rite. Put all these evil
dispositions aside, for they blind the soul, and render it incapable of
receiving any good, even from that ingrafted word of God which otherwise
would have saved their souls.

The ingrafted word - That doctrine which has already been planted among
you, which has brought forth fruit in all them that have meekly and
humbly received it, and is as powerful to save your souls as the souls
of those who have already believed. I think this to be the meaning of
εμφυτον λογον, the ingrafted word or doctrine. The seed of life had been
sown in the land; many of them had received it to their salvation;
others had partially credited it, but not so as to produce in them any
saving effects. Besides, they appear to have taken up with other
doctrines, from which they had got no salvation; he therefore exhorts
them to receive the doctrine of Christ, which would be the means of
saving them unto eternal life. And when those who were Jews, and who had
been originally planted by God as altogether a right vine, received the
faith of the Gospel, it is represented as being ingrafted on that right
stock, the pure knowledge of the true God and his holy moral law. This
indeed was a good stock on which to implant Christianity. This appears
to be what the apostle means by the ingrafted word, which is able to
save the soul.

[James 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jam 1:22</span></span>

But be ye doers of the word - They had heard this doctrine; they had
believed it; but they had put it to no practical use. They were
downright Antinomians, who put a sort of stupid, inactive faith in the
place of all moral righteousness. This is sufficiently evident from the
second chapter.

Deceiving your own selves - Παραλογιζομενοι ἑαυτους· Imposing on your
own selves by sophistical arguments; this is the meaning of the words.
They had reasoned themselves into a state of carnal security, and the
object of St. James is, to awake them out of their sleep.

[James 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jam 1:23</span></span>

Beholding his natural face in a glass - This metaphor is very simple,
but very expressive. A man wishes to see his own face, and how, in its
natural state, it appears; for this purpose he looks into a mirror, by
which his real face, with all its blemishes and imperfections, is
exhibited. He is affected with his own appearance; he sees deformities
that might be remedied; spots, superfluities, and impurities, that might
be removed. While he continues to look into the mirror he is affected,
and wishes himself different to what he appears, and forms purposes of
doing what he can to render his countenance agreeable. On going away he
soon forgets what manner of person he was, because the mirror is now
removed, and his face is no longer reflected to himself; and he no
longer recollects how disagreeable he appeared, and his own resolutions
of improving his countenance. The doctrines of God, faithfully preached,
are such a mirror; he who hears cannot help discovering his own
character, and being affected with his own deformity; he sorrows, and
purposes amendment; but when the preaching is over, the mirror is
removed, and not being careful to examine the records of his salvation,
the perfect law of liberty, [Jam 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025.md),
or not continuing to look therein, he soon forgets what manner of man he
was; or, reposing some unscriptural trust in God's mercy, he reasons
himself out of the necessity of repentance and amendment of life, and
thus deceives his soul.

[James 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jam 1:25</span></span>

But whoso looketh into the perfect law - The word παρακυψας, which we
translate looketh into, is very emphatic, and signifies that deep and
attentive consideration given to a thing or subject which a man cannot
bring up to his eyes, and therefore must bend his back and neck,
stooping down, that he may see it to the greater advantage. The law of
liberty must mean the Gospel; it is a law, for it imposes obligations
from God, and prescribes a rule of life; and it punishes transgressors,
and rewards the obedient. It is, nevertheless, a law that gives liberty
from the guilt, power, dominion, and influence of sin; and it is
perfect, providing a fullness of salvation for the soul: and it may be
called perfect here, in opposition to the law, which was a system of
types and representations of which the Gospel is the sum and substance.
Some think that the word τελειον, perfect, is added here to signify that
the whole of the Gospel must be considered and received, not a part; all
its threatenings with its promises, all its precepts with its
privileges.

And continueth - Παραμεινας· Takes time to see and examine the state of
his soul, the grace of his God, the extent of his duty, and the height
of the promised glory. The metaphor here is taken from those females who
spend much time at their glass, in order that they may decorate
themselves to the greatest advantage, and not leave one hair, or the
smallest ornament, out of its place.

He being not a forgetful hearer - This seems to be a reference to [Deu
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009.md) : "Only take heed to thyself, and
keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes
have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy
life." He who studies and forgets is like to a woman who brings forth
children, and immediately buries them. Aboth R. Nathan, cap. 23.

Shall be blessed in his deed - In Pirkey Aboth, cap. [Deu
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#014.md), it is said: "There are four
kinds of men who visit the synagogues,

1\. He who enters but does not work;

2\. He who works but does not enter.

3\. He who enters and works.

4\. He who neither enters nor works.

The first two are indifferent characters; the third is the righteous
man; the fourth is wholly evil."

As the path of duty is the way of safety, so it is the way of happiness;
he who obeys God from a loving heart and pure conscience, will
infallibly find continual blessedness.

[James 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 1:26</span></span>

Seem to be religious - The words θρησκος and θρησκεια, which we
translate religious and religion, (see the next verse), are of very
uncertain etymology. Suidas, under the word θρησκευει, which he
translates θεοσεβει, ὑπηρετει τοις θεοις, he worships or serves the
gods, accounts for the derivation thus: "It is said that Orpheus, a
Thracian, instituted the mysteries (or religious rites) of the Greeks,
and called the worshipping of God θρησκευειν threskeuein, as being a
Thracian invention." Whatever its derivation may be, the word is used
both to signify true religion, and superstition or heterodoxy. See
Hesychius, and see on [Jam 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027.md)
(note).

Bridleth not his tongue - He who speaks not according to the oracles of
God, whatever pretences he makes to religion, only shows, by his want of
scriptural knowledge, that his religion is false, ματαιος, or empty of
solid truth, profit to others, and good to himself. Such a person should
bridle his tongue, put the bit in his mouth; and particularly if he be a
professed teacher of religion; ho matter where he has studied, or what
else he has learned, if he have not learned religion, he can never teach
it. And religion is of such a nature that no man can learn it but by
experience; he who does not feel the doctrine of God to be the power of
God to the salvation of his soul, can neither teach religion, nor act
according to its dictates, because he is an unconverted, unrenewed man.
If he be old, let him retire to the desert, and pray to God for light;
if he be in the prime of life, let him turn his attention to some honest
calling; if he be young, let him tarry at Jericho till his beard grows.

[James 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jam 1:27</span></span>

Pure religion, and undefiled - Having seen something of the etymology of
the word θρησκεια, which we translate religion, it will be well to
consider the etymology of the word religion itself.

In the 28th chapter of the 4th book of his Divine Instructions,
Lactantius, who flourished about a.d. 300, treats of hope, true
religion, and superstition; of the two latter he gives Cicero's
definition from his book De Natura Deorum, lib. ii. c. 28, which with
his own definition will lead us to a correct view, not only of the
etymology, but of the thing itself.

"Superstition," according to that philosopher, "had its name from the
custom of those who offered daily prayers and sacrifices, that their
children might Survive Them; ut sui sibi liberi superstites essent.
Hence they were called superstitiosi, superstitious. On the other hand,
religion, religio, had its name from those who, not satisfied with what
was commonly spoken concerning the nature and worship of the gods,
searched into the whole matter, and perused the writings of past times;
hence they were called religiosi, from re, again, and lego, I read."

This definition Lactantius ridicules, and shows that religion has its
name from re, intensive, and ligo, I bind, because of that bond of piety
by which it binds us to God, and this he shows was the notion conceived
of it by Lucretius, who labored to dissolve this bond, and make men
atheists.

Primum quod magnis doceo de rebus, et Arctis

Religionum animos Nodis Exsolvere pergo.

For first I teach great things in lofty strains,

And loose men from religion's grievous chains.

Lucret., lib. i., ver. 930, 931

As to superstition, he says it derived its name from those who paid
religious veneration to the memory of the dead, (qui superstitem
memoriam defunctorem colunt), or from those who, surviving their
parents, worshipped their images at home, as household gods; aut qui,
parentibus suis superstites, colebant imagines eorum domi, tanquam deos
penates. Superstition, according to others, refers to novel rites and
ceremonies in religion, or to the worship of new gods. But by religion
are meant the ancient forms of worship belonging to those gods, which
had long been received. Hence that saying of Virgil: -

Vana superstitio veterumque ignara deorum.

"Vain superstition not knowing the ancient gods."

Here Lactantius observes, that as the ancient gods were consecrated
precisely in the same way with these new ones, that therefore it was
nothing but superstition from the beginning. Hence he asserts, the
superstitious are those who worship many and false gods, and the
Christians alone are religious, who worship and supplicate the one true
God only. St. James' definition rather refers to the effects of pure
religion than to its nature. The life of God in the soul of man,
producing love to God and man, will show itself in the acts which St.
James mentions here. It is pure in the principle, for it is Divine truth
and Divine love. It is undefiled in all its operations: it can produce
nothing unholy, because it ever acts in the sight of God; and it can
produce no ungentle word nor unkind act, because it comes from the
Father.

The words καθαρα και αμιαντος, pure and undefiled, are supposed to have
reference to a diamond or precious stone, whose perfection consists in
its being free from flaws; not cloudy, but of a pure water. True
religion is the ornament of the soul, and its effects, the ornament of
the life.

To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction - Works of
charity and mercy are the proper fruits of religion; and none are more
especially the objects of charity and mercy than the orphans and widows.
False religion may perform acts of mercy and charity; but its motives
not being pure, and its principle being defiled, the flesh, self, and
hypocrisy, spot the man, and spot his acts. True religion does not
merely give something for the relief of the distressed, but it visits
them, it takes the oversight of them, it takes them under its care; so
επισκεπτεσθαι means. It goes to their houses, and speaks to their
hearts; it relieves their wants, sympathizes with them in their
distresses, instructs them in Divine things and recommends them to God.
And all this it does for the Lord's sake. This is the religion of
Christ. The religion that does not prove itself by works of charity and
mercy is not of God. Reader, what religion hast thou? Has thine ever led
thee to cellars, garrets, cottages, and houses, to find out the
distressed? Hast thou ever fed, clothed, and visited a destitute
representative of Christ?

The subject in [Jam 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#011.md) suggests
several reflections on the mutability of human affairs, and the end of
all things.

1\. Nature herself is subject to mutability, though by her secret and
inscrutable exertions she effects her renovation from her decay, and
thus change is prevented from terminating in destruction. Yet nature
herself is tending, by continual mutations, to a final destruction; or
rather to a fixed state, when time, the place and sphere of mutability,
shall be absorbed in eternity. Time and nature are coeval; they began
and must terminate together. All changes are efforts to arrive at
destruction or renovation; and destruction must be the term or bound of
all created things, had not the Creator purposed that his works should
endure for ever. According to his promise, we look for a new heaven and
a new earth; a fixed, permanent, and endless state of things; an
everlasting sabbath to all the works of God.

I shall confirm these observations with the last verses of that
incomparable poem, the Faery Queene, of our much neglected but
unrivalled poet, Edmund Spenser: -

"When I bethink me on that speech whylear,

Of mutability, and well it weigh;

Me seems, that though she all unworthy were

Of the heaven's rule; yet very sooth to say,

In all things else she bears the greatest sway;

Which makes me loath this state of life so tickle,

And love of things so vain to cast away;

Whose flow'ring pride, so fading and so fickle,

Short Time shall soon cut down with his consuming sickle.

Then gin I think on that which Nature sayd,

Of that same time when no more change shall be,

But stedfast rest of all things, firmly stayd

Upon the pillours of eternity,

That is contrayr to mutability:

For all that moveth, doth in change delight:

But thenceforth all shall rest eternally

With him that is the God of Sabaoth hight:

O that great Sabaoth God, grant me that Sabaoth's sight!"

When this is to be the glorious issue, who can regret the speedy lapse
of time? Mutability shall end in permanent perfection, when time, the
destroyer of all things, shall be absorbed in eternity. And what has a
righteous man to fear from that "wreck of matter and that crush of
worlds," which to him shall usher in the glories of an eternal day? A
moralist has said, "Though heaven shall vanish like a vapour, and this
firm globe of earth shall crumble into dust, the righteous man shall
stand unmoved amidst the shocked depredations of a crushed world; for he
who hath appointed the heavens and the earth to fail, hath said unto the
virtuous soul, Fear not! for thou shalt neither perish nor be wretched."

Dr. Young has written most nervously, in the spirit of the highest order
of poetry, and with the knowledge and feeling of a sound divine, on this
subject, in his Night Thoughts. Night vi. in fine.

Of man immortal hear the lofty style: -

"If so decreed, th' Almighty will be done.

Let earth dissolve, yon ponderous orbs descend

And grind us into dust: the soul is safe;

The man emerges; mounts above the wreck,

As towering flame from nature's funeral pyre;

O'er desolation, as a gainer, smiles;

His charter, his inviolable rights,

Well pleased to learn from thunder's impotence,

Death's pointless darts, and hell's defeated storms."

After him, and borrowing his imagery and ideas, another of our poets, in
canticis sacris facile princeps, has expounded and improved the whole in
the following hymn on the Judgment.

"Stand the Omnipotent decree,

Jehovah's will be done!

Nature's end we wait to see,

And hear her final groan.

Let this earth dissolve, and blend

In death the wicked and the just;

Let those ponderous orbs descend

And grind us into dust.

Rests secure the righteous man;

At his Redeemer's beck,

Sure to emerge, and rise again,

And mount above the wreck.

Lo! the heavenly spirit towers

Like flames o'er nature's funeral pyre;

Triumphs in immortal powers,

And claps her wings of fire.

Nothing hath the just to lose

By worlds on worlds destroy'd;

Far beneath his feet he views,

With smiles, the flaming void;

Sees the universe renew'd;

The grand millennial reign begun;

Shouts with all the sons of God

Around th' eternal throne."

Wesley

One word more, and I shall trouble my reader no farther on a subject on
which I could wear out my pen and drain the last drop of my ink. The
learned reader will join in the wish.

"Talia saecla suis dixerunt, currite, fusis

Concordes stabili fatorum numine Parcae.

Aggredere O magnos (aderit jam tempus!) honores,

Cara Deum soboles, magnum Jovis incrementum.

Aspice convexo nutantem pondere mundum,

Terrasque, tractusque maris, coelumque profundum:

Aspice, venturo laetentur ut omnia saeclo.

O mihi tam longae maneat pars ultima vitae,

Spiritus, et quantum sat erit tua dicere facta!"

Virg. Eclog. iv.

There has never been a translation of this, worthy of the poet; and to
such a piece I cannot persuade myself to append the hobbling verses of
Mr. Dryden.

2\. Taken in every point of view, [Jam
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017.md) is one of the most curious and
singular in the New Testament. It has been well observed, that the first
words make a regular Greek hexameter verse, supposed to be quoted from
some Greek poet not now extant; and the last clause of the verse, with a
very little change, makes another hexameter: -

Πασα δοσις αγαθη, και παν δωρημα τελειον,

Εστ' απο των φωτων Πατρος καταβαινον ανωθεν.

"Every goodly gift, and every perfect donation,

Is from the Father of lights, and from above it descendeth."

The first line, which is incontestably a perfect hexameter, may have
been designed by St. James, or in the course of composition may have
originated from accident, a thing which often occurs to all good
writers; but the sentiment itself is immediately from heaven. I know not
that we can be justified by sound criticism in making any particular
distinction between δοσις and δωρημα· our translators have used the same
word in rendering both. They are often synonymous; but sometimes we may
observe a shade of difference, δοσις signifying a gift of any kind, here
probably meaning earthly blessings of all sorts, δωρημα signifying a
free gift - one that comes without constraint, from the mere benevolence
of the giver; and here it may signify all spiritual and eternal
blessings. Now all these come from above; God is as much the Author of
our earthly good, as he is of our eternal salvation. Earthly blessings
are simply good; but they are imperfect, they perish in the using. The
blessings of grace and glory are supreme goods, they are permanent and
perfect; and to the gift that includes these the term τελειον, perfect,
is here properly added by St. James. There is a sentiment very similar
to this in the ninth Olympic Ode of Pindar, l. 41: -

\- - Αγαθοι δε

Και σοφοι κατα Δαιμον' ανδρες.

Man, boast of naught: whate'er thou hast is given;

Wisdom and virtue are the gifts of Heaven.

But how tame is even Pindar's verse when compared with the energy of
James!

3\. In the latter part of the verse, παρ ᾡ ουκ ενι παραλλαγη, η τροπης
αποσκιασμα, which we translate, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning, there is an allusion to some of the most abstruse
principles in astronomy. This is not accidental, for every word in the
whole verse is astronomical. In his Πατηρ των φωτων, Father of lights,
there is the most evident allusion to the Sun, who is the father,
author, or source of all the lights or luminaries proper to our system.
It is not only his light which we enjoy by day, but it is his light also
which is reflected to us, from the moon's surface, by night. And it is
demonstrable that all the planets - Mercury, Venus, the Earth, the Moon,
Mars, Ceres, Pallas, Juno, Vesta, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn's Rings, and
Herschel, or the Georgium Sidus, with the four satellites of Jupiter,
the seven satellites of Saturn, and the six satellites of the Georgium
Sidus, thirty-one bodies in all, besides the comets, all derive their
light from the sun, being perfectly opaque or dark in themselves; the
sun being the only luminous body in our system; all the rest being
illumined by him.

The word παραλλαγη, which we translate variableness, from παραλλαττω, to
change alternately, to pass from one change to another, evidently refers
to parallax in astronomy. To give a proper idea of what astronomers mean
by this term, it must be premised that all the diurnal motions of the
heavenly bodies from east to west are only apparent, being occasioned by
the rotation of the earth upon its axis in an opposite direction in
about twenty-four hours. These diurnal motions are therefore performed
uniformly round the axis or polar diameter of the earth, and not round
the place of the spectator, who is upon the earth's surface. Hence every
one who observes the apparent motion of the heavens from this surface
will find that this motion is not even, equal arches being described in
unequal times; for if a globular body, such as the earth, describe
equally the circumference of a circle by its rotatory motion, it is
evident the equality of this motion can be seen in no other points than
those in the axis of the circle, and therefore any object viewed from
the center of the earth will appear in a different place from what it
does when observed from the surface. This difference of place of the
same object, seen at the same time from the earth's center and surface,
is called its parallax.

As I shall make some farther use of this point, in order to make it
plain to those who are not much acquainted with the subject, to which I
am satisfied St. James alludes, I shall introduce the following diagram:
Let the circle OKNS. in the annexed figure, represent the earth, E its
center, O the place of an observer on its surface, whose visible or
sensible horizon is OH, and the line EST, parallel to OH, the rational,
true, or mathematical horizon. Let ZDFT be considered a portion of a
great circle in the heavens, and A the place of an object in the visible
horizon. Join EA by a line produced to C: then C is the true place of
the object, and H is its apparent place; and the angle CAH is its
parallax; and, because the object is in the horizon, it is called its
horizontal parallax. As OAE, the angle which the earth's radius or
semidiameter subtends to the object, is necessarily equal to its
opposite angle CAH, hence the horizontal parallax of an object is
defined to be the angle which the earth's semidiameter subtends at that
object.

The whole effect of parallax is in a vertical direction; for the
parallactic angle is in the plane passing through the observer and the
earth's center, which plane is necessarily perpendicular to the horizon,
the earth being considered as a sphere. The more elevated an object is
above the horizon, the less the parallax, the distance from the earth's
center continuing the same. To make this sufficiently clear, let B
represent an object at any given altitude above the visible horizon OAH;
then the angle DBF, formed by the straight lines OB and EB produced to F
and D, will be the parallax of the object at the given altitude, and is
less than the parallax of the same object when in the visible horizon
OAH, for the angle DBF is less than the angle CAH. Hence the horizontal
parallax is the greatest of all diurnal parallaxes; and when the object
is in the zenith, it has no parallax, the visual ray passing
perpendicularly from the object through the observer to the earth's
center, as in the line Zoe.

The quantity of the horizontal parallax of any object is in proportion
to its distance from the place of observation, being greater or less as
the object is nearer to or farther removed from the spectator. In
illustration of this point, let I be the place of an object in the
sensible horizon; then will LIH be its horizontal parallax, which is a
smaller angle than CAH, the horizontal parallax of the nearer object A.

The horizontal parallax being given, the distance of the object from the
earth's center, EA or EI, may be readily found in semidiameters of the
earth by the resolution of the right-angled triangle OEA, in which we
have given the angle OAE, the horizontal parallax, the side OE, the
semidiameter of the earth, considered as unity, and the right angle AOE,
to find the side EA, the distance of the object from the earth's center.
The proportion to be used in this case is: The sine of the horizontal
parallax is to unity, the semidiameter of the earth, as radius, i.e. the
right angle AOE, the sine of ninety degrees being the radius of a
circle, is to the side EA. This proportion is very compendiously wrought
by logarithms as follows: Subtract the logarithmic sine of the
horizontal parallax from 10, the radius, and the remainder will be the
logarithm of the answer.

Example. When the moon's horizontal parallax is a degree, what is her
distance from the earth's center in semidiameters of the earth?

From the radius 10.0000000 Subtract the sine of 1 degree 8.2418553
Remainder the logarithm of 57.2987 1.7581447

Which is the distance of the moon in semidiameters of the earth, when
her horizontal parallax amounts to a degree. If 57.2987 be multiplied by
3977, the English miles contained in the earth's semidiameter, the
product, 227876.9, will be the moon's distance from the earth's center
in English miles.

The sun's horizontal parallax is about eight seconds and three-fifths,
as is evident from the phenomena attending the transits of Venus, of
1761 and 1769, as observed in different parts of the world: a method of
obtaining the solar parallax abundantly less liable to be materially
affected by error of observation than that of Hipparchus, who lived
between the 154th and 163d Olympiad, from lunar eclipses; or than that
of Aristarchus the Samian, from the moon's dichotomy; or even than that
of modern astronomers from the parallax of Mars when in opposition, and,
at the same time, in or near his perihelion. The sun's horizontal
parallax being scarcely the four hundred and eighteenth part of that of
the moon given in the preceding example, if 227876.9, the distance of
the moon as found above, be multiplied by 418.6, (for the horizontal
parallax decreases nearly in proportion as the distance increases), the
product will be the distance of the sun from the earth's center, which
will be found to be upwards of ninety-five millions of English miles.

When we know the horizontal parallax of any object, its magnitude is
easily determined. The apparent diameter of the sun, for example, at his
mean distance from the earth, is somewhat more than thirty-two minutes
of a degree, which is at least a hundred and eleven times greater than
the double of the sun's horizontal parallax, or the apparent diameter of
the earth as seen from the sun; therefore, the real solar diameter must
be at least a hundred and eleven times greater than that of the earth;
i.e. upwards of 880,000 English miles. And as spherical bodies are to
each other as the cubes of their diameters, if 111 be cubed, we shall
find that the magnitude of the sun is more than thirteen hundred
thousand times greater than that of the earth.

The whole effect of parallax being in a vertical circle, and the circles
of the sphere not being in this direction, the parallax of a star will
evidently change its true place with respect to these different circles;
whence there are five kinds of diurnal parallaxes, viz. the parallax of
longitude, parallax of latitude, parallax of ascension or descension,
parallax: of declination, and parallax of altitude, the last of which
has been already largely explained; and the meaning of the first four,
simply, is the difference between the true and visible longitude,
latitude, right ascension, and declination of an object. Besides these,
there is another kind of parallax, called by modern astronomers the
parallax of the earth's Annual Orbit, by which is meant the difference
between the places of a planet as seen from the sun and the earth at the
same time, the former being its true or heliocentric place, and the
latter its apparent or geocentric place. The ancient astronomers gave
the term parallax only to the diurnal apparent inequalities of motion in
the moon and planets; Ptolemy, who lived in the second century, calling
prosaphaeresis orbis what is now named the parallax of the great or
annual orbit. This parallax is more considerable than the diurnal
parallax, as the earth's annual orbit is more considerable than the
earth's semidiameter. This parallax, when greatest, amounts in Mars, the
nearest superior planet, to upwards of forty-seven degrees; in Jupiter
to near twelve degrees; in Saturn to more than six degrees, etc. In the
region of the nearest fixed stars, i.e. those new ones of 1572 and 1604,
double the radius of the earth's orbit does not subtend an angle of a
single minute of a degree; whence it is evident the nearest fixed stars
are at least hundreds of times more distant from us than the Georgium
Sidus is, whose greatest annual parallax amounts to upwards of three
degrees. The annual parallaxes of the fixed stars are, in general, too
minute to be measured; hence their distances from the earth must be
inconceivably great.

Any farther description of parallax would be useless in reference to the
subject to be illustrated.

The words τροπης αποσκιασμα, shadow of turning, either refer to the
darkness in which the earth is involved in consequence of its turning
round its axis once in every twenty-four hours, by means of which one
hemisphere, or half of its surface, is involved in darkness, being
hidden from the sun by the opposite hemisphere; or to the different
portions of the earth which come gradually into the solar light by its
revolution round its orbit, which, in consequence of the pole of the
earth being inclined nearly twenty-three degrees and a half to the plane
of its orbit, and keeping its parallelism through every part of its
revolution, causes all the vicissitudes of season, with all the
increasing and decreasing proportions of light and darkness, and of cold
and heat.

Every person who understands the images will see with what propriety St.
James has introduced them; and through this his great object is at once
discernible. It is evident from this chapter that there were persons,
among those to whom he wrote, that held very erroneous opinions
concerning the Divine nature; viz. that God tempted or influenced men to
sin, and, consequently, that he was the author of all the evil that is
in the world; and that he withholds his light and influence when
necessary to convey truth and to correct vice. To destroy this error he
shows that though the sun, for its splendor, genial heat, and general
utility to the globe and its inhabitants, may be a fit emblem of God,
yet in several respects the metaphor is very imperfect; for the sun
himself is liable to repeated obscurations; and although, as to his
mass, he is the focus of the system, giving light and heat to all, yet
he is not everywhere present, and both his light and heat may be
intercepted by a great variety of opposing bodies, and other causes. St.
James refers particularly to the Divine ubiquity or omnipresence.
Wherever his light and energy are, there is he himself; neither his word
nor his Spirit gives false or inconsistent views of his nature and
gracious purposes. He has no parallax, because he is equally present
everywhere, and intimately near to all his creatures; He is never seen
where he is not, or not seen where he is. He is the God and Father of
all; who is Above all, and Through all, and In all; "in the wide waste,
as in the city full;" nor can any thing be hidden from his light and
heat. There can be no opposing bodies to prevent him from sending forth
his light and truth, because he is everywhere essentially present. He
suffers no eclipses; he changes not in his nature; he varies not in his
designs; he is ever a full, free, and eternal fountain of mercy,
goodness, truth, and good will, to all his intelligent offspring.
Hallelujah, the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth! Amen.

In concluding these observations, I think it necessary to refer to Mr.
Wakefield's translation of this text, and his vindication of that
translation: Every good gift, and every perfect kindness, cometh down
from above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no parallax, nor
tropical shadow. "Some have affected," says he, "to ridicule my
translation of this verse, if it be obscure, the author must answer for
that, and not the translator. Why should we impoverish the sacred
writers, by robbing them of the learning and science they display? Why
should we conceal in them what we should ostentatiously point out in
profane authors? And if any of these wise, learned, and judicious
critics think they understand the phrase shadow of turning, I wish they
would condescend to explain it." Yes, if such a sentiment were found in
Aratus, or in any other ancient astronomical writer, whole pages of
commentary would be written on it, and the subtle doctrine of the
parallactic angle proved to be well known in itself, and its use in
determining the distances and magnitudes of the heavenly bodies, to the
ancients some hundreds of years before the Christian era.

The sentiment is as elegant as it is just, and forcibly points out the
unchangeableness and beneficence of God. He is the Sun, not of a system,
but of all worlds; the great Fountain and Dispenser of light and heat,
of power and life, of order, harmony, and perfection. In him all live
and move, and from him they have their being. There are no spots on his
disk; all is unclouded splendor. Can he who dwells in this unsufferable
and unapproachable light, in his own eternal self-sufficiency, concern
himself with the affairs of mortals? Yes, for we are his offspring; and
it is one part of his perfection to delight in the welfare of his
intelligent creatures. He is loving to every man: he hates nothing that
he has made; and his praise endureth for ever!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 2](jam002.md)

</div>
