<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[James Index](jam.md)  
  [Previous](jam002)  [Next](jam004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001.md)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 3:0</span></span>

They are exhorted not to be many masters, [Jam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001.md). And to bridle the tongue, which
is often an instrument of much evil, [Jam
3:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md). The character and fruits of
true and false wisdom, [Jam 3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#013.md).

[James 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 3:1</span></span>

Be not many masters - Do not affect the teacher's office, for many wish
to be teachers who have more need to learn. There were many teachers or
rabbins among the Jews, each affecting to have The truth, and to draw
disciples after him. We find a caution against such persons, and of the
same nature with that of St. James, in Pirkey Aboth, c. i. 10: Love
labor, and hate the rabbin's office.

This caution is still necessary; there are multitudes, whom God has
never called, and never can call, because he has never qualified them
for the work, who earnestly wish to get into the priest's office. And of
this kind, in opposition to St. James, we have many masters - persons
who undertake to show us the way of salvation, who know nothing of that
ways and are unsaved themselves. These are found among all descriptions
of Christians, and have been the means of bringing the ministerial
office into contempt. Their case is awful; they shall receive greater
condemnation than common sinners; they have not only sinned in thrusting
themselves into that office to which God has never called them, but
through their insufficiency the flocks over whom they have assumed the
mastery perish for lack of knowledge, and their blood will God require
at the watchman's hand. A man may have this mastery according to the law
of the land, and yet not have it according to the Gospel; another may
affect to have it according to the Gospel, because he dissents from the
religion of the state, and not have it according to Christ. Blockheads
are common, and knaves and hypocrites may be found everywhere.

[James 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 3:2</span></span>

In many things we offend all - Πταιομεν ἁπαντες· We all stumble or trip.
Dr. Barrow very properly observes: "As the general course of life is
called a way, and particular actions steps, so going on in a regular
course of right action is walking uprightly; and acting amiss, tripping
or stumbling." There are very few who walk so closely with God, and
inoffensively with men, as never to stumble; and although it is the
privilege of every follower of God to be sincere and without offense to
the day of Christ, yet few of them are so. Were this unavoidable, it
would be useless to make it a subject of regret; but as every man may
receive grace from his God to enable him to walk in every respect
uprightly, it is to be deplored that so few live up to their privileges.
Some have produced these words as a proof that "no man can live without
sinning against God; for James himself, a holy apostle speaking of
himself, all the apostles, and the whole Church of Christ, says, In many
things we offend all." This is a very bad and dangerous doctrine; and,
pushed to its consequences, would greatly affect the credibility of the
whole Gospel system. Besides, were the doctrine as true as it is
dangerous and false, it is foolish to ground it upon such a text;
because St. James, after the common mode of all teachers, includes
himself in his addresses to his hearers. And were we to suppose that
where he appears by the use of the plural pronoun to include himself, he
means to be thus understood, we must then grant that himself was one of
those many teachers who were to receive a great condemnation, [Jam
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001.md); that he was a horse-breaker,
because he says, "we put bits in the horses' mouths, that they may obey
us," [Jam 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#003.md); that his tongue was a
world of iniquity, and set on fire of hell, for he says, "so is the
tongue among our members," [Jam 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006.md);
that he cursed men, "wherewith curse we men, [Jam
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#009.md). No man possessing common sense
could imagine that James, or any man of even tolerable morals, could be
guilty of those things. But some of those were thus guilty to whom he
wrote; and to soften his reproofs, and to cause them to enter the more
deeply into their hearts, he appears to include himself in his own
censure; and yet not one of his readers would understand him as being a
brother delinquent.

Offend not in word, the same is a perfect man - To understand this
properly we must refer to the caution St. James gives in the preceding
verse: Be not many masters or teachers - do not affect that for which
you are not qualified, because in your teaching, not knowing the
heavenly doctrine, ye may sin against the analogy of faith. But, says
he, if any man offend not, ου πταιει, trip not, εν λογῳ, in doctrine,
teaching the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, the same
is τελειος ανηρ, a man fully instructed in Divine things: How often the
term λογος, which we render word, is used to express doctrine, and the
doctrine of the Gospel, we have seen in many parts of the preceding
comment. And how often the word τελειος, which we translate perfect, is
used to signify an adult Christian, one thoroughly instructed in the
doctrines of the Gospel, may be seen in various parts of St. Paul's
writings. See among others, [Co1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006.md);
[Co1 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020.md); [Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md); [Phi
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015.md); [Col
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#012.md); [Heb
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014.md). The man, therefore, who advanced
no false doctrine, and gave no imperfect view of any of the great truths
of Christianity; that man proved himself thereby to be thoroughly
instructed in Divine things; to be no novice, and consequently, among
the many teachers, to be a perfect master, and worthy of the sacred
vocation.

Able also to bridle the whole body - Grotius, by body, believed that the
Church of Christ was intended; and this the view we have taken of the
preceding clauses renders very probable. But some think the passions and
appetites are intended; yet these persons understand not offending in
word as referring simply to well guarded speech. Now how a man's
cautiousness in what he says can be a proof that he has every passion
and appetite under control, I cannot see. Indeed, I have seen so many
examples of a contrary kind, that I can have no doubt of the impropriety
of this exposition. But it is objected "that χαλιναγωγεω signifies to
check, turn, or rule with a bridle; and is never applied to the
government of the Church of Christ." Probably not: but St. James is a
very peculiar writer; his phraseology, metaphors, and diction in
general, are different from all the rest of the New Testament writers,
so as to have scarcely any thing in common with them, but only that he
writes in Greek. The sixth verse is supposed to be a proof against the
opinion of Grotius; but I conceive that verse to belong to a different
subject, which commences [Jam 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#003.md).

[James 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 3:3</span></span>

Behold, we put bits in the horses' mouths - In order to show the
necessity of regulating the tongue, to which St. James was led by his
exhortation to them who wished to thrust themselves into the teacher's
office, supposing, because they had the gift of a ready flow of speech,
that therefore they might commence teachers of Divine things; he
proceeds to show that the tongue must be bridled as the horse, and
governed as the ships; because, though it is small, it is capable of
ruling the whole man; and of irritating and offending others.

[James 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 3:5</span></span>

Boasteth great things - That is, can do great things, whether of a good
or evil kind. He seems to refer here to the powerful and all commanding
eloquence of the Greek orators: they could carry the great mob
whithersoever they wished; calm them to peaceableness and submission, or
excite them to furious sedition.

Behold, how great a matter - See what a flame of discord and
insubordination one man, merely by his persuasive tongue, may kindle
among the common people.

[James 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 3:6</span></span>

The tongue is a fire - It is often the instrument of producing the most
desperate contentions and insurrections.

A world of iniquity - This is an unusual form of speech, but the meaning
is plain enough; World signifies here a mass, a great collection, an
abundance. We use the term in the same sense - a world of troubles, a
world of toil, a world of anxiety; for great troubles, oppressive toil,
most distressing anxiety. And one of our lexicographers calls his work a
world of words; i.e. a vast collection of words: so we also say, a
deluge of wickedness, a sea of troubles; and the Latins, oceanus
malorum, an ocean of evils. I do not recollect an example of this use of
the word among the Greek writers; but in this sense it appears to be
used by the Septuagint, [Pro 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006.md) :
Του πιστου ὁλος ὁ κοσμος των χρηματων, του δε απιστου ουδε οβολος, which
may be translated, "The faithful has a world of riches, but the
unfaithful not a penny." This clause has nothing answering to it in the
Hebrew text. Some think that the word is thus used, [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005.md) : And brought the flood, κοσμῳ
ασεβων, on the multitude of the ungodly. Mr. Wakefield translates the
clause thus: The tongue is the varnisher of injustice. We have seen that
κοσμοςsignifies adorned, elegant, beautiful, etc., but I can scarcely
think that this is its sense in this place. The Syriac gives a curious
turn to the expression: And the tongue is a fire; and the world of
iniquity is like a wood. Above, the same version has: A little fire
burns great woods. So the world of iniquity is represented as inflamed
by the wicked tongues of men; the world being fuel, and the tongue a
fire.

So is the tongue among our members - I think St. James refers here to
those well known speeches of the rabbins, Vayikra Rabba, sec. 16, fol.
159. "Rabbi Eleazar said, Man has one hundred and forty-eight members,
some confined, others free. The tongue is placed between the jaws; and
from under it proceeds a fountain of water, (the great sublingual
salivary gland), and it is folded with various foldings. Come and see
what a flame the tongue kindles! Were it one of the unconfined members,
what would it not do?" The same sentiment, with a little variation, may
be found in Midrash, Yalcut Simeoni, par. 2, fol. 107; and in Erachin,
fol. xv. 2, on [Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md) : What shall
be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue?
"The holy blessed God said to the tongue: All the rest of the members of
the body are erect, but thou liest down; all the rest are external, but
thou art internal. Nor is this enough: I have built two walls about
thee; the one bone, the other flesh: What shall be given unto thee, and
what shall be done unto thee, O thou false tongue?"

Setteth on fire the course of nature - Φλογιζουσα τον τροχον της
γενεσεως· And setteth on fire the wheel of life. I question much whether
this verse be in general well understood. There are three different
interpretations of it:

1\. St. James does not intend to express the whole circle of human
affairs, so much affected by the tongue of man; but rather the penal
wheel of the Greeks, and not unknown to the Jews, on which they were
accustomed to extend criminals, to induce them to confess, or to punish
them for crimes; under which wheels, fire was often placed to add to
their torments. In the book, De Maccabaeis, attributed to Josephus, and
found in Haverkamp's edition, vol. ii., p. 497-520, where we have the
account of the martyrdom of seven Hebrew brothers, in chap. ix, speaking
of the death of the eldest, it is said: Ανεβαλον αυτον επι τον τροχοι -
περι ὁν κατατεινομενος· "They cast him on the wheel, over which they
extended him; πυρ ὑπεστρωσαν και διηρεθισαν τον τροχον
προσεπικατατεινοντες· they put coals under it, and strongly agitated the
wheel." And of the martyrdom of the sixth brother it is said, cap. 11:
Παρηγον επι τον τροχον, εφ' οὑ κατατεινομενος εκμελως και
εκσφονδυλιζομενος ὑπεκαιετο, και οβελισκους δε οξεις πυρωσαντες, τοις
νοτοις προσεφερον, και τα πλευρα διαπειραντες αυτου, και τα σπλαγχνα
διεκαιον· They brought him to the wheel, on which, having distended his
limbs, and broken his joints, they scorched him with the fire placed
underneath; and with sharp spits heated in the fire, they pierced his
sides, and burned his bowels.

The fire and the wheel are mentioned by Achilles Tatius, lib. 7, p. 449.
"Having stripped me of my garments, I was carried aloft, των μεν
μαστιγας κομιζοντων, των δε πυρ και τροχον, some bringing scourges,
others the fire and the wheel." Now as γενεσις often signifies life,
then the wheel of life will signify the miseries and torments of life.
To set on fire the wheel of life is to increase a man's torments; and to
be set on fire from hell implies having these miseries rendered more
active by diabolic agency; or, in other words, bad men, instigated by
the devil, through their lies and calumnies, make life burdensome to the
objects of their malicious tongues. The wheel and the fire, so pointedly
mentioned by St. James, make it probable that this sort of punishment
might have suggested the idea to him. See more in Kypke.

2\. But is it not possible that by the wheel of life St. James may have
the circulation of the blood in view? Angry or irritating language has
an astonishing influence on the circulation of the blood: the heart
beats high and frequent; the blood is hurried through the arteries to
the veins, through the veins to the heart, and through the heart to the
arteries again, and so on; an extraordinary degree of heat is at the
same time engendered; the eyes become more prominent in their sockets;
the capillary vessels suffused with blood; the face flushed; and, in
short, the whole wheel of nature is set on fire of hell. No description
can be more natural than this: but it may be objected that this
intimates that the circulation of the blood was known to St. James. Now
supposing it does, is the thing impossible? It is allowed by some of the
most judicious medical writers, that Solomon refers to this in his
celebrated portraiture of old age, particularly in [Ecc
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#006.md) : "Or ever the silver cord be
loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the
fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern." Here is the very wheel of
life from which St. James might have borrowed the idea; and the
different times evidently refer to the circulation of the blood, which
might be as well known to St. James as the doctrine of the parallax of
the sun. See on [Jam 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017) (note.md).

3\. It is true, however, that the rabbins use the term גלגל תולדות
gilgal toledoth, "the wheel of generations," to mark the successive
generations of men: and it is possible that St. James might refer to
this; as if he had said: "The tongue has been the instrument of
confusion and misery through all the ages of the world." But the other
interpretations are more likely.

[James 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 3:7</span></span>

Every kind of beasts - That is, every species of wild beasts, πασα φυσις
θηριων, is tamed, i.e. brought under man's power and dominion. Beasts,
birds, serpents, and some kinds of fishes have been tamed so as to be
domesticated; but every kind, particularly των εναλιων, of sea monsters,
has not been thus tamed; but all have been subjected to the power of
man; both the shark and whale become an easy prey to the skill and
influence of the human being. I have had the most credible information,
when in the Zetland Isles, of the seals being domesticated, and of one
that would pass part of his time on shore, receive his allowance of
milk, etc., from the servants, go again to sea, and return, and so on.

[James 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 3:8</span></span>

But the tongue wan no man tame - No cunning, persuasion, or influence
has ever been able to silence it. Nothing but the grace of God,
excision, or death, can bring it under subjection.

It is an unruly evil - Ακατασχετον κακον· An evil that cannot be
restrained; it cannot be brought under any kind of government; it breaks
all bounds.

Full of deadly poison - He refers here to the tongues of serpents,
supposed to be the means of conveying their poison into wounds made by
their teeth. Throughout the whole of this poetic and highly declamatory
description, St. James must have the tongue of the slanderer,
calumniator, backbiter, whisperer, and tale-bearer, particularly in
view. Vipers, basilisks; and rattlesnakes are not more dangerous to
life, than these are to the peace and reputation of men.

[James 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 3:9</span></span>

Therewith bless we God - The tongue is capable of rehearsing the
praises, and setting forth the glories, of the eternal King: what a pity
that it should ever be employed in a contrary work! It can proclaim and
vindicate the truth of God, and publish the Gospel of peace and good
will among men: what a pity that it should ever be employed in
falsehoods, calumny, or in the cause of infidelity!

And therewith curse we men - In the true Satanic spirit, many pray to
God, the Father, to destroy those who are objects of their displeasure!
These are the common swearers, whose mouths are generally full of
direful imprecations against those with whom they are offended.

The consideration that man is made after the image of God should
restrain the tongue of the swearer; but there are many who, while they
pretend to sing the high praises of God, are ready to wish the direst
imprecations either on those who offend them, or with whom they choose
to be offended.

[James 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 3:10</span></span>

Out of the same mouth - This saying is something like that, [Pro
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#021.md) : Death and life are in the
power of the tongue; and on this, for an illustration of St. James'
words, hear Vayikra Rabba, sec. 33: "Rabbi Simeon, the son of Gamaliel,
said to his servant Tobias, Go and bring me some good food from the
market: the servant went, and he bought tongues. At another time he said
to the same servant, Go and buy me some bad food: the servant went, and
bought tongues. The master said, What is the reason that when I ordered
thee to buy me good and bad food, thou didst bring tongues? The servant
answered, From the tongue both good and evil come to man: if it be good,
there is nothing better; if bad, there is nothing worse."

A saying very like that of St. James as found in Rabbi Tanchum, fol. 10,
4: "The mouth desires to study in the law, and to speak good words; to
praise God, to glorify him, and to celebrate him with hymns: but it can
also slander, blaspheme, reproach, and swear falsely." See Schoettgen.

To find a man who officiates in sacred things to be a common swearer, a
slanderer, etc., is truly monstrous; but there have been many cases of
this kind, and I have known several. Let me say to all such, My
brethren, these things ought not so to be.

[James 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 3:11</span></span>

Doth a fountain send forth - sweet water and bitter? - In many things
nature is a sure guide to man; but no such inconsistency is found in the
natural world as this blessing and cursing in man. No fountain, at the
same opening, sends forth sweet water and bitter; no fig tree can bear
olive berries; no vine can bear figs; nor can the sea produce salt water
and fresh from the same place. These are all contradictions, and indeed
impossibilities, in nature. And it is depraved man alone that can act
the monstrous part already referred to.

[James 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 3:12</span></span>

So can no fountain both yield salt water and fresh - For the reading of
the common text, which is οὑτως ουδεμια πηγη ἁλυκον και γλυκυ ποιησαι
ὑδωρ, so no fountain can produce salt water and sweet, there are various
other readings in the MSS. and versions. The word οὑτως, so, which makes
this a continuation of the comparison in [Jam
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#011.md), is wanting in ABC, one other,
with the Armenian and ancient Syriac; the later Syriac has it in the
margin with an asterisk. ABC, five others, with the Coptic, Vulgate, one
copy of the Itala, and Cyril, have ουτε ἁλυκον γλυκυ ποιησαι ὑδωρ,
neither can salt water produce sweet. In the Syriac and the Arabic of
Erpen, it is, So, likewise, sweet water cannot become bitter; and bitter
water cannot become sweet. The true reading appears to be, Neither can
salt water produce sweet, or, Neither can the sea produce fresh water;
and this is a new comparison, and not an inference from that in [Jam
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#011.md). This reading Griesbach has
admitted into the text; and of it Professor White, in his Crisews, says,
Lectio indubie genuina, "a reading undoubtedly genuine." There are
therefore, four distinct comparisons here:

1\. A fountain cannot produce sweet water and bitter.

2\. A fig tree cannot produce olive berries.

3\. A vine cannot produce figs.

4\. Salt water cannot be made sweet. That is, according to the ordinary
operations of nature, these things are impossible. Chemical analysis is
out of the question.

[James 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 3:13</span></span>

Who is a wise man - One truly religious; who, although he can neither
bridle nor tame other men's tongues, can restrain his own.

And endued with knowledge - Και επιστημων· And qualified to teach
others.

Let him show - Let him by a holy life and chaste conversation show,
through meekness and gentleness, joined to his Divine information, that
he is a Christian indeed; his works and his spirit proving that God is
in him of a truth; and that, from the fullness of a holy heart, his feet
walk, his hands work; and his tongue speaks. We may learn from this that
genuine wisdom is ever accompanied with meekness and gentleness. Those
proud, overbearing, and disdainful men, who pass for great scholars and
eminent critics, may have learning, but they have not wisdom. Their
learning implies their correct knowledge of the structure of language,
and of composition in general; but wisdom they have none, nor any
self-government. They are like the blind man who carried a lantern in
daylight to keep others from jostling him in the street. That learning
is not only little worth, but despicable, that does not teach a man to
govern his own spirit, and to be humble in his conduct towards others.

[James 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 3:14</span></span>

If ye have bitter envying and strife - If ye be under the influence of
an unkind, fierce, and contemptuous spirit, even while attempting or
pretending to defend true religion, do not boast either of your
exertions or success in silencing an adversary; ye have no religion, and
no true wisdom, and to profess either is to lie against the truth. Let
all writers on what is called polemic (fighting, warring) divinity lay
this to heart. The pious Mr. Herbert gives excellent advice on this
subject: -

"Be calm in arguing, for fierceness makes

Error a fault, and truth discourtesy;

Why should I feel another man's mistakes

More than his sickness or his poverty?

In love I should; but anger is not love,

Nor wisdom neither; therefore g-e-n-t-l-y m-o-v-e."

[James 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 3:15</span></span>

This wisdom descendeth not from above - God is not the author of it,
because it is bitter - not meek. See at the end of this chapter.

Is earthly - Having this life only in view.

Sensual - Ψυχικη· Animal - having for its object the gratification of
the passions and animal propensities.

Devilish - Δαιμονιωδης· Demoniacal - inspired by demons, and maintained
in the soul by their indwelling influence.

[James 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 3:16</span></span>

For where envying and strife is - Ζηλος και εριθεια· Zeal - fiery,
inflammatory passion, and contention - altercations about the different
points of the law, of no use for edification, such as those mentioned,
[Tit 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009.md). The Jews were the most
intolerant of all mankind; it was a maxim with them to kill those who
would not conform to their law; and their salvation they believed to be
impossible. This has been the spirit of Popery, and of the Romish Church
at large; in vain do they attempt to deny it; they have written it in
characters of blood and fire even in this country, (England), when they
were possessed of political power. With them it is still an established
maxim, that out of their Church there is no redemption; and fire and
faggot have been in that Church legal means of conversion or extinction.
In the short popish reign of Mary in this country, besides multitudes
who suffered by fine, imprisonment, confiscation, etc., two hundred and
seventy-seven were burnt alive, among whom were one archbishop, four
bishops, twenty-one clergymen, eight lay gentlemen, eighty-four
tradesmen, one hundred husbandmen, fifty-five women, and four children!
O earth! thou hast not drunk their blood; but their ashes have been
strewed on the face of the field.

[James 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 3:17</span></span>

The wisdom that is from above - The pure religion of the Lord Jesus,
bought by his blood, and infused by his Spirit. See the rabbinical
meaning of this phrase at the end of this chapter.

Is first pure - Ἁγνη· Chaste, holy, and clean.

Peaceable - Ειρηνικη· Living in peace with others, and promoting peace
among men.

Gentle - Επιεικης· Meek, modest, of an equal mind, taking every thing in
good part, and putting the best construction upon all the actions of
others.

Easy to be entreated - Ευπειθης· Not stubborn nor obstinate; of a
yielding disposition in all indifferent things; obsequious, docile.

Full of mercy - Ready to pass by a transgression, and to grant
forgiveness to those who offend, and performing every possible act of
kindness.

Good fruits - Each temper and disposition producing fruits suited to and
descriptive of its nature.

Without partiality - Αδιακριτος· Without making a difference - rendering
to every man his due; and being never swayed by self-interest, worldly
honor, or the fear of man; knowing no man after the flesh. One of the
Itala has it irreprehensible.

Without hypocrisy - Ανυποκριτος· Without dissimulation; without
pretending to be what it is not; acting always in its own character;
never working under a mask. Seeking nothing but God's glory, and using
no other means to attain it than those of his own prescribing.

[James 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 3:18</span></span>

And the fruit of righteousness is sown - The whole is the principle of
righteousness in the soul, and all the above virtues are the fruits of
that righteousness.

Is sown in peace - When the peace of God rules the heart, all these
virtues and graces grow and flourish abundantly.

Of them that make peace - The peace-makers are continually recommending
this wisdom to others, and their own conduct is represented as a sowing
of heavenly seed, which brings forth Divine fruit. Perhaps sowing in
peace signifies sowing prosperously - being very successful. This is not
only the proper disposition for every teacher of the Gospel, but for
every professed follower of the Lord Jesus.

Some render this verse, which is confessedly obscure, thus: And the
peaceable fruits of righteousness are sown for the practisers of peace.
He who labors to live peaceably shall have peace for his reward.

1\. Almost the whole of the preceding chapter is founded on maxims
highly accredited in the rabbinical writings, and without a reference to
those writings it would have been impossible, in some cases, to have
understood St. James' meaning. There is one phrase, the rabbinical
meaning and use of which I have reserved for this place, viz.. The
wisdom that is from above. This is greatly celebrated among them by the
terms חכמה עליונה chocmah elyonah, the supernal wisdom. This they seem
to understand to be a peculiar inspiration of the Almighty, or a
teaching communicated immediately by the angels of God. In Sohar, Yalcut
Rubeni, fol. 19, Rabbi Chiya said: "The wisdom from above was in Adam
more than in the supreme angels, and he knew all things." In Sohar
Chadash, fol. 35, it is said concerning Enoch, "That the angels were
sent from heaven, and taught him the wisdom that is from above." Ibid.
fol. 42, 4: "Solomon came, and he was perfect in all things, and
strongly set forth the praises of the wisdom that is from above." See
more in Schoettgen. St. James gives us the properties of this wisdom,
which are not to be found in such detail in any of the rabbinical
writers. It is another word for the life of God in the soul of man, or
true religion; it is the teaching of God in the human heart, and he who
has this not is not a child of God; for it is written, All thy children
shall be taught of the Lord.

2\. To enjoy the peace of God in the conscience, and to live to promote
peace among men, is to answer the end of our creation, and to enjoy as
much happiness ourselves as the present state of things can afford. They
who are in continual broils live a wretched life; and they who love the
life of the salamander must share no small portion of the demoniacal
nature. In domestic society such persons are an evil disease; therefore
a canker in the Church, and a pest in the state.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 4](jam004.md)

</div>
