<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jude Index](jde.md)  
  [Previous](jde000)  [Next](rev000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jude Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md)

The address and apostolical benediction, [Jde
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md), [Jde
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#002.md). The reasons which induced Jude to
write this epistle, to excite the Christians to contend for the true
faith, and to beware of false teachers, lest, falling from their
steadfastness, they should be destroyed after the example of backsliding
Israel, the apostate angels, and the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha,
[Jde 1:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003.md). Of the false teachers,
[Jde 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#008.md). Of Michael disputing about
the body of Moses, [Jde 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009.md). The false
teachers particularly described: they are like brute beasts, going the
way of Cain, run after the error of Balaam, and shall perish, as did
Korah in his gainsaying, [Jde 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#010.md),
[Jde 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011.md). Are impure, unsteady,
fierce, shameless, etc., 12, 13. How Enoch prophesied of such, [Jde
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014.md), [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015.md). They are farther described as
murmurers and complainers, [Jde 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016.md).
We should remember the cautions given unto us by the apostles who
foretold of these men, [Jde 1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#017.md).
We should build up ourselves on our most holy faith, [Jde
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#020.md), [Jde
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#021.md). How the Church of Christ should
treat such, [Jde 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#022.md), [Jde
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#023.md). The apostle's farewell, and his
doxology to God, [Jde 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#024.md), [Jde
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#025.md).

[Jude 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jde 1:1</span></span>

Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ - Probably Jude the apostle, who was
surnamed Thaddeus and Lebbeus, was son to Alpheus, and brother to James
the less, Joses, and Simon. See [Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003.md), and collate with [Luk
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#016.md); [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055.md).

Brother of James - Supposed to be James the less, bishop of Jerusalem,
mentioned here, because he was an eminent person in the Church. See the
preface to St. James.

To them that are sanctified by God - Instead of ἡγιασμενοις, to the
sanctified, AB, several others, both the Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, Coptic,
Sahidic, Armenian, Ethiopic, and Vulgate, with several of the fathers,
have ηγαπημενοις, to them that are beloved; and before εν τῳ Θεῳ, in
God, some MSS., with the Syriac and Armenian, have εθνεσιν, to the
Gentiles, in God the Father: but although the first is only a probable
reading, this is much less so. St. Jude writes to all believers
everywhere, and not to any particular Church; hence this epistle has
been called a general epistle. Sanctified signifies here consecrated to
God through faith in Christ.

Preserved in (or by) Jesus Christ - Signifies those who continued
unshaken in the Christian faith; and implies also, that none can be
preserved in the faith that do not continue in union with Christ, by
whose grace alone they can be preserved and called. This should be read
consecutively with the other epithets, and should be rather, in a
translation, read first than last, to the saints in God the Father,
called and preserved by Christ Jesus. Saints is the same as Christians;
to become such they were called to believe in Christ by the preaching of
the Gospel, and having believed, were preserved by the grace of Christ
in the life and practice of piety.

[Jude 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jde 1:2</span></span>

Mercy unto you - For even the best have no merit, and must receive every
blessing and grace in the way of mercy.

Peace - With God and your consciences, love both to God and man, be
multiplied - be unboundedly increased.

[Jude 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jde 1:3</span></span>

When I gave all diligence - This phrase, πασαν σπουδην ποιουμενος, is a
Grecism for being exceedingly intent upon a subject; taking it up
seriously with determination to bring it to good effect. The meaning of
the apostle seems to be this: "Beloved brethren, when I saw it necessary
to write to you concerning the common salvation, my mind being deeply
affected with the dangers to which the Church is exposed from the false
teachers that are gone out into the world, I found it extremely
necessary to write and exhort you to hold fast the truth which you had
received, and strenuously to contend for that only faith which, by our
Lord and his apostles, has been delivered to the Christians."

Some think that St. Jude intimates that he had at first purposed to
write to the Church at large, on the nature and design of the Gospel;
but seeing the dangers to which the Churches were exposed, because of
the false teachers, he changed his mind, and wrote pointedly against
those false doctrines, exhorting them strenuously to contend for the
faith.

The common salvation - The Christian religion, and the salvation which
it brings. This is called common because it equally belongs to Jews and
Gentiles; it is the saving grace of God which has appeared to every man,
and equally offers to every human being that redemption which is
provided for the whole world.

[Jude 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jde 1:4</span></span>

For there are certain men crept in unawares - Παρεισεδυσαν· They had got
into the Church under specious pretences; and, when in, began to sow
their bad seed.

Before of old ordained - Οἱ παλαι προγεγραμμενοι Such as were long ago
proscribed, and condemned in the most public manner; this is the import
of the word προγραφειν in this place, and there are many examples of
this use of it in the Greek writers. See Kypke.

To this condemnation - To a similar punishment to that immediately about
to be mentioned.

In the sacred writings all such persons, false doctrines, and impure
practices, have been most openly proscribed and condemned; and the
apostle immediately produces several examples, viz., the disobedient
Israelites, the unfaithful angels, and the impure inhabitants of Sodom
and Gomorrha. This is most obviously the apostle's meaning, and it is as
ridiculous as it is absurd to look into such words for a decree of
eternal reprobation, etc., such a doctrine being as far from the
apostle's mind as from that of Him in whose name he wrote.

Turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness - Making the grace and
mercy of God a covering for crimes; intimating that men might sin safely
who believe the Gospel, because in that Gospel grace abounds. But
perhaps the goodness of God is here meant, for I cannot see how they
could believe the Gospel in any way who denied the Lord Jesus Christ;
unless, which is likely, their denial refers to this, that while they
acknowledged Jesus as the promised Messiah, they denied him to be the
only Lord, Sovereign, and Ruler of the Church and of the world. There
are many in the present day who hold the same opinion.

The only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ - Μονον Δεσποτην Θεον και
Κυριον ἡμων Ιησουν Χριστον αρυουμενοι. These words may be translated,
Denying the only sovereign God, even our Lord Jesus Christ. But Θεον
God, is omitted by ABC, sixteen others, with Erpen's Arabic, the Coptic,
Ethiopic, Armenian, and Vulgate, and by many of the fathers. It is very
likely that it was originally inserted as a gloss, to ascertain to whom
the title of τον μονον Δεσποτην, the only Sovereign, belonged; and thus
make two persons where only one seems to be intended. The passage I
believe belongs solely to Jesus Christ, and may be read thus: Denying
the only sovereign Ruler, even our Lord Jesus Christ. The text is
differently arranged in the Complutensian Polyglot, which contains the
first edition of the Greek Testament: Και τον μονον Θεον και Δεσποτην,
τον Κυριον ἡμων Ιησουν Χριστον αρνουμενοι· Denying the only God and
Sovereign, our Lord Jesus Christ. This is a very remarkable position of
the words, and doubtless existed in some of the MSS. from which these
editors copied. The Simonians, Nicolaitans, and Gnostics, denied God to
be the creator of the world; and Simon is said to have proclaimed
himself as Father to the Samaritans, as Son to the Jews, and as the Holy
Ghost to all other nations. All such most obviously denied both Father,
Son, and Spirit.

[Jude 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jde 1:5</span></span>

I will therefore put you in remembrance - That is, how such persons were
proscribed, and condemned to bear the punishment due to such crimes.

Though ye once knew this - The word ἁπαξ, here translated once, has
greatly puzzled many interpreters. It has two meanings in the sacred
writings, and indeed in the Greek writers also.

1\. It signifies once, one time, as opposed to twice, or several times.

2\. Altogether, entirely, perfectly, interpreted by Suidas αντι τον
διολου, ὁλοσχερως· and of this meaning he produces a proof from
Josephus; This appears to be the sense of the word in [Heb
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004.md) : τους ἁπαξ φωτισθεντας· those who
were Fully enlightened. [Heb 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#002.md) :
ἁπαξ κεκαθαρμενους· Thoroughly cleansed. See also [Heb
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#003.md). [Psa
62:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#011.md) : ἁπαξ ελαλησεν ὁ Θεος. God
spoke Fully, completely, on the subject. St. Jude is to be understood as
saying, I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye are
Thoroughly instructed in this.

Saved the people - Delivered them from the Egyptian bondage.

Afterward destroyed them - Because they neither believed his word, nor
were obedient to his commands. This is the first example of what was
mentioned [Jde 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004.md).

[Jude 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jde 1:6</span></span>

The angels which kept not their first estate - Την ἑαυτων αρχην Their
own principality. The words may be understood of their having invaded
the office or dignity of some others, or of their having by some means
forfeited their own. This is spoken of those generally termed the fallen
angels; but from what they fell, or from what cause or for what crime,
we know not. It is generally thought to have been pride; but this is
mere conjecture. One thing is certain; the angels who fell must have
been in a state of probation, capable of either standing or falling, as
Adam was in paradise. They did not continue faithful, though they knew
the law on which they stood; they are therefore produced as the second
example.

But left their own habitation - This seems to intimate that they had
invaded the office and prerogatives of others, and attempted to seize on
their place of residence and felicity.

He hath reserved in everlasting chains - That is, in a state of
confinement from which they cannot escape.

Under darkness - Alluding probably to those dungeons or dark cells in
prisons where the most flagitious culprits were confined.

The judgment of the great day, - The final judgment, when both angels
and men shall receive their eternal doom. See on [Pe2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004) (note.md). In Sohar Exod., fol. 8, c.
32: "Rabbi Isaac asked: Suppose God should punish any of his heavenly
family, how would he act? R. Abba answered: He would send them into the
flaming river, take away their dominion, and put others in their place."
Some suppose that the saints are to occupy the places from which these
angels, by transgression, fell.

[Jude 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jde 1:7</span></span>

Even as Sodom and Gomorrha - What their sin and punishment were may be
seen in Genesis 19, and the notes there. This is the third example to
illustrate what is laid down [Jde 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004.md).

Are set forth for an example - Both of what God will do to such
transgressors, and of the position laid down in [Jde
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004.md), viz., that God has in the most
open and positive manner declared that such and such sinners shall meet
with the punishment due to their crimes.

Suffering the vengeance of eternal fire - Subjected to such a punishment
as an endless fire can inflict. Some apply this to the utter subversion
of these cities, so that by the action of that fire which descended from
heaven they were totally and eternally destroyed; for as to their being
rebuilt, that is impossible, seeing the very ground on which they stood
is burned up, and the whole plain is now the immense lake Asphaltites.
See the notes on Genesis 19 (note).

The first sense applies to the inhabitants of those wicked cities; the
second, to the cities themselves: in either case the word πυρ αιωνιον
signifies an eternally destructive fire; it has no end in the punishment
of the wicked Sodomites, etc.; it has no end in the destruction of the
cities; they were totally burnt up, and never were and never can be
rebuilt. In either of these senses the word αιωνιος, eternal, has its
grammatical and proper meaning.

[Jude 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jde 1:8</span></span>

Likewise also these filthy dreamers - He means to say that these false
teachers and their followers were as unbelieving and disobedient as the
Israelites in the wilderness, as rebellious against the authority of God
as the fallen angels, and as impure and unholy as the Sodomites; and
that consequently they must expect similar punishment.

Our translators, by rendering ενυπνιαζομενοι filthy dreamers, seem to
have understood St. Jude to mean les pollutions nocturnes et voluntaires
de ces hommes impurs, qui se livrent sans scrupule a toutes sortes des
pensees; et salissant leur imagination pas la vue de toutes sortes d'
objets, tombent ensuite dans les corsuptions honteuses et criminelles.
See Calmet. In plain English, self-pollution, with all its train of
curses and cursed effects on body, soul, and spirit. The idea of our
translators seems to be confirmed by the words σαρκα μεν μιαινουσι, they
indeed pollute the flesh. See what is said at the conclusion of the
thirty-eighth chapter of Genesis.

Despise dominion - Κυριοτητα δε αθετουσι· They set all government at
nought - they will come under no restraints; they despise all law, and
wish to live as they list.

Speak evil of dignities - Δοξας δε βλασφημουσιν· They blaspheme or speak
injuriously of supreme authority. (See [Pe2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010.md), [Pe2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#011)..md) They treat governors and
government with contempt, and calumniate and misrepresent all Divine and
civil institutions.

[Jude 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jde 1:9</span></span>

Yet Michael the archangel - Of this personage many things are spoken in
the Jewish writings "Rabbi Judah Hakkodesh says: Wherever Michael is
said to appear, the glory of the Divine Majesty is always to be
understood." Shemoth Rabba, sec. ii., fol. 104, 3. So that it seems as
if they considered Michael in some sort as we do the Messiah manifested
in the flesh.

Let it be observed that the word archangel is never found in the plural
number in the sacred writings. There can be properly only one archangel,
one chief or head of all the angelic host. Nor is the word devil, as
applied to the great enemy of mankind, ever found in the plural; there
can be but one monarch of all fallen spirits. Michael is this archangel,
and head of all the angelic orders; the devil, great dragon, or Satan,
is head of all the diabolic orders. When these two hosts are opposed to
each other they are said to act under these two chiefs, as leaders;
hence in [Rev 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007.md), it is said:
Michael and his angels fought against the Dragon and his angels. The
word Michael מיכאל, seems to be compounded of מי mi, who, כ ke, like,
and אל El, God; he who is like God; hence by this personage, in the
Apocalypse, many understand the Lord Jesus.

Disputed about the body of Moses - What this means I cannot tell; or
from what source St. Jude drew it, unless from some tradition among his
countrymen. There is something very like it in Debarim Rabba, sec. ii.,
fol. 263, 1: "Samael, that wicked one, the prince of the satans,
carefully kept the soul of Moses, saying: When the time comes in which
Michael shall lament, I shall have my mouth filled with laughter.
Michael said to him: Wretch, I weep, and thou laughest. Rejoice not
against me, O mine enemy, because I have fallen; for I shall rise again:
when I sit in darkness, the Lord is my light; [Mic
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008.md). By the words, because I have
fallen, we must understand the death of Moses; by the words, I shall
rise again, the government of Joshua, etc." See the preface.

Another contention of Michael with Satan is mentioned in Yalcut Rubeni,
fol. 43, 3: "At the time in which Isaac was bound there was a contention
between Michael and Satan. Michael brought a ram, that Isaac might be
liberated; but Satan endeavored to carry off the ram, that Isaac might
be slain."

The contention mentioned by Jude is not about the sacrifice of Isaac,
nor the soul of Moses, but about the Body of Moses; but why or wherefore
we know not. Some think the devil wished to show the Israelites where
Moses was buried, knowing that they would then adore his body; and that
Michael was sent to resist this discovery.

Durst not bring against him a railing accusation - It was a Jewish
maxim, as may be seen in Synopsis Sohar, page 92, note 6: "It is not
lawful for man to prefer ignominious reproaches, even against wicked
spirits." See Schoettgen.

Dr. Macknight says: "In [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013.md),
[Dan 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021.md); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001.md), Michael is spoken of as one of
the chief angels who took care of the Israelites as a nation; he may
therefore have been the angel of the Lord before whom Joshua the high
priest is said, [Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md), to have
stood, Satan being at his right hand to resist him, namely, in his
design of restoring the Jewish Church and state, called by Jude the body
of Moses, just as the Christian Church is called by Paul the body of
Christ. Zechariah adds, And the Lord, that is, the angel of the Lord, as
is plain from [Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md), [Zac
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002.md), said unto Satan, The Lord rebuke
thee, O Satan! even the Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee!"
This is the most likely interpretation which I have seen; and it will
appear the more probable when it is considered that, among the Hebrews,
גוף guph, Body, is often used for a thing itself. So, in [Rom
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md), σωμα της ἁμαρτιας, the body of
sin, signifies sin itself; so the body of Moses, גוף של משה guph shel
Mosheh, may signify Moses himself; or that in which he was particularly
concerned, viz., his institutes, religion, etc.

It may be added, that the Jews consider Michael and Samael, one as the
friend, the other as the enemy, of Israel. Samael is their accuser,
Michael their advocate. "Michael and Samael stand before the Lord; Satan
accuses, but Michael shows the merits of Israel. Satan endeavors to
speak, but Michael silences him: Hold thy tongue, says he, and let us
hear what the Judge determines; for it is written, He will speak peace
to his people, and to his saints; [Psa
85:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#008.md)." Shemoth Rabba, sec. xviii. fol.
117, 3.

[Jude 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jde 1:10</span></span>

Speak evil of those things which they know not - They do not understand
the origin and utility of civil government; they revile that which ever
protects their own persons and their property. This is true in most
insurrections and seditions.

But what they know naturally - They are destitute of reflection; their
minds are uncultivated; they follow mere natural instinct, and are
slaves to their animal propensities.

As brute beasts - Ὡς τα αλογα ζωα· Like the irrational animals; but, in
the indulgence of their animal propensities, they corrupt themselves,
beyond the example of the brute beasts. A fearful description; and true
of many in the present day.

[Jude 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jde 1:11</span></span>

They have gone in the way of Cain - They are haters of their brethren,
and they that are such are murderers; and by their false doctrine they
corrupt and destroy the souls of the people.

The error of Balaam - For the sake of gain they corrupt the word of God
and refine away its meaning, and let it down so as to suit the passions
of the profligate. This was literally true of the Nicolaitans, who
taught most impure doctrines, and followed the most lascivious
practices.

Gainsaying of Core - See the account of the rebellion of Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram, and their company, in Num. 22. It appears that these persons
opposed the authority of the apostles of our Lord, as Korah and his
associates did that of Moses and Aaron; and St. Jude predicts them a
similar punishment. In this verse he accuses them of murder,
covetousness, and rebellion against the authority of God.

[Jude 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jde 1:12</span></span>

Spots in your feasts of charity - It appears that these persons, unholy
and impure as they were, still continued to have outward fellowship with
the Church! This is strange: but it is very likely that their power and
influence in that place had swallowed up, or set aside, the power and
authority of the real ministers of Christ; a very common case when
worldly, time - serving men get into the Church.

The feasts of charity, the αγαπαι or love feasts, of which the apostle
speaks, were in use in the primitive Church till the middle of the
fourth century, when, by the council of Laodicea, they were prohibited
to be held in the Churches; and, having been abused, fell into disuse.
In later days they have been revived, in all the purity and simplicity
of the primitive institution, among the Moravians or Unitas Fratrum, and
the people called Methodists.

Among the ancients, the richer members of the Church made an occasional
general feast, at which all the members attended, and the poor and the
rich ate together. The fatherless, the widows, and the strangers were
invited to these feasts, and their eating together was a proof of their
love to each other; whence such entertainments were called love feasts.
The love feasts were at first celebrated before the Lord's Supper; in
process of time they appear to have been celebrated after it. But they
were never considered as the Lord's Supper, nor any substitute for it.
See, for farther information, Suicer, in his Thesaurus, under the word
Αγαπη.

Feeding themselves without fear - Eating, not to suffice nature, but to
pamper appetite. It seems the provision was abundant, and they ate to
gluttony and riot. It was this which brought the love feasts into
disrepute in the Church, and was the means of their being at last wholly
laid aside. This abuse is never likely to take place among the
Methodists, as they only use bread and water; and of this the provision
is not sufficient to afford the tenth part of a meal.

Instead of αγαπαις, love feasts, απαταις, deceits, is the reading of the
Codex Alexandrinus, and the Codex Ephrem, two MSS. of the highest
antiquity; as also of those MSS. collated by Laurentius Valla, and of
some of those in the Medicean library. This reading appears to have been
introduced in order to avoid the conclusion that some might be led to
draw concerning the state of the Church; it must be very corrupt, to
have in its communion such corrupt men.

Clouds - without water - The doctrine of God is compared to the rain,
[Deu 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002.md), and clouds are the
instruments by which the rain is distilled upon the earth. In arid or
parched countries the very appearance of a cloud is delightful, because
it is a token of refreshing showers; but when sudden winds arise, and
disperse these clouds, the hope of the husbandman and shepherd is cut
off. These false teachers are represented as clouds; they have the form
and office of the teachers of righteousness, and from such appearances
pure doctrine may be naturally expected: but these are clouds without
water - they distil no refreshing showers, because they have none; they
are carried away and about by their passions, as those light fleecy
clouds are carried by the winds. See the notes on [Pe2
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017.md).

Trees whose fruit withereth - Δενδρα φθινοπωρινα· Galled or diseased
trees; for φθινοπωρον is, according to Phavorinus, νοσος φθινουσα
οπωρας, a disease (in trees) which causes their fruit to wither; for
although there are blossoms, and the fruit shapes or is set, the galls
in the trees prevent the proper circulation of the sap, and therefore
the fruit never comes to perfection. Hence the apostle immediately adds,
without fruit; i.e. the fruit never comes to maturity. This metaphor
expresses the same thing as the preceding. They have the appearance of
ministers of the Gospel, but they have no fruit.

Twice dead - First, naturally and practically dead in sin, from which
they had been revived by the preaching and grace of the Gospel.
Secondly, dead by backsliding or apostasy from the true faith, by which
they lost the grace they had before received; and now likely to continue
in that death, because plucked up from the roots, their roots of faith
and love being no longer fixed in Christ Jesus. Perhaps the aorist is
taken here for the future: They Shall Be plucked up from the roots - God
will exterminate them from the earth.

[Jude 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jde 1:13</span></span>

Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame - The same metaphor
as in [Isa 57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020.md) : The wicked are like
the troubled sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and
dirt. These are like the sea in a storm, where the swells are like
mountains; the breakers lash the shore, and sound like thunder; and the
great deep, stirred up from its very bottom, rolls its muddy, putrid
sediment, and deposits it upon the beach. Such were those proud and
arrogant boasters, those headstrong, unruly, and ferocious men, who
swept into their own vortex the souls of the simple, and left nothing
behind them that was not indicative of their folly, their turbulence,
and their impurity.

Wandering stars - Αστερες πλανηται· Not what we call planets; for
although these differ from what are called the fixed stars, which never
change their place, while the planets have their revolution round the
sun; yet, properly speaking, there is no irregularity in their motions:
for their appearance of advancing, stationary, and retrograde, are only
in reference to an observer on the earth, viewing them in different
parts of their orbits; for as to themselves, they ever continue a steady
course through all their revolutions. But these are uncertain, anomalous
meteors, ignes fatui, wills-o'-the-wisp; dancing about in the darkness
which themselves have formed, and leading simple souls astray, who have
ceased to walk in the light, and have no other guides but those
oscillating and devious meteors which, if you run after them, will flee
before you, and if you run from them will follow you.

The blackness of darkness - They are such as are going headlong into
that outer darkness where there is wailing, and weeping, and gnashing of
teeth. The whole of this description appears to have been borrowed from
2 Peter 2, where the reader is requested to see the notes.

[Jude 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jde 1:14</span></span>

Enoch also, the seventh from Adam - He was the seventh patriarch, and is
distinguished thus from Enoch, son of Cain, who was but the third from
Adam; this appears plainly from the genealogy, [Ch1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001.md) : Adams Seth, Enosh, Kenan,
Mahalaleel, Jered, Henoch or Enoch, etc. Of the book of Enoch, from
which this prophecy is thought to have been taken, much has been said;
but as the work is apocryphal, and of no authority, I shall not burden
my page with extracts. See the preface.

Perhaps the word προεφητευσε, prophesied, means no more than preached,
spoke, made declarations, etc., concerning these things and persons; for
doubtless he reproved the ungodliness of his own times. It is certain
that a book of Enoch was known in the earliest ages of the primitive
Church, and is quoted by Origen and Tertullian; and is mentioned by St.
Jerome in the Apostolical Constitutions, by Nicephorus, Athanasius, and
probably by St. Augustine. See Suicer's Thesaurus, vol. i., col. 1131.
Such a work is still extant among the Abyssinians.

Ten thousand of his saints - This seems to be taken from [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md).

[Jude 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jde 1:15</span></span>

To execute judgment - This was originally spoken to the antediluvians;
and the coming of the Lord to destroy that world was the thing spoken of
in this prophecy or declaration. But as God had threatened this, it
required no direct inspiration to foretell it. To execute judgment, etc.
This is a very strange verse as to its composition, and is loaded with
various readings; the MSS. and versions being at little agreement among
themselves on its phraseology. Αυτων, which we translate among them, is
omitted by the best MSS. and versions, and is, in all probability,
spurious. Many also omit ασεβειας after ργων, ungodly deeds. Many insert
λογων, words or speeches, after σκληρων, hard; and this word our
translators have supplied. And instead of ἁμαρτωλοι, sinners, the
Sahidic has ανθρωποι, men. There are others of less note; but the
frequent recurrence of All and Ungodly makes the construction of the
sentence very harsh.

Dr. Macknight supposes that Enoch's prophecy was common among the Jews;
for the first words in Hebrew are Maranatha, and these were used by them
in that form of excommunication or cursing which they pronounced against
irreclaimable offenders. The doctor forgets himself here; the words
Maranatha are not Hebrew, but Syriac. In Hebrew the form of execration
begins with ארור אתה arur attah, "cursed art thou;" or מחרם אתה mochoram
attah: but the Syriac maran atha, is literally, our Lord is coming; see
on [Co1 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022) (note.md); but here, in the
Syriac, the words are atha moria, "the Lord cometh." So it is doubtful
whether this fancied analogy exists.

[Jude 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jde 1:16</span></span>

These are murmurers - Grudging and grumbling at all men, and at all
things; complainers, μεμψιμοιροι, complainers of their fate or destiny -
finding fault with God and all his providential dispensations, making
and governing worlds in their own way; persons whom neither God nor man
can please.

Walking after their own lusts - Taking their wild, disorderly, and
impure passions for the rule of their conduct, and not the writings of
the prophets and apostles.

Great swelling words - Ὑπερογκα. See the explanation of this term in
[Pe2 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018.md).

Having men's persons in admiration - Time-servers and flatterers;
persons who pretend to be astonished at the greatness, goodness,
sagacity, learning, wisdom; etc., of rich and great men, hoping thereby
to acquire money, influence, power, friends, and the like.

Because of advantage - Ωφελειας χαριν· For the sake of lucre. All the
flatterers of the rich are of this kind; and especially those who
profess to be ministers of the Gospel, and who, for the sake of a more
advantageous settlement or living, will soothe the rich even in their
sins. With such persons a rich man is every thing; and if he have but a
grain of grace, his piety is extolled to the skies! I have known several
ministers of this character, and wish them all to read the sixteenth
verse of Jude.

[Jude 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jde 1:17</span></span>

Remember - the words - Instead of following those teachers and their
corrupt doctrine, remember what Christ and his apostles have said; for
they foretold the coming of such false teachers and impostors.

[Jude 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jde 1:18</span></span>

Mockers in the last time - See the notes on [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md); [Ti2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001) (note.md), etc.; and particularly
[Pe2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#002.md) , [Pe2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003) (note.md), etc., to which Jude seems
to refer.

The last time. - The conclusion of the Jewish polity.

[Jude 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jde 1:19</span></span>

Who separate themselves - From the true Church, which they leave from an
affectation of superior wisdom.

Sensual - Ψυχικοι· Animal - living as brute beasts, guided simply by
their own lusts and passions, their Bible being the manifold devices and
covetousness of their own hearts; for they have not the Spirit - they
are not spiritually minded; and have no Holy Ghost, no inspiration from
God.

[Jude 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jde 1:20</span></span>

Building up yourselves - Having the most holy faith - the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus, and the writings of his apostles, for your foundation;
founding all your expectations on these, and seeking from the Christ who
is their sum and substance; all the grace and glory ye need.

Praying in the Holy Ghost - Holding fast the Divine influence which ye
have received, and under that influence making prayer and supplication
to God. The prayer that is not sent up through the influence of the Holy
Ghost is never likely to reach heaven.

[Jude 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jde 1:21</span></span>

Keep yourselves in the love of God - By building up yourselves on your
most holy faith, and praying in the Holy Ghost; for without this we
shall soon lose the love of God.

Looking for the mercy of our Lord - For although they were to build
themselves up, and to pray in the Holy Ghost, and keep themselves in the
love of God, yet this building, praying, and keeping, cannot merit
heaven; for, after all their diligence, earnestness, self-denial,
watching, obedience, etc., they must look for the Mercy of the Lord
Jesus Christ, to bring them to Eternal Life.

[Jude 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jde 1:22</span></span>

And of some have compassion, making a difference - The general meaning
of this exhortation is supposed to be, "Ye are not to deal alike with
all those who have been seduced by false teachers; ye are to make a
difference between those who have been led away by weakness and
imprudence, and those who, in the pride and arrogance of their hearts,
and their unwillingness to submit to wholesome discipline, have
separated themselves from the Church, and become its inveterate
enemies."

Instead of Και οὑς μεν ελεειτε διακρινομενοι, and of some have
compassion, making a difference, many MSS., versions, and fathers have
και οὑς μεν ελεγχετε διακρινομενους, and some rebuke, after having
judged them; or, rebuke those that differ; or, some that are wavering
convince; or whatever else the reader pleases: for this and the
following verse are all confusion, both in the MSS. and versions; and it
is extremely difficult to know what was the original text. Our own is as
likely as any.

[Jude 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jde 1:23</span></span>

And others save with fear - "Some of them snatch from the fire: but when
they repent, have mercy upon them in fear." - Syriac. "And some of them
rebuke for their sins; and on others have mercy when they are convicted;
and others save from the fire and deliver them." - Erpen's Arabic. Mr.
Wesley's note has probably hit the sense. "Meantime watch over others as
well as yourselves; and give them such help as their various needs
require. For instance,

1\. Some that are wavering in judgment, staggered by others' or by their
own evil reasoning, endeavor more deeply to convince of the truth as it
is in Jesus.

2\. Some snatch with a swift and strong hand out of the fire of sin and
temptation.

3\. On others show compassion, in a milder and gentler way; though still
with a jealous fear, lest you yourselves be infected with the disease
you endeavor to cure. See therefore that, while ye love the sinners, ye
retain the utmost abhorrence of their sins, and of any, the least degree
of or approach to them."

Having even the garment spotted by the flesh - Fleeing from all
appearance of evil. Dictum sumptum, ut apparet, a mulieribus sanguine
menstruo pollutis, quarum vestes etiam pollutae censebantur: or there
may be an allusion to a case of leprosy, for that infected the garments
of the afflicted person, and these garments were capable of conveying
the contagion to others.

[Jude 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jde 1:24</span></span>

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling - Who alone can
preserve you from the contagion of sin, and preserve you from falling
into any kind of error that might be prejudicial to the interests of
your souls; and thus to present you faultless, or, as many others read,
ασπιλους, without spot, alluding to the spotted garment mentioned above.

Before the presence of his glory - Where nothing can stand that does not
resemble himself, with exceeding great joy, in finding yourselves
eternally out of the reach of the possibility of falling, and for having
now arrived at an eternity of happiness.

[Jude 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jde 1:25</span></span>

To the only wise God - Who alone can teach, who alone has declared the
truth; that truth in which ye now stand. See on [Rom
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#027) (note.md).

Our Savior - Who has by his blood washed us from our sins, and made us
kings and priests unto God the Father.

Be glory - Be ascribed all light, excellence, and splendor.

Majesty - All power, authority, and pre-eminence.

Dominion - All rule and government in the world and in the Church, in
earth and in heaven.

And power - All energy and operation to every thing that is wise, great,
good, holy, and excellent.

Both now - In the present state of life and things.

And ever - Εις παντας τους αιωνας· To the end of all states, places,
dispensations, and worlds; and to a state which knows no termination,
being that Eternity in which this glory, majesty, dominion, and power
ineffably and incomprehensibly dwell.

Amen - So let it be, so ought it to be, and so it shall be.

After to the only wise God our Savior, many excellent MSS. versions,
etc., add δια Ιησου Χριστου του Κυριου ἡμων, by Jesus Christ our Lord;
and after dominion and power they add προ παντος του αιωνος, before all
time; and both these readings Griesbach has received into the text. The
text, therefore, may be read thus: To the only wise God our Savior, by
Christ Jesus our Lord, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, before
all time; and now, and through all futurity. Amen. Let the whole
creation join in one chorus, issuing in one eternal Amen!

Subscriptions to this epistle in the Versions: -

The Epistle of Jude the apostle, whose intercession be ever with us,
Amen. The end. - Syriac.

The Epistle of Jude, the brother of James is finished: and glory be to
God for ever and ever, Amen. - Aethiopic.

Nothing in the Vulgate.

Nothing in the Arabic.

"This epistle was written a.d. 64, by the Apostle Jude, the brother of
James; who is also called Lebbeus and Thaddeus; and who preached (the
Gospel) to the Armenians and to the Persians." - This is found at the
end of the Armenian Bible, printed in 1698.

The Epistle of Jude the son of Joseph, and brother of James, is ended -
A MS. copy of the Syriac.

The end of the catholic Epistle of St. Jude. - Complutensian.

The Epistle of Jude the apostle is ended. - Ibid. Latin text.

In the Manuscripts: -

Jude. - Codex Vaticanus, B.

The Epistle of Jude. - Codex Alexandrinus.

The catholic Epistle of Jude. - Codex Ephrem.

The Epistle of the holy Apostle Jude. - Codex G, in Griesbach.

Of how little authority such subscriptions are, we have already had
occasion to observe in various cases. Very few of them are ancient; and
none of them coeval with the works to which they are appended. They are,
in general, the opinions of the scribes who wrote the copies; or of the
Churches for whose use they were written. No stress therefore should be
laid on them, as if proceeding from Divine authority.

With the Epistle of Jude end all the apostolical epistles, and with it
the canon of the New Testament, as to gospels and epistles; for the
Apocalypse is a work sui generis, and can rank with neither. It is in
general a collection of symbolic prophecies, which do not appear to be
yet fully understood by the Christian world, and which can only be known
when they are fulfilled.

Finished for a new impression, January 4th, 1832. - A. C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Introduction](rev000.md)

</div>
