<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg006)  [Next](jdg008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#001.md)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 7:0</span></span>

The Lord commands Gideon to make a selection of a small number of his
men to go against the Midianites. Three hundred only are selected; and
into the hands of these God promises to deliver the whole Midianitish
host, [Jdg 7:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#001.md). Gideon is directed
to go down unto the host in the night, that he may be encouraged on
hearing what they say, [Jdg 7:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#009.md). He
obeys, and hears a Midianite tell a remarkable dream unto his fellow,
which predicted the success of his attack, [Jdg
7:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#013.md). He takes encouragement,
divides his men into three companies, and gives each a trumpet with a
lighted lamp concealed in a pitcher, with directions how to use them,
[Jdg 7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016.md). They come to the
Midianitish camp at night, when all suddenly blowing their trumpets and
exposing their lamps, the Midianites are thrown into confusion, fly, and
are stopped by the Ephraimites at the passage of Jordan, and slain, [Jdg
7:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#019.md). Oreb and Zeeb, two
Midianitish princes, are slain, [Jdg
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#025.md).

[Judges 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 7:1</span></span>

Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon - It appears that Jerubbaal was now a
surname of Gideon, from the circumstance mentioned [Jdg
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#032.md). See [Jdg
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#035.md).

The well of Harod - If this was a town or village, it is nowhere else
mentioned. Probably, as חרד charad signifies to shake or tremble through
fear, the fountain in question may have had its name from the terror and
panic with which the Midianitish host was seized at this place.

[Judges 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 7:2</span></span>

The people that are with thee are too many - Had he led up a numerous
host against his enemies, the excellence of the power by which they were
discomfited might have appeared to be of man and not of God. By the
manner in which this whole transaction was conducted, both the
Israelites and Midianites must see that the thing was of God. This would
inspire the Israelites with confidence, and the Midianites with fear.

[Judges 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 7:3</span></span>

Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return - from Mount Gilead -
Gideon was certainly not at Mount Gilead at this time, but rather near
Mount Gilboa. Gilead was on the other side of Jordan. Calmet thinks
there must either have been two Gileads, which does not from the
Scripture appear to be the case, or that the Hebrew text is here
corrupted, and that for Gilead we should read Gilboa. This reading,
though adopted by Houbigant, is not countenanced by any MS., nor by any
of the versions. Dr. Hales endeavors to reconcile the whole, by the
supposition that there were in Gideon's army many of the eastern
Manassites, who came from Mount Gilead; and that these probably were
more afraid of their neighbors, the Midianites, than the western tribes
were; and therefore proposes to read the text thus: Whosoever from Mount
Gilead is fearful and afraid, let him return (home) and depart early. So
there returned (home) twenty-two thousand of the people. Perhaps this is
on the whole the best method of solving this difficulty.

There returned of the people twenty and two thousand - Gideon's army was
at this time thirty-two thousand strong, and after the above address
twenty-two thousand went away. How astonishing, that in thirty-two
thousand men there should be found not less than twenty-two thousand
poltroons, who would neither fight for God nor their oppressed country!
A state of slavery debases the mind of man, and renders it incapable of
being influenced by the pure principles of patriotism or religion. In
behalf of the army of Gideon we may say, if the best appointed armies in
Europe had the same address, bona fide, from their generals as the
Israelites had, at least an equal proportion would return home.

[Judges 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 7:5</span></span>

Every one that lappeth of the water - as a dog - The original word ילק
yalok is precisely the sound which a dog makes when he is drinking.

[Judges 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 7:6</span></span>

The number of them that lapped - From this account it appears that some
of the people went down on their knees, and putting their mouths to the
water, sucked up what they needed; the others stooped down, and taking
up water in the hollow of their hands, applied it to their mouth.

[Judges 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 7:8</span></span>

So the people took victuals - The three hundred men that he reserved
took the victuals necessary for the day's expenditure, while the others
were dismissed to their tents and their houses as they thought proper.

[Judges 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 7:9</span></span>

I have delivered it into thine hand - I have determined to do it, and it
is as sure as if it were done.

[Judges 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 7:11</span></span>

Unto the outside of the armed men - No doubt the vast multitudes of
Midianites, etc., which came merely for plunder, were wholly unarmed;
but they had a guard of armed men, as all the caravans have, and those
guards were on the outside of the multitudes; it was to these that
Gideon and his servant came.

[Judges 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 7:13</span></span>

Told a dream - Both the dream and the interpretation were inspired by
God for the purpose of increasing the confidence of Gideon, and
appalling his enemies.

[Judges 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 7:14</span></span>

Into his hand hath God delivered Midian - This is a full proof that God
had inspired both the dream and its interpretation.

[Judges 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 7:16</span></span>

He divided the three hundred men - Though the victory was to be from the
Lord, yet he knew that he ought to use prudential means; and those which
he employed on this occasion were the best calculated to answer the end.
If he had not used these means, it is not likely that God would have
delivered the Midianites into his hands. Sometimes, even in working a
miracle, God will have natural means used: Go, dip thyself seven times
in Jordan. Go, wash in the pool Siloam.

[Judges 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 7:18</span></span>

The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon - The word חרב chereb, "sword," is
not found in this verse, though it is necessarily implied, and is found
in [Jdg 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#020.md). But it is found in this
place in the Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic, and in eight of Kennicott's
and De Rossi's MSS. The reading appears to be genuine.

[Judges 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 7:20</span></span>

Blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers - How astonishing must the
effect be, in a dark night, of the sudden glare of three hundred
torches, darting their splendor, in the same instant, on the
half-awakened eyes of the terrified Midianites, accompanied with the
clangour of three hundred trumpets, alternately mingled with the
thundering shout of חרב ליהוה ולגדעון chereb layhovah ulegidon, "A sword
for the Lord and for Gideon!" Origen, in his ninth homily on this book,
makes these three hundred men types of the preachers of the Gospel;
their trumpets of the preaching of Christ crucified; and their lights or
torches, of the holy conduct of righteous men. In some verses of an
ancient author, attributed to Tertullian, and written against the
heretic Marcion, Gideon's three hundred men are represented as horsemen;
and in this number he finds the mystery of the cross; because the Greek
letter Τ, tau, which is the numeral for 300, is itself the sign of the
cross. The verses, which may be found in vol. v. of the Pisaurian
Collection of the Latin heathen and Christian poets, Advers, Marcion.,
lib. 3, ver. 18, as being very curious, and not often to be met with, I
shall here subjoin: -

Ex quibus ut Gideon dux agminis, acer in hostem,

Non virtute sua tutelam acquirere genti

Firmatusque fide signum petit excita menti,

Quo vel non posset, vel posset vincere bellum,

Vellus ut in noctem positum de rore maderet,

Et tellus omnis circum siccata jaceret,

Hoc inimicorum palmam coalescere mundo;

Atque iterum solo remanenti vellere sicco,

Hoc eadem tellus roraret nocte liquore,

Hoc etenim signo praedonum stravit acervos.

Congressus populo Christi, sine milite multo:

Tercenteno equite (numerus Tau littera Graeca)

Armatis facibusque et cornibus ore canentum.

Vellus erat populus ovium de semine sancto.

Nam tellus variae gentes fusaeque per orbem,

Verbum quod nutrit, sed nox est mortis imago.

Tau signum crucis et cornu praeconia vitae,

Lucentesque faces in lychno spiritus ardens.

"Gideon, keen in arms, was captain of the host,

And acquired redemption for his people, but not by his own power.

Being strengthened in faith, his heart was influenced to ask a sign

By which he might know whether or not he should be successful in battle.

A fleece was so placed by night, that it might be wet with dew;

And all the surrounding earth remain dry.

By this he was to learn that he should gain the victory over his
enemies.

The sign was reversed; the fleece remaining dry while all the ground was
moist;

And by this sign he was to know that he should slaughter those troops of
robbers.

The people of Christ conquer without any military force;

Three hundred horsemen, (for the Greek letter T, tau, is the emblem of
the number),

Armed with torches, and blowing with trumpets.

The fleece of the sheep are the people sprung from the Messiah,

And the earth are the various nations dispersed over the world.

It is the word which nourishes; but might is the image of death.

Tau is the sign of the cross; and the trumpets, the emblems of the
heralds of life;

And the burning torches in the pitchers, the emblems of the Holy
Spirit."

We see here what abstruse meanings a strong imagination, assisted by a
little piety, may extract from what was never intended to be understood
as a mystery.

[Judges 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 7:21</span></span>

They stood every man in his place - Each of the three companies kept its
station, and continued to sound their trumpets. The Midianites seeing
this, and believing that they were the trumpets of a numerous army which
had then penetrated their camp, were thrown instantly into confusion;
and supposing that their enemies were in the midst of them, they turned
their swords against every man they met, while at the same time they
endeavored to escape for their lives. No stratagem was ever better
imagined, better executed, or more completely successful.

[Judges 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 7:22</span></span>

Fled to Beth-shittah - This is no where else mentioned in Scripture.

Zererath - This and Tabbath are nowhere else to be found.

Abel-meholah - This was the birth-place of the prophet Elisha, [Kg1
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016.md). It was beyond Jordan, in the
tribe of Manasseh, [Kg1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#012.md). The
Zartanah, mentioned in this last quoted verse, was probably the same as
Zererath. Its situation corresponds well with Abel-meholah.

[Judges 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 7:23</span></span>

The men of Israel gathered - It is very likely that these were some
persons whom Gideon had sent home the day before, who now hearing that
the Midianites were routed, went immediately in pursuit.

[Judges 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 7:24</span></span>

Take before them the waters unto Beth-barah - This is probably the same
place as that mentioned [Joh 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028.md),
where the Hebrews forded Jordan under the direction of Joshua. To this
place the Midianites directed their flight that they might escape into
their own country; and here, being met by the Ephraimites, they appear
to have been totally overthrown, and their two generals taken.

[Judges 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 7:25</span></span>

They slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb - These two generals had taken
shelter, one in the cavern of the rock, the other in the vat of a
winepress; both of which places were from this circumstance, afterwards
called by their names.

Brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon - Oreb signifies a raven
and Zeeb a wolf. In all ancient nations we find generals and princes
taking their names from both birds and beasts; the Romans had their
Gracchi, jackdaws; Corvini, crows; Aquilini, eagles, etc. We have the
same in our Crows, Wolfs, Lyons, Hawkes, Bulls, Kidds, etc. Among
barbarous nations the head of the conquered chief was often brought to
the conqueror. Pompey's head was brought to Caesar; Cicero's head, to
Mark Antony; the heads of Ahab's children, to Jehu, etc. These
barbarities are not often practiced now, except among the Mohammedans or
the savages of Africa and America; and for the credit of human nature it
is a pity that such barbarous atrocities had ever been committed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 8](jdg008.md)

</div>
