<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg004)  [Next](jdg006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 5:0</span></span>

The triumphant song of Deborah and Barak, after the defeat of Sisera,
captain of the armies of Jabin, king of Canaan.

[Judges 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 5:1</span></span>

Then sang Deborah, and Barak - There are many difficulties in this very
sublime song; and learned men have toiled much to remove them. That
there are several gross mistakes in our version will be instantly
acknowledged by all who can critically examine the original. Dr.
Kennicott has distributed it into parts, assigned to Deborah and Barak
alternately. But his division is by far too artificial. Dr. Hales has
also given a version of it which, perhaps, comes nearer to the
simplicity of the original; but it also leaves several difficulties
behind. As these are the two best versions I have met with, I shall lay
them both in parallel columns before the reader, after introducing the
general description of this song, given by each of these learned men.
These the reader will find at the conclusion of the chapter.

[Judges 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 5:2</span></span>

For the avenging of Israel - See the notes, etc., at the end of the
chapter, [Jdg 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028) (note).

[Judges 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 5:4</span></span>

When thou wentest out of Seir - Here is an allusion to the giving of the
law, and the manifestation of God's power and glory at that time; and as
this was the most signal display of his majesty and mercy in behalf of
their forefathers, Deborah very properly begins her song with a
commemoration of this transaction.

[Judges 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 5:6</span></span>

The highways were unoccupied - The land was full of anarchy and
confusion, being everywhere infested with banditti. No public road was
safe; and in going from place to place, the people were obliged to use
unfrequented paths.

[Judges 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 5:7</span></span>

The villages ceased - The people were obliged to live together in
fortified places; or in great numbers, to protect each other against the
incursions of bands of spoilers.

[Judges 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 5:8</span></span>

They chose new gods - This was the cause of all their calamities; they
forsook Jehovah, and served other gods; and then was war in their gates
- they were hemmed up in every place, and besieged in all their
fortified cities; and they were defenseless, they had no means of
resisting their adversaries; for even among forty thousand men, there
was neither spear nor shield to be seen. The Vulgate gives a strange and
curious turn to this verse: Nova bella elegit Dominus, et portas hostium
ipse subvertit; "The Lord chose a new species of war, and himself
subverted the gates of the enemy." Now, what was this new species of
war? A woman signifies her orders to Barak; he takes 10,000 men, wholly
unarmed, and retires to Mount Tabor, where they are immediately besieged
by a powerful and well-appointed army. On a sudden Barak and his men
rush upon them, terror and dismay are spread through the whole
Cannanitish army, and the rout is instantaneous and complete. The
Israelites immediately arm themselves with the arms of their enemies,
and slay all before them; they run, and are pursued in all directions.
Sisera, their general, is no longer safe in his chariot; either his
horses fail, or the unevenness of the road obliges him to desert it, and
fly away on foot; in the end, the whole army is destroyed, and the
leader ingloriously slain. This was a new species of war, and was most
evidently the Lord's doings. Whatever may be said of the version of the
Vulgate, (and the Syriac and Arabic are something like it), the above
are all facts, and show the wondrous working of the Lord.

[Judges 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 5:10</span></span>

Ye that ride on white asses - Perhaps אתנות צחרות athonoth tsechoroth
should be rendered sleek or well-fed asses; rendered asinos nitentes,
shining asses, by the Vulgate.

Ye that sit in judgment - ישבי על מדין yoshebey al middin; some have
rendered this, ye who dwell in Middin. This was a place in the tribe of
Judah, and is mentioned [Jos 15:61](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061).

And walk by the way - Persons who go from place to place for the
purposes of traffic.

[Judges 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 5:11</span></span>

In the places of drawing water - As wells were very scarce in every part
of the East, and travelers in such hot countries must have water,
robbers and banditti generally took their stations near tanks, pools,
and springs, in order that they might suddenly fall upon those who came
to drink; and when the country was badly governed, annoyances of this
kind were very frequent. The victory gained now by the Israelites put
the whole country under their own government, and the land was cleansed
from such marauders. Dr. Shaw, in his account of the sea-coast of the
Mauritania Caesariensis, page 20, mentions a beautiful rill of water
that runs into a basin of Roman workmanship, called shrub we krub,
"drink and be off," because of the danger of meeting with assassins in
the place. Instead of such danger and insecurity, Deborah intimates that
they may sit down at the place of drawing water, and there rehearse the
righteous acts of the Lord; the land being now everywhere in peace,
order and good government being restored.

Go down to the gates - They may go down to the gates to receive judgment
and justice as usual. It is well known that the gate was the place of
judgment in the East.

[Judges 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 5:12</span></span>

Lead thy captivity captive - Make those captives who have formerly
captivated us.

[Judges 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 5:13</span></span>

Make him that remaineth - This appears to be spoken of Barak, who is
represented as being only a remnant of the people.

[Judges 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 5:14</span></span>

Out of Ephraim - a root of them - Deborah probably means that out of
Ephraim and Benjamin came eminent warriors. Joshua, who was of the tribe
of Ephraim, routed the Amalekites a short time after the Israelites came
out of Egypt, [Exo 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#010). Ehud, who
was of the tribe of Benjamin, slew Eglon, and defeated the Moabites, the
friends and allies of the Ammonites and Amalekites. Machir, in the land
of Gilead, produced eminent warriors; and Zebulun produced eminent
statesmen, and men of literature. Probably Deborah speaks here of the
past wars, and not of any thing that was done on this occasion; for we
know that no persons from Gilead were present in the war between Jabin
and Israel. See [Jdg 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017). Gilead
abode beyond Jordan.

[Judges 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 5:15</span></span>

The princes of Issachar - They were at hand and came willingly forth, at
the call of Deborah, to this important war. Barak - was sent on foot - I
have no doubt that ברגלין, without regarding the points, should be
translated with his footmen or infantry. Thus the Alexandrian Septuagint
understood it, rendering the clause thus: Οὑτω Βαρακ εξαπεστειλεν πεζους
αυτου εις την κοιλαδα, "Barak also sent forth his footmen into the
valley." Luther has perfectly hit the meaning, Barak mit seinen
fussvoleke, "Barak with his footmen."

For the divisions of Reuben - Either the Reubenites were divided among
themselves into factions, which prevented their co-operation with their
brethren, or they were divided in their judgment concerning the measures
now to be pursued, which prevented them from joining with the other
tribes till the business was entirely settled. The thoughts of heart,
and searchings of heart, might refer to the doubts and uneasiness felt
by the other tribes, when they found the Reubenites did not join them;
for they might have conjectured that they were either unconcerned about
their liberty, or were meditating a coalition with the Canaanites.

[Judges 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 5:17</span></span>

Gilead abode beyond Jordan - That is, the Gadites, who had their lot in
those parts, and could not well come to the aid of their brethren at a
short summons. But the words of Deborah imply a criminal neglect on the
part of the Danites; they were intent upon their traffic, and trusted in
their ships. Joppa was one of their sea-ports.

Asher continued on the seashore - The lot of Asher extended along the
Mediterranean Sea; and being contiguous to Zebulun and Naphtali, they
might have easily succoured their brethren; but they had the pretense
that their posts were unguarded, and they abode in their breaches, in
order to defend them.

[Judges 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 5:18</span></span>

Zebulun and Naphtali - jeoparded their lives - The original is very
emphatic, חרף נפשו למות chereph naphsho lamuth, they desolated their
lives to death - they were determined to conquer or die, and therefore
plunged into the thickest of the battle. The word jeoparded is a silly
French term, and comes from the exclamation of a disappointed gamester:
Jeu perdu! The game is lost; or J'ai perdue! I have lost.

[Judges 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 5:19</span></span>

The kings came and fought - It is conjectured that Jabin and his
confederates had invaded Manasseh, as both Taanach and Megiddo were in
that tribe: and that they were discomfited by the tribes of Zebulun and
Naphtali at Taanach and Megiddo; while Barak defeated Sisera at Mount
Tabor.

They took no gain of money - They expected much booty in the total rout
of the Israelites; but they were defeated, and got no prey; or, if
applied to the Israelites, They fought for liberty, not for plunder.

[Judges 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 5:20</span></span>

They fought from heaven - The angels of God came to the assistance of
Israel: and the stars in their orbits fought against Sisera; probably
some thunder storm, or great inundation from the river Kishon, took
place at that time, which in poetic language was attributed to the
stars. So our poet sung relative to the storms which dispersed the
Spanish armada in 1588: -

"Both winds and waves at once conspire

To aid old England - frustrate Spain's desire."

Perhaps it means no more than this: the time which was measured and
ruled by the heavenly bodies seemed only to exist for the destruction of
the Canaanites. There may be also a reference to the sun and moon
standing still in the days of Joshua.

[Judges 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 5:21</span></span>

The river of Kishon swept them away - This gives plausibility to the
above conjecture, that there was a storm at this time which produced an
inundation in the river Kishon, which the routed Canaanites attempting
to ford were swept away.

[Judges 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 5:22</span></span>

Then were the horsehoofs broken - In very ancient times horses were not
shod; nor are they to the present day in several parts of the East.
Sisera had iron chariots when his hosts were routed; the horses that
drew these, being strongly urged on by those who drove them, had their
hoofs broken by the roughness of the roads; in consequence of which they
became lame, and could not carry off their riders. This is marked as one
cause of their disaster.

[Judges 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 5:23</span></span>

Curse ye Meroz - Where Meroz was is not known; some suppose it was the
same as Merom, nigh to Dotham. The Syriac and Arabic have Merod; but
where this was is equally uncertain. It was certainly some city or
district, the inhabitants of which would not assist in this war.

Curse ye bitterly - ארו ארור oru aror, curse with cursing - use the most
awful execrations.

Said the angel of the Lord - That is, Barak, who was Jehovah's angel or
messenger in this war; the person sent by God to deliver his people.

To the help of the Lord - That is, to the help of the people of the
Lord.

Against the mighty - בגבורים baggibborim, "with the heroes;" that is,
Barak and his men, together with Zebulun and Naphtali: these were the
mighty men, or heroes, with whom the inhabitants of Meroz would not
join.

[Judges 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 5:24</span></span>

Blessed above women shall Jael - be - She shall be highly celebrated as
a most heroic woman; all the Israelitish women shall glory in her. I do
not understand these words as expressive of the Divine approbation
towards Jael. See the observations at the end of [Jdg
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#024) (note). The word bless, both in
Hebrew and Greek, often signifies to praise, to speak well of, to
celebrate. This is most probably its sense here.

[Judges 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 5:25</span></span>

She brought forth butter - As the word חמאה chemah, here translated
butter, signifies disturbed, agitated, etc., it is probable that
buttermilk is intended. The Arabs form their buttermilk by agitating the
milk in a leathery bag, and the buttermilk is highly esteemed because of
its refreshing and cooling quality; but there is no reason why we may
not suppose that Jael gave him cream: Sisera was not only thirsty, but
was also exhausted with fatigue; and nothing could be better calculated
to quench his thirst, and restore his exhausted strength, than a bowl of
cream. I am surprised that Mr. Harmer should see any difficulty in this.
It is evident that Deborah wishes to convey the idea that Jael was more
liberal and kind than Sisera had requested. He asked for water, and she
brought him cream; and she brought it to him, not in an ordinary
pitcher, but in the most superb dish or bowl which she possessed. See at
the end of [Jdg 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#024) (note).

[Judges 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 5:26</span></span>

She smote off his head - The original does not warrant this translation;
nor is it supported by fact. She smote his head, and transfixed him
through the temples. It was his head that received the death wound, and
the place where this wound was inflicted was the temples. The manner in
which Jael despatched Sisera seems to have been this:

1\. Observing him to be in a profound sleep she took a workman's hammer,
probably a joiner's mallet, and with one blow on the head deprived him
of all sense.

2\. She then took a tent nail and drove it through his temples, and thus
pinned him to the earth; which she could not have done had she not
previously stunned him with the blow on the head. Thus she first smote
his head, and secondly pierced his temples.

[Judges 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 5:27</span></span>

At her feet he bowed - בין רגליה bein ragleyha, "between her feet."
After having stunned him she probably sat down, for the greater
convenience of driving the nail through his temples.

He bowed - he fell - He probably made some struggles after he received
the blow on the head, but could not recover his feet. Aeschylus
represents Agamemnon rising, staggering, and finally falling, under the
blows of Clytemnestra. - Agam. v. 1384.

[Judges 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 5:28</span></span>

Cried through the lattice - This is very natural: in the women's
apartments in the East the windows are latticed, to prevent them from
sending or receiving letters, etc. The latticing is the effect of the
jealousy which universally prevails in those countries.

Why is his chariot so long in coming? - Literally, Why is his chariot
ashamed to come? Dr. Lowth has very justly observed, that this is a
striking image of maternal solicitude, and of a mind divided between
hope and fear.

"The mother of Sisera looked out at a window;

She cried through the lattice,

'Why is his chariot so long in coming?

Why tarry the wheels of his chariot?'

"Immediately, impatient of delay, she prevents the comfort of her
companions; elate in mind, and bursting forth into female levity and
jactation, impotent to hope for any thing, and drunk with her good
fortune,

"Her wise ladies earnestly answered her;

Yea, she immediately returned answer to herself;

'Have they not sped? have they not divided the spoil?'

"We see how consonant to the person speaking is every idea, every word.
She dwells not upon the slaughter of the enemies, the number of the
captives, the valor and great exploits of the victor, but, burning with
the female love of spoils, on those things rather which captivate the
light mind of the vainest woman; damsels, gold, garments. Nor does she
dwell upon them only; but she repeats, she accumulates, she augments
every thing. She seems, as it were, to handle the spoils. dwelling as
she does on every particular.

'Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey?

A damsel, yea, two damsels to every man:

To Sisera, a prey of divers colors;

A prey of divers colors of needlework,

Finely coloured of needlework on both sides,

A spoil for adorning the neck.'

To enhance the beauty of this passage, there is, in the poetic
conformation of the sentences, an admirable neatness in the diction,
great force, splendor, accuracy; in the very redundance of the
repetitions the utmost brevity; and, lastly, the most striking
disappointment of the woman's hope, tacitly insinuated by that sudden
and unexpected apostrophe,

'So let all thine enemies perish, O Jehovah!'

is expressed more fully and strongly by this silence than could have
been painted by any colouring of words." See Dr. Lowth, 13th Prelection,
[Pro 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018), [Pro
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019).

"We cannot do better," says Dr. Dodd, "than conclude this chapter with
the words of Pelicanus: 'Let a Homer, or a Virgil, go and compare his
poetry, if he be able, with the song of this woman; and, if there be
anyone who excels in eloquence and learning, let him celebrate the
praises and learning of this panegyric, more copiously than I am able.'"

For other matters relative to this song I must refer to the two
translations which immediately follow; and their authors' notes on them.

Dr. Kennicott says, "This celebrated song of triumph is most deservedly
admired; though some parts of it are at present very obscure, and others
unintelligible in our English version. Besides particular difficulties,
there is a general one that pervades the whole; arising as I humbly
apprehend, from its being considered as entirely the song of Deborah. It
is certain, though very little attended to, that it is said to have been
sung by Deborah and By Barak. It is also certain there are in it parts
which Deborah could not sing, as well as parts which Barak could not
sing; and therefore it seems necessary, in order to form a better
judgment of this song, that some probable distribution should be made of
it; whilst those words which seem most likely to have been sung by
either party should be assigned to their proper name; either to that of
Deborah the prophetess, or to that of Barak the captain.

"For example: Deborah could not call upon Deborah, exhorting herself to
awake, etc., as in [Jdg 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012); neither
could Barak exhort himself to arise, etc., in the same verse. Again,
Barak could not sing, Till I, Deborah, arose a mother in Israel, [Jdg
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007); nor could Deborah sing about a
damsel or two for every soldier, [Jdg
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030); though, indeed, as to this last
article, the words are probably misunderstood. There are other parts
also which seem to require a different rendering. [Jdg
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002), For the avenging of Israel, where
the address is probably to those who took the lead in Israel on this
great occasion, for the address in the next words is to those among the
people who were volunteers; as again, [Jdg
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#009). [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011), [Jdg
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013), have many great difficulties.
It seems impossible that ([Jdg 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023))
any person should be cursed for not coming to the help of Jehovah; to
the help of Jehovah against the mighty. Nor does it seem more probable
that Jael should, in a sacred song, be styled blessed above women for
the death of Sisera. [Jdg 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026)
mentions butter, of which nothing is said in the history in [Jdg
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#019); nor does the history say that
Jael smote off Sisera's head with a hammer, or indeed that she smote it
off at all, as here, [Jdg 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026).
Lastly, as to [Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030), there being
no authority for rendering the words a damsel or two damsels, and the
words in Hebrew being very much like two other words in this same verse,
which make excellent sense here, it seems highly probable that they were
originally the same. And at the end of this verse, which contains an
excellent compliment paid to the needlework of the daughters of Israel,
and which is here put with great art in the mouth of Sisera's Mother,
the true sense seems to be, the hopes She had of some very rich prize to
adorn Her Own Neck." - Kennicott's Remarks, p. 94.

Dr. Hales observes, "That the design of this beautiful ode, which
breathes the characteristic softness and luxuriance of female
composition, seems to be twofold, religious and political; first, to
thank God for the recent victory and deliverance of Israel from
Canaanitish bondage and oppression; and next, to celebrate the zeal and
alacrity with which some of the rulers volunteered their services
against the common enemy, and to censure the lukewarmness and apathy of
others who stayed at home, and thus betrayed the public cause; and, by
this contrast and exposure, to heal those fatal divisions among the
tribes, so injurious to the commonwealth. The first verse, as a title,
briefly recites the design or subject of the poem, which consists of
eight stanzas.

"The first opens with a devout thanksgiving, to which she calls the
attention of all, friends and foes.

"The second describes, in the sublime imagery of Moses, the magnificent
scenes at Mount Sinai, Seir, etc., in the deserts of Arabia, while they
were led by the Divine power and presence from Egypt to Canaan.

"The third states their offending afterwards by their apostasies in
serving new gods, as foretold by Moses, [Deu
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016), [Deu
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017), and their consequent oppression
by their enemies; the insecurity of travelling, and desertion of the
villages, during the twenty years that intervened from the death of
Shamgar till Jael's exploit, and till Deborah became judge. By this time
they were disarmed by the Philistines and Canaanites, and scarcely a
sword or a spear was to be seen in Israel. This policy was adopted by
the Philistines in Saul's time, [Sa1
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#019), and was probably introduced
before, when Shamgar, for want of other weapons, had recourse to an
ox-goad, which was only left with them for the purpose of agriculture,
[Sa1 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#021).

"The fourth contrasts their present happy state of security from the
incursions and depredations of their foes, especially at the watering
places, which were most exposed to attacks; owing to the Divine
protection which crowned the victory, the zeal and exertions of 'a
remnant of the people,' or a part of the tribes, against the enemy,
under her conduct; these were the midland tribes of Ephraim, Manasseh,
and Benjamin, including, perhaps, Judah and Simeon, which bordered on
Amalek southward, and Issachar, Zebulun, and Naphtali, northward.

"The fifth censures the recreant tribes Reuben and Gad, beyond Jordan
eastward; and Dan and Asher, on the Mediterranean Sea westward, who
deserted the common cause in consequence of their divisions, and their
paltry attachment to their own concerns.

"The sixth records the miraculous defeat of the confederate kings of
Canaan, who were swept away by the torrents issuing from the different
springs of the river Kishon, swollen by uncommon rains. Meroz was
probably a place in the neighborhood.

"The seventh contains a panegyric on Jael, who is here 'blessed above
women,' for attempting an exploit above her sex to perform; and a
picturesque description of her giving Sisera buttermilk to drink, which
is considered as a great treat at present among the Arabs. Then follows
a minute and circumstantial description of her mode of slaying him.

"The eighth affords an admirable representation of the impatience of the
mother of Sisera at his delay in returning; her sanguine anticipation of
his success; in which she dwells, not upon the greatness of his
exploits, or the slaughter of his enemies, but upon the circumstances
most likely to engage a light female mind, such as captive damsels, and
embroidered garments, or the spoils of victory, which she repeats and
exemplifies with much grace and elegance.

"The unexpected and abrupt apostrophe which concludes the poem, So
perish all thine enemies, O Lord! tacitly insinuates the utter
disappointment of their vain hopes of conquest and spoil more fully and
forcibly than any express declaration in words; while it marks the
author's piety, and sole reliance upon the Divine protection of His
people, and the glorious prospect of a future and greater deliverance,
perhaps, by the Sun of righteousness." - New Anal. Chron. p. 324.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 6](jdg006)

</div>
