<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg001)  [Next](jdg003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001.md)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 2:0</span></span>

An angel comes to the Israelites at Bochim, and gives them various
reproofs, at which they are greatly affected, [Jdg
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001.md). They served the Lord during the
days of Joshua, and the elders who succeeded him, [Jdg
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006.md), [Jdg
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007.md). Joshua having died, and all that
generation, the people revolted from the true God and served idols, [Jdg
2:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#008.md). The Lord, being angry,
delivered them into the hands of spoilers, and they were greatly
distressed, [Jdg 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014.md), [Jdg
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#015.md). A general account of the method
which God used to reclaim them, by sending them judges whom they
frequently disobeyed, [Jdg 2:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016.md).
Therefore God left the various nations of the land to plague and punish
them, [Jdg 2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020.md).

[Judges 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 2:1</span></span>

An angel of the Lord - In the preceding chapter we have a summary of
several things which took place shortly after the death of Joshua;
especially during the time in which the elders lived (that is, the men
who were contemporary with Joshua, but survived him), and while the
people continued faithful to the Lord. In this chapter, and some parts
of the following, we have an account of the same people abandoned by
their God and reduced to the heaviest calamities, because they had
broken their covenant with their Maker. This chapter, and the first
eight verses of the next, may be considered as an epitome of the whole
book, in which we see, on one hand, the crimes of the Israelites; and on
the other, the punishments inflicted on them by the Lord; their
repentance, and return to their allegiance; and the long-suffering and
mercy of God, shown in pardoning their backslidings, and delivering them
out of the hands of their enemies. The angel of the Lord, mentioned
here, is variously interpreted; some think it was Phinehas, the high
priest, which is possible; others, that it was a prophet, sent to the
place where they were now assembled, with an extraordinary commission
from God, to reprove them for their sins, and to show them the reason
why God had not rooted out their enemies from the land; this is the
opinion of the Chaldee paraphrast, consequently of the ancient Jews;
others think that an angel, properly such, is intended; and several are
of opinion that it was the Angel of the Covenant, the Captain of the
Lord's host, which had appeared unto Joshua, [Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014.md), and no less than the Lord Jesus
Christ himself. I think it more probable that some extraordinary human
messenger is meant, as such messengers, and indeed prophets, apostles,
etc., are frequently termed angels, that is, messengers of the Lord. The
person here mentioned appears to have been a resident at Gilgal, and to
have come to Bochim on this express errand.

I will never break my covenant - Nor did God ever break it. A covenant
is never broken but by him who violates the conditions of it: when any
of the contracting parties violates any of the conditions, the covenant
is then broken, and by that party alone; and the conditions on the other
side are null and void.

[Judges 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 2:3</span></span>

I will not drive them out from before you - Their transgressions, and
breach of the covenant, were the reasons why they were not put in entire
possession of the promised land. See note at the end of this chapter,
[Jdg 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#023) (note.md).

[Judges 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 2:5</span></span>

They called the name of that place Bochim - The word בכים bochim
signifies weepings or lamentations; and is translated by the Septuagint
Κλαυθυων or Κλαυθυωνες, bewailings; and it is supposed that the place
derived its name from these lamentations of the people. Some think the
place itself, where the people were now assembled, was Shiloh, now named
Bochim because of the above circumstance. It should be observed, that
the angel speaks here in the person of God, by whom he was sent; as the
prophets frequently do.

[Judges 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 2:6</span></span>

When Joshua had let the people go - The author of this book is giving
here a history of the people, from the division of the land by Joshua to
the time in which the angel speaks. Joshua divided the land to them by
lot; recommended obedience to God, which they solemnly promised: and
they continued faithful during his life, and during the lives of those
who had been his contemporaries, but who had survived him. When all that
generation who had seen the wondrous works of God in their behalf had
died, then the succeeding generation, who knew not the Lord - who had
not seen his wondrous works - forsook his worship, and worshipped Baalim
and Ashtaroth, the gods of the nations among whom they lived, and thus
the Lord was provoked to anger; and this was the reason why they were
delivered into the hands of their enemies. This is the sum of their
history to the time in which the angel delivers his message.

[Judges 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 2:8</span></span>

Joshua - died - See the notes on [Jos
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#029.md), [Jos
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030.md).

[Judges 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 2:11</span></span>

Served Baalim - The word בעלים baalim signifies lords. Their false gods
they considered supernatural rulers or governors, each having his
peculiar district and office; but when they wished to express a
particular בעל baal, they generally added some particular epithet, as
Baal-zephon, Baal-peor, Baal-zehub, Baal-shamayim, etc., as Calmet has
well observed. The two former were adored by the Moabites; Baal-zebub by
the Ekronites. Baal-berith was honored at Shechem; and Baal-shamayim,
the lord or ruler of the heavens, was adored among the Phoenicians,
Syrians, Chaldeans, etc. And whenever the word baal is used without an
epithet, this is the god that is intended; and probably, among all these
people, it meant the sun.

[Judges 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 2:12</span></span>

Which brought them out of the land of Egypt - This was one of the
highest aggravations of their offense; they forsook the God who brought
them out of Egypt; a place in which they endured the most grievous
oppression and were subjected to the most degrading servitude, from
which they never could have rescued themselves; and they were delivered
by such a signal display of the power, justice, and mercy of God, as
should never have been forgotten, because the most stupendous that had
ever been exhibited. They forsook Him, and served idols as destitute of
real being as of influence and power.

[Judges 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 2:13</span></span>

Served Baal and Ashtaroth - In a general way, probably, Baal and
Ashtaroth mean the sun and moon; but in many cases Ashtaroth seems to
have been the same among the Canaanites as Venus was among the Greeks
and Romans, and to have been worshipped with the same obscene rites.

[Judges 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 2:14</span></span>

The hands of spoilers - Probably marauding parties of the Canaanites,
making frequent incursions in their lands, carrying away cattle,
spoiling their crops, etc.

[Judges 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 2:15</span></span>

The hand of the Lord was against them - The power which before protected
them when obedient, was now turned against them because of their
disobedience. They not only had not God with them, but they had God
against them.

[Judges 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 2:16</span></span>

The Lord raised up judges - That is, leaders, generals, and governors,
raised up by an especial appointment of the Lord, to deliver them from,
and avenge them on, their adversaries. See the preface.

[Judges 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 2:17</span></span>

Went a whoring after other gods - Idolatry, or the worship of strange
gods, is frequently termed adultery, fornication, and whoredom, in the
sacred writings. As many of their idolatrous practices were accompanied
with impure rites, the term was not only metaphorically but literally
proper.

[Judges 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 2:18</span></span>

The Lord was with the judge - God himself was king, and the judge was
his representative.

It repented the Lord - He changed his purpose towards them: he purposed
to destroy them because of their sin; they repented and turned to him,
and he changed this purpose. The purpose was to destroy them if they did
not repent; when they did repent, his not destroying them was quite
consistent with his purpose.

[Judges 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 2:19</span></span>

When the judge was dead - It appears that in general the office of the
judge was for life.

Their stubborn way - Their hard or difficult way. Most sinners go
through great tribulation, in order to get to eternal perdition; they
would have had less pain in their way to heaven.

[Judges 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 2:20</span></span>

The anger of the Lord was hot - They were as fuel by their
transgressions; and the displeasure of the Lord was as a fire about to
kindle and consume that fuel.

[Judges 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 2:21</span></span>

I will not henceforth drive out - As a people, they never had personal
courage, discipline, or hardihood, sufficient to stand before their
enemies: the advantages they gained were by the peculiar interference of
God. This they had while obedient; when they ceased to obey, his strong
arm was no longer stretched out in their behalf; therefore their enemies
continued to possess the land which God purposed to give them as their
inheritance for ever.

[Judges 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 2:22</span></span>

That through them I may prove Israel - There appeared to be no other way
to induce this people to acknowledge the true God, but by permitting
them to fall into straits from which they could not be delivered but by
his especial providence. These words are spoken after the manner of men;
and the metaphor is taken from the case of a master or father, who
distrusts the fidelity or obedience of his servant or son, and places
him in such circumstances that, by his good or evil conduct, he may
justify his suspicions, or give him proofs of his fidelity.

[Judges 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 2:23</span></span>

Without driving them out hastily - Had God expelled all the ancient
inhabitants at once, we plainly see, from the subsequent conduct of the
people, that they would soon have abandoned his worship, and in their
prosperity forgotten their deliverer. He drove out at first as many as
were necessary in order to afford the people, as they were then, a
sufficiency of room to settle in; as the tribes increased in population,
they were to extend themselves to the uttermost of their assigned
borders, and expel all the remaining inhabitants. On these accounts God
did not expel the aboriginal inhabitants hastily or at once; and thus
gave the Israelites time to increase; and by continuing the ancient
inhabitants, prevented the land from running into waste, and the wild
beasts from multiplying; both of which must have infallibly taken place
had God driven out all the old inhabitants at once, before the
Israelites were sufficiently numerous to occupy the whole of the land.

These observations are important, as they contain the reason why God did
not expel the Canaanites. God gave the Israelites a grant of the whole
land, and promised to drive out their enemies from before them if they
continued faithful. While they continued faithful, God did continue to
fulfill his promise; their borders were enlarged, and their enemies fled
before them. When they rebelled against the Lord, he abandoned them, and
their enemies prevailed against them. Of this, their frequent lapses and
miscarriages, with God's repeated interpositions in their behalf, are
ample evidence. One or two solitary instances might not be considered as
sufficient proof; but by these numerous instances the fact is
established. Each rebellion against God produced a consequent disaster
in their affairs; each true humiliation was invariably followed by an
especial Divine interposition in their behalf. These afforded continual
proof of God's being, providence, and grace. The whole economy is
wondrous; and its effects, impressive and convincing. The people were
not hastily put in possession of the promised land, because of their
infidelity. Can the infidels controvert this statement? If not then
their argument against Divine revelation, from "the failure of positive
promises and oaths," falls to the ground. They have not only in this,
but in all other respects, lost all their props.

"Helpless and prostrate all their system lies

Cursing its fate, and, as it curses, dies."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 3](jdg003.md)

</div>
