<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg010)  [Next](jdg012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 11:0</span></span>

The history of Jephthah, and his covenant with the Gileadites, [Jdg
11:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001). He is elected by the people,
[Jdg 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#011). Sends an embassy to the
king of the Ammonites, to inquire why they invaded Israel; and receives
an answer, to which he sends back a spirited reply, vv. 12-27. This is
disregarded by the Ammonites, and Jephthah prepares for battle, [Jdg
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#028), [Jdg
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029). His vow, [Jdg
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#030), [Jdg
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#031). He attacks and defeats them,
[Jdg 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#032), [Jdg
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#033). On his return to Mizpeh he is
met by his daughter, whom, according to his vow, he dedicates to the
Lord, [Jdg 11:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034).

[Judges 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 11:1</span></span>

Now Jephthah - was the son of a harlot - I think the word זונה zonah,
which we here render harlot, should be translated, as is contended for
on [Jos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001) (note), viz. a hostess,
keeper of an inn or tavern for the accommodation of travelers; and thus
it is understood by the Targum of Jonathan on this place: והוא בר אתתא
פונדקיתא vehu bar ittetha pundekitha, "and he was the son of a woman, a
tavern keeper." She was very probably a Canaanite, as she is called,
[Jdg 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#002), a strange woman, אשה אחרת
ishshah achereth, a woman of another race; and on this account his
brethren drove him from the family, as he could not have a full right to
the inheritance, his mother not being an Israelite.

[Judges 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 11:3</span></span>

There were gathered vain men to Jephthah - אנשים ריקים anashim reykim,
empty men - persons destitute of good sense, and profligate in their
manners. The word may, however, mean in this place poor persons, without
property, and without employment. The versions in general consider them
as plunderers.

[Judges 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 11:4</span></span>

The children of Ammon made war - They had invaded the land of Israel,
and were now encamped in Gilead. See [Jdg
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017).

[Judges 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 11:6</span></span>

Come, and be our captain - The Israelites were assembled in Mizpeh, but
were without a captain to lead them against the Ammonites. And we find,
from the conclusion of the preceding chapter, that they offered the
command to any that would accept it.

[Judges 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 11:8</span></span>

Therefore we turn again to thee now - We are convinced that we have
dealt unjustly by thee, and we wish now to repair our fault, and give
thee this sincere proof of our regret for having acted unjustly, and of
our confidence in thee.

[Judges 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 11:11</span></span>

Jepthah went with the elders - The elders had chosen him for their head;
but, to be valid, this choice must be confirmed by the people;
therefore, it is said, the people made him head. But even this did not
complete the business; God must be brought in as a party to this
transaction; and therefore Jephthah uttered all his words before the
Lord - the terms made with the elders and the people on which he had
accepted the command of the army; and, being sure of the Divine
approbation, he entered on the work with confidence.

[Judges 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 11:12</span></span>

Jepthah sent messengers - He wished the Ammonites to explain their own
motives for undertaking a war against Israel; as then the justice of his
cause would appear more forcibly to the people.

[Judges 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 11:13</span></span>

From Arnon even unto Jabbok, and unto Jordan - That is, all the land
that had formerly belonged to the Amorites, and to the Moabites, who it
seems were confederates on this occasion.

[Judges 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 11:22</span></span>

From the wilderness even unto Jordan - From Arabia Deserta on the east
to Jordan on the west.

[Judges 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 11:23</span></span>

The Lord God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites - Jephthah shows
that the Israelites did not take the land of the Moabites or Ammonites,
but that of the Amorites, which they had conquered from Sihon their
king, who had, without cause or provocation, attacked them; and although
the Amorites had taken the lands in question from the Ammonites, yet the
title by which Israel held them was good, because they took them not
from the Ammonites, but conquered them from the Amorites. So now the
Lord - hath dispossessed the Amorites. - The circumstances in which the
Israelites were when they were attacked by the Amorites, plainly proved,
that, unless Jehovah had helped them, they must have been overcome. God
defeated the Amorites, and made a grant of their lands to the
Israelites; and they had, in consequence, possessed them for three
hundred years, [Jdg 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#026).

[Judges 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 11:24</span></span>

Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee - As if he
had said: "It is a maxim with you, as it is among all nations, that the
lands which they conceive to be given them by their gods, they have an
absolute right to, and should not relinquish them to any kind of
claimant. You suppose that the land which you possess was given you by
your god Chemosh and therefore you will not relinquish what you believe
you hold by a Divine right. Now, we know that Jehovah, our God, who is
the Lord of heaven and earth, has given the Israelites the land of the
Amorites; and therefore we will not give it up." The ground of
Jephthah's remonstrance was sound and good.

1\. The Ammonites had lost their lands in their contests with the
Amorites.

2\. The Israelites conquered these lands from the Amorites, who had
waged a most unprincipled war against them.

3\. God, who is the Maker of heaven and earth had given those very lands
as a Divine grant to the Israelites.

4\. In consequence of this they had possession of them for upwards of
three hundred years.

5\. These lands were never reclaimed by the Ammonites, though they had
repeated opportunities of doing it, whilst the Israelites dwelt in
Heshbon, in Aroer, and in the coasts of Arnon; but they did not reclaim
them because they knew that the Israelites held them legally. The
present pretensions of Ammon were unsupported and unjustifiable.

[Judges 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 11:27</span></span>

The Lord the Judge be judge - between the children of Israel - If you be
right, and we be wrong, then Jehovah, who is the sovereign and
incorruptible Judge, shall determine in your favor; and to Him I submit
the righteousness of my cause.

[Judges 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 11:29</span></span>

Then the Spirit of the Lord came upon Jephthah - The Lord qualified him
for the work he had called him to do, and thus gave him the most
convincing testimony that his cause was good.

[Judges 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 11:31</span></span>

Shall surely be the Lord's, and I will offer it up for a burnt-offering
- The text is והיה ליהוה והעליתיהו עולה vehayah layhovah, vehaalithihu
olah; the translation of which, according to the most accurate Hebrew
scholars, is this: I will consecrate it to the Lord, or I will offer it
for a burnt-offering; that is, "If it be a thing fit for a
burnt-offering, it shall be made one; if fit for the service of God, it
shall be consecrated to him." That conditions of this kind must have
been implied in the vow, is evident enough; to have been made without
them, it must have been the vow of a heathen, or a madman. If a dog had
met him, this could not have been made a burnt-offering; and if his
neighbor or friend's wife, son, or daughter, etc., had been returning
from a visit to his family, his vow gave him no right over them.
Besides, human sacrifices were ever an abomination to the Lord; and this
was one of the grand reasons why God drove out the Canaanites, etc.,
because they offered their sons and daughters to Molech in the fire,
i.e., made burnt-offerings of them, as is generally supposed. That
Jephthah was a deeply pious man, appears in the whole of his conduct;
and that he was well acquainted with the law of Moses, which prohibited
all such sacrifices, and stated what was to be offered in sacrifice, is
evident enough from his expostulation with the king and people of Ammon,
[Jdg 11:14-27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#014). Therefore it must be
granted that he never made that rash vow which several suppose he did;
nor was he capable, if he had, of executing it in that most shocking
manner which some Christian writers ("tell it not in Gath") have
contended for. He could not commit a crime which himself had just now
been an executor of God's justice to punish in others.

It has been supposed that "the text itself might have been read
differently in former times; if instead of the words והעליתיהו עולה, I
will offer It a burnt-offering, we read והעליתי הוא עולה, I will offer
Him (i.e., the Lord) a burnt-offering: this will make a widely different
sense, more consistent with everything that is sacred; and it is formed
by the addition of only a single letter, (א aleph), and the separation
of the pronoun from the verb. Now the letter א aleph is so like the
letter ע ain, which immediately follows it in the word עולה olah, that
the one might easily have been lost in the other, and thus the pronoun
be joined to the verb as at present, where it expresses the thing to be
sacrificed instead of the person to whom the sacrifice was to be made.
With this emendation the passage will read thus: Whatsoever cometh forth
of the doors of my house to meet me - shall be the Lord's; and I will
offer Him a burnt-offering." For this criticism there is no absolute
need, because the pronoun הו hu, in the above verse, may with as much
propriety be translated him as it. The latter part of the verse is,
literally, And I will offer him a burnt-offering, עולה olah, not לעולה
leolah, For a burnt-offering, which is the common Hebrew form when for
is intended to be expressed. This is strong presumption that the text
should be thus understood: and this avoids the very disputable
construction which is put on the ו vau, in והעליתיהו vehaalithihu, Or I
will offer It up, instead of And I will offer Him a burnt-offering.

"From [Jdg 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#039) it appears evident
that Jephthah's daughter was not Sacrificed to God, but consecrated to
him in a state of perpetual virginity; for the text says, She knew no
man, for this was a statute in Israel. ותהי חק בישראל vattehi chok
beyishrael; viz., that persons thus dedicated or consecrated to God,
should live in a state of unchangeable celibacy. Thus this celebrated
place is, without violence to any part of the text, or to any proper
rule of construction, cleared of all difficulty, and caused to speak a
language consistent with itself, and with the nature of God."

Those who assert that Jephthah did sacrifice his daughter, attempt to
justify the opinion from the barbarous usages of those times: but in
answer to this it may be justly observed, that Jephthah was now under
the influence of the Spirit of God, [Jdg
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029); and that Spirit could not
permit him to imbrue his hands in the blood of his own child; and
especially under the pretense of offering a pleasing sacrifice to that
God who is the Father of mankind, and the Fountain of love, mercy, and
compassion.

The versions give us but little assistance in clearing the difficulties
of the text. In the Targum of Jonathan there is a remarkable gloss which
should be mentioned, and from which it will appear that the Targumist
supposed that the daughter of Jephthah was actually sacrificed: "And he
fulfilled the vow which he had vowed upon her; and she knew no man: and
it was made a statute in Israel, that no man should offer his son or his
daughter for a burnt-offering, as did Jephthah the Gileadite, who did
not consult Phinehas the priest; for if he had consulted Phinehas the
priest, he would have redeemed her with money."

The Targumist refers here to the law, [Lev
27:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#001), where the Lord prescribes the
price at which either males or females, who had been vowed to the Lord,
might be redeemed. "When a man shall make a singular vow, the persons
shall be for the Lord at thy estimation: the male from twenty years old
even unto sixty, shall be fifty shekels of silver; and if it be a
female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels; and from five years
old unto twenty years, the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten."
This also is an argument that the daughter of Jephthah was not
sacrificed; as the father had it in his power, at a very moderate price,
to have redeemed her: and surely the blood of his daughter must have
been of more value in his sight than thirty shekels of silver.

Dr. Hales has entered largely into the subject: his observations may be
seen at the end of this chapter.

[Judges 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 11:33</span></span>

Twenty cities - That is, he either took or destroyed twenty cities of
the Ammonites, and completely routed their whole army.

[Judges 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 11:34</span></span>

With timbrels and with dances - From this instance we find it was an
ancient custom for women to go out to meet returning conquerors with
musical instruments, songs, and dances; and that it was continued
afterwards is evident from the instance given [Sa1
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006), where David was met, on his
return from the defeat of Goliath and the Philistines, by women from all
the cities of Israel, with singing and dancing, and various instruments
of music.

[Judges 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 11:35</span></span>

Thou hast brought me very low - He was greatly distressed to think that
his daughter, who was his only child, should be, in consequence of his
vow, prevented from continuing his family in Israel; for it is evident
that he had not any other child, for besides her, says the text, he had
neither son nor daughter, [Jdg 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034).
He might, therefore, well be grieved that thus his family was to become
extinct in Israel.

[Judges 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jdg 11:36</span></span>

And she said unto him - What a pattern of filial piety and obedience!
She was at once obedient, pious, and patriotic. A woman to have no
offspring was considered to be in a state of the utmost degradation
among the Hebrews; but she is regardless of all this, seeing her father
is in safety, and her country delivered.

[Judges 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jdg 11:37</span></span>

I and my fellows - Whether she meant the young women of her own
acquaintance, or those who had been consecrated to God in the same way,
though on different accounts, is not quite clear; but it is likely she
means her own companions: and her going up and down upon the mountains
may signify no more than her paying each of them a visit at their own
houses, previously to her being shut up at the tabernacle; and this
visiting of each at their own home might require the space of two
months. This I am inclined to think is the meaning of this difficult
clause.

[Judges 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jdg 11:39</span></span>

And she knew no man - She continued a virgin all the days of her life.

[Judges 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jdg 11:40</span></span>

To lament the daughter of Jephthah - I am satisfied that this is not a
correct translation of the original לתנות לבת יפתח lethannoth lebath
yiphtach. Houbigant translates the whole verse thus: Sed iste mos apud
Israel invaluit, ut virgines Israel, temporibus diversis, irent ad
filiam Jepthe-ut eam quotannis dies quatuor consolarentur; "But this
custom prevailed in Israel that the virgins of Israel went at different
times, four days in the year, to the daughter of Jephthah, that they
might comfort her." This verse also gives evidence that the daughter of
Jephthah was not sacrificed: nor does it appear that the custom or
statute referred to here lasted after the death of Jephthah's daughter.

The following is Dr. Hales' exposition of Jephthah's vow: - "When
Jephthah went forth to battle against the Ammonites, he vowed a vow unto
the Lord, and said, 'If thou wilt surely give the children of Ammon into
my hand, then it shall be that whatsoever cometh out of the doors of my
house to meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon,
shall either be the Lord's, or I will offer it up (for) a
burnt-offering,' [Jdg 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#030), [Jdg
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#031). According to this rendering of
the two conjunctions, ו vau in the last clause 'either,' 'or,'(which is
justified by the Hebrew idiom thus, 'He that curseth his father and his
mother,' [Exo 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017), is necessarily
rendered disjunctively, 'His father or his mother,' by the Septuagint,
Vulgate, Chaldee, and English, confirmed by [Mat
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004), the paucity of connecting
particles in that language making it necessary that this conjunction
should often be understood disjunctively), the vow consisted of two
parts:

1\. That what person soever met him should be the Lord's or be dedicated
to his service; and,

2\. That what beast soever met him, if clean, should be offered up for a
burnt-offering unto the Lord.

"This rendering and this interpretation is warranted by the Levitical
law about vows.

"The נדר neder, or vow, in general, included either persons, beasts, or
things dedicated to the Lord for pious uses; which, if it was a simple
vow, was redeemable at certain prices, if the person repented of his
vow, and wished to commute it for money, according to the age or sex of
the person, [Lev 27:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#001) : this was a
wise regulation to remedy rash vows. But if the vow was accompanied with
חרם cherem, devotement, it was irredeemable, as in the following case,
[Lev 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#028).

"Notwithstanding, no devotement which a man shall devote unto the Lord,
(either) of man, or beast, or of land of his own property, shall be sold
or redeemed. Every thing devoted is most holy to the Lord.

"Here the three ו vaus in the original should necessarily be rendered
disjunctively, or as the last actually is in our translation, because
there are three distinct subjects of devotement to be applied to
distinct uses, the man to be dedicated to the service of the Lord, as
Samuel by his mother Hannah, [Sa1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011); the cattle, if clean, such as
oxen, sheep, goats, turtle-doves, or pigeons, to be sacrificed; and if
unclean, as camels, horses, asses, to be employed for carrying burdens
in the service of the tabernacle or temple; and the lands, to be sacred
property.

"This law therefore expressly applied in its first branch to Jephthah's
case, who had devoted his daughter to the Lord, or opened his mouth to
the Lord, and therefore could not go back, as he declared in his grief
at seeing his daughter and only child coming to meet him with timbrels
and dances: she was, therefore necessarily devoted, but with her own
consent to perpetual virginity in the service of the tabernacle, [Jdg
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#036), [Jdg
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#037); and such service was customary,
for in the division of the spoils taken in the first Midianitish war, of
the whole number of captive virgins the Lord's tribute was thirty-two
persons, Numbers 31:15-40. This instance appears to be decisive of the
nature of her devotement.

"Her father's extreme grief on the occasion and her requisition of a
respite for two months to bewail her virginity, are both perfectly
natural. Having no other issue, he could only look forward to the
extinction of his name or family; and a state of celibacy, which is
reproachful among women everywhere, was peculiarly so among the
Israelites, and was therefore no ordinary sacrifice on her part; who,
though she generously gave up, could not but regret the loss of,
becoming 'a mother in Israel.' And he did with her according to his vow
which he had vowed, and she knew no man, or remained a virgin, all her
life, [Jdg 11:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034).

"There was also another case of devotement which was irredeemable, and
follows the former, [Lev 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#029). This
case differs materially from the former.

"1. It is confined to Persons devoted, omitting beasts and lands.

2\. It does not relate to private property, as in the foregoing. And,

3\. The subject of it was to be utterly destroyed, instead of being most
holy unto the Lord.

This law, therefore, related to aliens, or public enemies devoted to
destruction either by God, the people, or by the magistrate. Of all
these we have instances in Scripture.

"1. The Amalekites and Canaanites were devoted by God himself. Saul was,
therefore, guilty of a breach of the law for sparing Agag the king of
the Amalekites, as Samuel reproached him, [Sa1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033) : 'And Samuel hewed Agag in
pieces before the Lord;' not as a sacrifice, according to Voltaire, but
as a criminal, whose sword had made many women childless. By this law
the Midianitish women who had been spared in battle were slain, [Num
31:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014).

"2. In Mount Hor, when the Israelites were attacked by Arad, king of the
southern Canaanites, who took some of them prisoners, they vowed a vow
unto the Lord that they would utterly destroy the Canaanites and their
cities, if the Lord should deliver them into their hand, which the Lord
ratified; whence the place was called Hormah, because the vow was
accompanied by cherem, or devotement to destruction, [Num
21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001); and the vow was accomplished,
[Jdg 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#017).

"3. In the Philistine war Saul adjured the people, and cursed any one
who should taste food till the evening. His own son Jonathan
inadvertently ate a honey-comb, not knowing his father's oath, for which
Saul sentenced him to die. But the people interposed, and rescued him
for his public services; thus assuming the power of dispensing, in their
collective capacity, with an unreasonable oath. This latter case,
therefore, is utterly irrelative to Jephthah's vow, which did not regard
a foreign enemy or a domestic transgressor devoted to destruction, but
on the contrary was a vow of thanksgiving, and therefore properly came
under the former case.

And that Jephthah could not possibly have sacrificed his daughter,
(according to the vulgar opinion), may appear from the following
considerations: -

"1. The sacrifice of children to Molech was an abomination to the Lord,
of which in numberless passages he expresses his detestation, and it was
prohibited by an express law, under pain of death, as a defilement of
God's sanctuary, and a profanation of his holy name, [Lev
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002), [Lev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#003). Such a sacrifice, therefore,
unto the Lord himself, must be a still higher abomination, and there is
no precedent of any such under the law in the Old Testament.

"2. The case of Isaac before the law is irrelevant, for Isaac was not
sacrificed, and it was only proposed for a trial of Abraham's faith.

"3. No father, merely by his own authority, could put an offending, much
less an innocent, child to death upon any account, without the sentence
of the magistrate, ([Deu 21:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)),
and the consent of the people, as in Jonathan's case.

"4. The Mischna, or traditional law of the Jews is pointedly against it;
ver. 212. 'If a Jew should devote his son or daughter, his man or maid
servant, who are Hebrews, the devotement would be void, because no man
can devote what is not his own, or whose life he has not the absolute
disposal of.' These arguments appear to be decisive against the
sacrifice; and that Jephthah could not have devoted his daughter to
celibacy against her will is evident from the history, and from the high
estimation in which she was always held by the daughters of Israel for
her filial duty and her hapless fate, which they celebrated by a regular
anniversary commemoration four days in the year; [Jdg
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#040)." - New Analysis of Chronology,
vol. iii., p. 319.

The celebrated sacrifice of Iphigenia has been supposed by many learned
men to be a fable founded on this account of Jephthah's daughter; and M.
De Lavaur, Conference de la Fable avec l'Histoire Sainte, has thus
traced the parallel: -

"The fable of Iphigenia, offered in sacrifice by Agamemnon her father,
sung by so many poets, related after them by so many historians, and
celebrated in the Greek and French theatres, has been acknowledged by
all those who knew the sacred writings, and who have paid a particular
attention to them, as a changed copy of the history of the daughter of
Jephthah, offered in sacrifice by her father. Let us consider the
several parts particularly, and begin with an exposition of the
original, taken from the eleventh chapter of the book of Judges.

"The sacred historian informs us that Jephthah, the son of Gilead, was a
great and valiant captain. The Israelites, against whom God was
irritated, being forced to go to war with the Ammonites, (nearly about
the time of the siege of Troy), assembled themselves together to oblige
Jephthah to come to their succor, and chose him for their captain
against the Ammonites. He accepted the command on conditions that, if
God should give him the victory, they would acknowledge him for their
prince. This they promised by oath; and all the people elected him in
the city of Mizpeh, in the tribe of Judah. He first sent ambassadors to
the king of the Ammonites to know the reason why he had committed so
many acts of injustice, and so many ravages on the coast of Israel. The
other made a pretext of some ancient damages his people had suffered by
the primitive Israelites, to countenance the ravages he committed, and
would not accord with the reasonable propositions made by the
ambassadors of Jephthah. Having now supplicated the Lord and being
filled with his Spirit, he marched against the Ammonites, and being
zealously desirous to acquit himself nobly, and to ensure the success of
so important a war, he made a vow to the Lord to offer in sacrifice or
as a burnt-offering the first thing that should come out of the house to
meet him at his return from victory.

"He then fought with and utterly discomfited the Ammonites; and
returning victorious to his house, God so permitted it that his only
daughter was the first who met him. Jephthah was struck with terror at
the sight of her, and tearing his garments, he exclaimed, Alas! alas! my
daughter, thou dost exceedingly trouble me; for I have opened my mouth
against thee, unto the Lord, and I cannot go back. His daughter, full of
courage and piety, understanding the purport of his vow, exhorted him to
accomplish what he had vowed to the Lord, which to her would be
exceedingly agreeable, seeing the Lord had avenged him of his and his
country's enemies; desiring liberty only to go on the mountains with her
companions, and to bewail the dishonor with which sterility was
accompanied in Israel, because each hoped to see the Messiah born of his
or her family. Jephthah could not deny her this request. She accordingly
went, and at the end of two months returned, and put herself into the
hands of her father, who did with her according to his vow.

"Several of the rabbins, and many very learned Christian expositors,
believe that Jephthah's daughter was not really sacrificed, but that her
virginity was consecrated to God, and that she separated from all
connection with the world; which indeed seems to be implied in the
sacred historian's account: And she knew no man. This was a kind of
mysterious death, because it caused her to lose all hope of the glory of
a posterity from which the Messiah might descend. From this originated
the custom, observed afterwards in Israel, that on a certain season in
the year the virgins assembled themselves on the mountains to bewail the
daughter of Jephthah for the space of four days. Let us now consider the
leading characters of the fable of Iphigenia. According to good
chronological reckonings, the time of the one and of the other very
nearly agree. The opinion that the name of Iphigenia is taken from the
daughter of Jephthah, appears well founded; yea, the conformity is
palpable. By a very inconsiderable change Iphigenia makes Iphthygenia,
which signifies literally, the daughter of Jephthah. Agamemnon, who is
described as a valiant warrior and admirable captain, was chosen by the
Greeks for their prince and general against the Trojans, by the united
consent of all Greece, assembled together at Aulis in Baeotia.

"As soon as he had accepted the command, he sent ambassadors to Priam,
king of Troy, to demand satisfaction for the rape of Helen, of which the
Greeks complained. The Trojans refusing to grant this, Agamemnon, to
gain over to his side the gods, who appeared irritated against the
Greeks and opposed to the success of their enterprise, after having
sacrificed to them went to consult their interpreter, Chalchas, who
declared that the gods, and particularly Diana, would not be appeased
but by the sacrifice of Iphigenia, the daughter of Agamemnon.

"Cicero, in his Offices, says that Agamemnon, in order to engage the
protection of the gods in his war against the Trojans, vowed to
sacrifice to them the most beautiful of all that should be born in his
kingdom; and as it was found that his daughter Iphigenia surpassed all
the rest in beauty, he believed himself bound by his vow to sacrifice
her. Cicero condemns this, rightly judging that it would have been a
less evil to have falsified his vow than to have committed parricide.
This account of Cicero renders the fable entirely conformable to the
history.

"Agamemnon was at first struck with and troubled at this order,
nevertheless consented to it: but he afterwards regretted the loss of
his daughter. He is represented by the poets as deliberating, and being
in doubt whether the gods could require such a parricide; but at last a
sense of his duty and honor overcame his paternal affection, and his
daughter, who had warmly exhorted him to fulfill his vow to the gods,
was led to the altar amidst the lamentations of her companions; as Ovid
and Euripides relate, see Met., lib. 13.

"Some authors have thought she really was sacrificed; but others, more
humane, say she was caught up in a cloud by the gods, who, contented
with the intended sacrifice, substituted a hind in her place, with which
the sacrifice was completed. Dictys Cretensis says that this animal was
substituted to save Iphigenia.

"The chronology of times so remote cannot, in many respects, but be
uncertain. Both the Greeks and Romans grant that there was nothing else
than fables before the first Olympiad, the beginning of which was at
least four hundred and fifty years after the destruction of Troy, and
two hundred and forty years after Solomon. As to the time of Solomon,
nothing can be more certain than what is related in the sixth chapter of
the first book of Kings, that from the going out of Egypt, under Moses,
till the time in which he began to build the temple, was four hundred
and eighty years.

"According to the common opinion, the taking of Troy is placed one
hundred and eighty years before the reign of Solomon; but his reign
preceded Homer three centuries, according to some learned men, and
always at least one century by those who related it lowest. Indeed,
there is much uncertainty in fixing the express time in which Homer
flourished.

"Pausanias found so much difference concerning this in authors, that he
was at a loss how to judge of it. However, it is sufficient for us that
it was granted that Solomon was at least a century before Homer, who
wrote more than two centuries after the taking of Troy and who is the
most ancient historian of this famous siege."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 12](jdg012)

</div>
