<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg000)  [Next](jdg002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

After the death of Joshua the Israelites purpose to attack the remaining
Canaanites; and the tribe of Judah is directed to go up first, [Jdg
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md), [Jdg
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002.md). Judah and Simeon unite, attack
the Canaanites and Perrizites, kill ten thousand of them, take
Adoni-bezek prisoner, cut off his thumbs and great toes, and bring him
to Jerusalem, where he dies, [Jdg
1:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#003.md). Jerusalem conquered, [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008.md). A new war with the Canaanites
under the direction of Caleb, [Jdg
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009.md). Kirjath-sepher taken by
Othniel, on which he receives, as a reward, Achsah, the daughter of
Caleb and with her a south land with springs of water, [Jdg
1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#012.md). The Kenites dwell among the
people, [Jdg 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016.md). Judah and Simeon
destroy the Canaanites in Zephath, Gaza, etc., [Jdg
1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#017.md). Hebron is given to Caleb,
[Jdg 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#020.md). Of the Benjamites, house of
Joseph, tribe of Manasseh, etc., [Jdg
1:21-27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021.md). The Israelites put the
Canaanites to tribute, [Jdg 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#028.md). Of
the tribes of Ephraim, Zebulun, Asher, and Naphtali, [Jdg
1:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#029.md). The Amorites force the
children of Dan into the mountains, [Jdg
1:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#034.md).

[Judges 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 1:1</span></span>

Now after the death of Joshua - How long after the death of Joshua this
happened we cannot tell; it is probable that it was not long. The
enemies of the Israelites, finding their champion dead, would naturally
avail themselves of their unsettled state, and make incursions on the
country.

Who shall go up - Joshua had left no successor, and every thing relative
to the movements of this people must be determined either by caprice, or
an especial direction of the Lord.

[Judges 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 1:2</span></span>

The Lord said, Judah shall go up - They had inquired of the Lord by
Phinehas the high priest; and he had communicated to them the Divine
counsel.

[Judges 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 1:3</span></span>

Come up with me into my lot - It appears that the portions of Judah and
Simeon had not been cleared of the Canaanites, or that these were the
parts which were now particularly invaded.

[Judges 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 1:5</span></span>

And they found Adoni-bezek - The word מצא matsa, "he found," is used to
express a hostile encounter between two parties; to attack, surprise,
etc. This is probably its meaning here. Adoni-bezek is literally the
lord of Bezek. It is very probable that the different Canaanitish tribes
were governed by a sort of chieftains, similar to those among the clans
of the ancient Scottish Highlanders. Bezek is said by some to have been
in the tribe of Judah. Eusebius and St. Jerome mention two villages of
this name, not in the tribe of Judah, but about seventeen miles from
Shechem.

[Judges 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 1:6</span></span>

Cut off his thumbs - That he might never be able to draw his bow or
handle his sword, and great toes, that he might never be able to pursue
or escape from an adversary.

[Judges 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 1:7</span></span>

Threescore and ten kinds - Chieftains, heads of tribes, or military
officers. For the word king cannot be taken here in its proper and usual
sense.

Having their thumbs and their great toes cut off - That this was an
ancient mode of treating enemies we learn from Aelian, who tells us,
Var. Hist. l. ii., c. 9, that "the Athenians, at the instigation of
Cleon, son of Cleaenetus, made a decree that all the inhabitants of the
island of Aegina should have the thumb cut off from the right hand, so
that they might ever after be disabled from holding a spear, yet might
handle an oar." This is considered by Aelian an act of great cruelty;
and he wishes to Minerva, the guardian of the city, to Jupiter
Eleutherius, and all the gods of Greece, that the Athenians had never
done such things. It was a custom among those Romans who did not like a
military life, to cut off their own thumbs, that they might not be
capable of serving in the army. Sometimes the parents cut off the thumbs
of their children, that they might not be called into the army.
According to Suetonius, in Vit. August., c. 24, a Roman knight, who had
cut off the thumbs of his two sons to prevent them from being called to
a military life was, by the order of Augustus, publicly sold, both he
and his property. These are the words of Suetonius: Equitem Romanum,
quod duobus filis adolescentibus, causa detractandi sacramenti, pollices
amputasset, ipsum bonaque subjecit hastae. Calmet remarks that the
Italian language has preserved a term, poltrone, which signifies one
whose thumb is cut off, to designate a soldier destitute of courage and
valor. We use poltroon to signify a dastardly fellow, without
considering the import of the original. There have been found frequent
instances of persons maiming themselves, that they might be
incapacitated for military duty. I have heard an instance in which a
knavish soldier discharged his gun through his hand, that he might be
discharged from his regiment. The cutting off of the thumbs was probably
designed for a double purpose:

1\. To incapacitate them for war; and,

2\. To brand them as cowards.

Gathered their meat under my table - I think this was a proverbial mode
of expression, to signify reduction to the meanest servitude; for it is
not at all likely that seventy kings, many of whom must have been
contemporaries, were placed under the table of the king of Bezek, and
there fed; as in the houses of poor persons the dogs are fed with crumbs
and offal, under the table of their owners.

So God hath requited me - The king of Bezek seems to have had the
knowledge of the true God, and a proper notion of a Divine providence.
He now feels himself reduced to that state to which he had cruelly
reduced others. Those acts in him were acts of tyrannous cruelty; the
act towards him was an act of retributive justice.

And there he died - He continued at Jerusalem in a servile and degraded
condition till the day of his death. How long he lived after his
disgrace we know not.

[Judges 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 1:8</span></span>

Had fought against Jerusalem - We read this verse in a parenthesis,
because we suppose that it refers to the taking of this city by Joshua;
for as he had conquered its armies and slew its king, [Jos
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#026.md), it is probable that he took the
city: yet we find that the Jebusites still dwelt in it, [Jos
15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063.md); and that the men of Judah could
not drive them out, which probably refers to the strong hold or fortress
on Mount Zion, which the Jebusites held till the days of David, who took
it, and totally destroyed the Jebusites. See [Sa2
5:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006.md), and [Ch1
11:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#004.md). It is possible that the
Jebusites who had been discomfited by Joshua, had again become
sufficiently strong to possess themselves of Jerusalem; and that they
were now defeated, and the city itself set on fire: but that they still
were able to keep possession of their strong fort on Mount Zion, which
appears to have been the citadel of Jerusalem.

[Judges 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 1:9</span></span>

The Canaanites, that dwelt to the mountain - The territories of the
tribe of Judah lay in the most southern part of the promised land, which
was very mountainous, though towards the west it had many fine plains.
In some of these the Canaanites had dwelt; and the expedition marked
here was for the purpose of finally expelling them. But probably this is
a recapitulation of what is related [Jos
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#036.md); [Jos
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021.md); [Jos
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013.md).

[Judges 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 1:12</span></span>

And Caleb, etc. - See this whole account, which is placed here by way of
recapitulation, in [Jos 15:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013.md)
(note), and the explanatory notes there.

[Judges 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 1:16</span></span>

The children of the Kenite, Moses' father-in-law - For an account of
Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, see Exodus 18:1-27 (note); [Num
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029) (note.md), etc.

The city of palm trees - This seems to have been some place near
Jericho, which city is expressly called the city of palm trees, [Deu
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#003.md); and though destroyed by Joshua,
it might have some suburbs remaining where these harmless people had
taken up their residence. The Kenites, the descendants of Jethro, the
father-in-law of Moses, were always attached to the Israelites: they
remained with them, says Calmet, during their wanderings in the
wilderness, and accompanied them to the promised land. They received
there a lot with the tribe of Judah, and remained in the city of palm
trees during the life of Joshua; but after his death, not contented with
their portion, or molested by the original inhabitants, they united with
the tribe of Judah, and went with them to attack Arad. After the
conquest of that country, the Kenites established themselves there, and
remained in it till the days of Saul, mingled with the Amalekites. When
this king received a commandment from God to destroy the Amalekites, he
sent a message to the Kenites to depart from among them, as God would
not destroy them with the Amalekites. From them came Hemath, who was the
father of the house of Rechab, [Ch1
2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#055.md), and the Rechabites, of whom we
have a remarkable account [Jer 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#001.md),
etc.

[Judges 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 1:17</span></span>

The city was called Hormah - This appears to be the same transaction
mentioned [Num 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001) (note.md), etc.,
where see the notes.

[Judges 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 1:18</span></span>

Judah took Gaza - and Askelon - and Ekron - There is a most remarkable
variation here in the Septuagint; I shall set down the verse: Και ουκ
εκληρονομησεν Ιουδας την Γαζαν, ουδε τα ὁρια αυτης· ουδε την Ασκαλωνα,
ουδε τα ὁρια αυτης· και την Ακκαρων, ουδε τα ὁρια αυτης· την Αζωτον,
ουδε τα περισπορια αυτης· και ην Κυριος μετα Ιουδα. "But Judah Did Not
possess Gaza, Nor the coast thereof; neither Askelon, nor the coasts
thereof, neither Ekron, nor the coasts thereof; neither Azotus, nor its
adjacent places: and the Lord was with Judah." This is the reading of
the Vatican and other copies of the Septuagint: but the Alexandrian MS.,
and the text of the Complutensian and Antwerp Polyglots, agree more
nearly with the Hebrew text. St. Augustine and Procopius read the same
as, the Vatican MS.; and Josephus expressly says that the Israelites
took only Askelon and Azotus, but did not take Gaza nor Ekron; and the
whole history shows that these cities were not in the possession of the
Israelites, but of the Philistines; and if the Israelites did take them
at this time, as the Hebrew text states, they certainly lost them in a
very short time after.

[Judges 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 1:19</span></span>

And the Lord was with Judah, and he drave out the inhabitants of the
mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley, because
they had chariots of iron - Strange! were the iron chariots too strong
for Omnipotence? The whole of this verse is improperly rendered. The
first clause, The Lord was with Judah should terminate the 18th verse,
and this gives the reason for the success of this tribe: The Lord was
with Judah, and therefore he slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath,
etc., etc. Here then is a complete period: the remaining part of the
verse either refers to a different time, or to the rebellion of Judah
against the Lord, which caused him to withdraw his support. Therefore
the Lord was with Judah, and these were the effects of his protection;
but afterwards, when the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the
Lord, and served Baalim, etc., God was no longer with them, and their
enemies were left to be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their side,
as God himself had said. This is the turn given to the verse by Jonathan
ben Uzziel, the Chaldee paraphrast: "And the Word of Jehovah was in the
support of the house of Judah, and they extirpated the inhabitants of
the mountains; but afterwards, When They Sinned, they were not able to
extirpate the inhabitants of the plain country, because they had
chariots of iron." They were now left to their own strength, and their
adversaries prevailed against them. From a work called the Dhunoor Veda,
it appears that the ancient Hindoos had war chariots similar to those of
the Canaanites. They are described as having many wheels, and to have
contained a number of rooms. - Ward's Customs.

[Judges 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 1:20</span></span>

They gave Hebron unto Caleb - See this whole transaction explained [Jos
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#012) (note.md), etc.

[Judges 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 1:21</span></span>

The Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin - Jerusalem was
situated partly in the tribe of Judah, and partly in the tribe of
Benjamin, the northern part belonging to the latter tribe, the southern
to the former. The Jebusites had their strongest position in the part
that belonged to Benjamin, and from this place they were not wholly
expelled till the days of David. See the notes on [Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008.md). What is said here of Benjamin is
said of Judah, [Jos 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063.md). There must
be an interchange of the names in one or other of these places.

Unto this day - As the Jebusites dwelt in Jerusalem till the days of
David, by whom they were driven out, and the author of the book of
Judges states them to have been in possession of Jerusalem when he
wrote; therefore this book was written before the reign of David.

[Judges 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 1:22</span></span>

The house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel - That is, the
tribe of Ephraim and the half tribe of Manasseh, who dwelt beyond
Jordan. Beth-el was not taken by Joshua, though he took Ai, which was
nigh to it. Instead of בית יוסף beith Yoseph, "the house of Joseph," ten
of Dr. Kennicott's MSS. and six of De Rossi's have בני יוסף beney
Yoseph, "the children of Joseph;" and this is the reading of both the
Septuagint and Arabic, as well as of two copies in the Hexapla of
Origen.

[Judges 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 1:23</span></span>

Beth-el - the name of the city before was Luz - Concerning this city and
its names, see the notes on [Gen
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019.md).

[Judges 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 1:24</span></span>

Show us - the entrance into the city - Taken in whatever light we
choose, the conduct of this man was execrable. He was a traitor to his
country, and he was accessary to the destruction of the lives and
property of his fellow citizens, which he most sinfully betrayed, in
order to save his own. According to the rules and laws of war, the
children of Judah might avail themselves of such men and their
information; but this does not lessen, on the side of this traitor, the
turpitude of the action.

[Judges 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 1:26</span></span>

The land of the Hittites - Probably some place beyond the land of
Canaan, in Arabia, whither this people emigrated when expelled by
Joshua. The man himself appears to have been a Hittite, and to
perpetuate the name of his city he called the new one which he now
founded Luz, this being the ancient name of Beth-el.

[Judges 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 1:27</span></span>

Beth-shean - Called by the Septuagint Σκυθωνπολις, Scythopolis, or the
city of the Scythians. On these towns see the notes, [Jos
17:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#012) (note.md).

[Judges 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 1:29</span></span>

Neither did Ephraim - See the notes on the parallel passages, [Jos
16:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#005) (note.md).

[Judges 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 1:30</span></span>

Neither did Zebulun drive out - See on [Jos
19:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#010) (note.md).

[Judges 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 1:31</span></span>

Neither did Asher - See on [Jos
19:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#024) (note.md).

Accho - Supposed to be the city of Ptolemais, near to Mount Carmel.

[Judges 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 1:33</span></span>

Neither did Naphtali - See the notes on [Jos
19:32-39](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#032) (note.md).

[Judges 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 1:34</span></span>

The Amorites forced the children of Dan, etc. - Just as the ancient
Britons were driven into the mountains of Wales by the Romans; and the
native Indians driven back into the woods by the British settlers in
America.

[Judges 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 1:35</span></span>

The Amorites would dwell in Mount Heres - They perhaps agreed to dwell
in the mountainous country, being unable to maintain themselves on the
plain, and yet were so powerful that the Danites could not totally expel
them; they were, however, laid under tribute, and thus the house of
Joseph had the sovereignty. The Septuagint have sought out a literal
meaning for the names of several of these places, and they render the
verse thus: "And the Amorites began to dwell in the mount of Tiles, in
which there are bears, and in which there are foxes." Thus they
translate Heres, Aijalon, and Shaalbim.

[Judges 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jdg 1:36</span></span>

Akrabbim - Of scorpions; probably so called from the number of those
animals in that place.

From the rock, and upward - The Vulgate understands by סלע sela, a rock,
the city Petra, which was the capital of Arabia Petraea.

The whole of this chapter appears to be designed as a sort of supplement
to those places in the book of Joshua which are referred to in the notes
and in the margin; nor is there any thing in it worthy of especial
remark. We everywhere see the same fickle character in the Israelites,
and the goodness and long-suffering of God towards them. An especial
Providence guides their steps, and a fatherly hand chastises them for
their transgressions. They are obliged to live in the midst of their
enemies, often straitened, but never overcome so as to lose the land
which God gave them as their portion. We should learn wisdom from what
they have suffered, and confidence in the protection and providence of
God from their support, because these things were written for our
learning. Few can be persuaded that adversity is a blessing, but without
it how little should we learn! He, who in the school of affliction has
his mind turned towards God,

"Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,

Sermons in stones, and good in every thing."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 2](jdg002.md)

</div>
