<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg019)  [Next](jdg021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 20:0</span></span>

The heads of the eleven tribes come before the Lord in Mizpeh, and
examine the Levite relative to the murder of his wife, who gives a
simple narrative of the whole affair, [Jdg
20:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md). They unanimously resolve to
avenge the wrong, and make provision for a campaign against the
Benjamites, [Jdg 20:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#008.md). They desire
the Benjamites to deliver up the murderers; they refuse, and prepare for
battle, having assembled an army of twenty-six thousand seven hundred
men, [Jdg 20:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#012.md). The rest of the
Israelites amount to four hundred thousand, who, taking counsel of God,
agree to send the tribe of Judah against the Benjamites, [Jdg
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#017.md), [Jdg
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018.md). They attack the Benjamites, and
are routed with the loss of twenty-two thousand men, [Jdg
20:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#019.md). They renew the battle next
day, and are discomfited with the loss of eighteen thousand men, [Jdg
20:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#022.md). They weep, fast, and pray,
and offer sacrifices; and again inquire of the Lord, who promises to
deliver Benjamin into their hands, [Jdg
20:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026.md). They concert plans, attack
the Benjamites, and rout them, killing twenty-five thousand one hundred
men, and destroy the city of Gibeah, [Jdg
20:29-37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#029.md). A recapitulation of the
different actions in which they were killed, [Jdg
20:38-46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038.md). Six hundred men escape to
the rock Rimmon, [Jdg 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#047.md). The
Israelites destroy all the cities of the Benjamites, [Jdg
20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048.md).

[Judges 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 20:1</span></span>

Unto the Lord in Mizpeh - This city was situated on the confines of
Judah and Benjamin, and is sometimes attributed to the one, sometimes to
the other. It seems that there was a place here in which the Lord was
consulted, as well as at Shiloh; in 1 Maccabees 3:46, we read, In Maspha
was the place where they prayed aforetime in Israel. These two passages
cast light on each other. Some think that Shiloh is meant, because the
ark was there; but the phrase before the Lord may signify no more than
meeting in the name of God to consult him, and make prayer and
supplication. Wherever God's people are, there is God himself; and it
ever was true, that wherever two or three were assembled in his name, he
was in the midst of them.

[Judges 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 20:2</span></span>

The chief of all the people - The corners פנות pinnoth; for as the
corner-stones are the strength of the walls, so are the chiefs the
strength of the people. Hence Christ is called the chief corner-stone.

In the assembly of the people of God - The Septuagint translate, And all
the tribes of Israel stood up before the face of the Lord, εν εκκλησιᾳ
του λαου του Θεου, in the Church of the people of God. Here was a
Church, though there was no priest; for, as Tertullian says, Ubi tres,
ecclesia est, licet laici; "Wheresoever three are gathered together in
the name of the Lord, there is a Church, although there be none but the
laity."

[Judges 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 20:3</span></span>

Tell us, how was this wickedness? - They had heard before, by the
messengers he sent with the fragments of his wife's body; but they wish
to hear it, in full council, from himself.

[Judges 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 20:8</span></span>

We will not any of us go to his tent - We will have satisfaction for
this wickedness before we return home.

[Judges 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 20:10</span></span>

Ten men of a hundred - Expecting that they might have a long contest,
they provide suttlers for the camp; and it is probable that they chose
these tenths by lot.

[Judges 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 20:13</span></span>

Deliver us the men - Nothing could be fairer than this. They wish only
to make the murderers answerable for their guilt.

Benjamin would not hearken - Thus making their whole tribe partakers of
the guilt of the men of Gibeah. By not delivering up those bad men, they
in effect said: "We will stand by them in what they have done, and would
have acted the same part had we been present." This proves that the
whole tribe was excessively depraved.

[Judges 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 20:15</span></span>

Twenty and six thousand - Some copies of the Septuagint have
twenty-three thousand, others twenty-five thousand. The Vulgate has this
latter number; the Complutensian Polyglot and Josephus have the same.

[Judges 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 20:16</span></span>

Left-handed - They were ambidexters - could use the right hand and the
left with equal ease and effect. See the note on [Jdg
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015.md).

Could sling stones at a hair - and not miss - ולא יחטא velo yachati, and
not sin: και ουκ εξαμαρτανοντες; Sept. Here we have the true import of
the term sin; it signifies simply to miss the mark, and is well
translated in the New Testament by ἁμαρτανω, from α, negative, and
μαρπτω, to hit the mark. Men miss the mark of true happiness in aiming
at sensual gratifications; which happiness is to be found only in the
possession and enjoyment of the favor of God, from whom their passions
continually lead them. He alone hits the mark, and ceases from sin, who
attains to God through Christ Jesus.

It is worthy of remark that the Persian khuta kerden, which literally
signifies to sin or mistake, is used by the Mohammedans to express to
miss the mark.

The sling was a very ancient warlike instrument, and, in the hands of
those who were skilled in the use of it, it produced astonishing
effects. The inhabitants of the isles called Baleares, now Majorca and
Minorca, were the most celebrated slingers of antiquity. They did not
permit their children to break their fast till they had struck down the
bread they were to eat from the top of a pole, or some distant eminence.
They had their name Baleares from the Greek word βαλλειν to dart, cast,
or throw.

Concerning the velocity of the ball out of the sling, there are strange
and almost incredible things told by the ancients. The leaden ball, when
thus projected, is said to have melted in its course. So Ovid, Met. lib.
ii.. ver. 726.

Obstupuit forma Jove natus: et aethere pendens

Non secus exarsit, quam cum balearica plumbum

Funda jacit; volat illud, et incandescit eundo;

Et, quos non habuit, sub nubibus invenit ignes.

Hermes was fired as in the clouds he hung;

So the cold bullet that, with fury slung

From Balearic engines, mounts on high,

Glows in the whirl, and burns along the sky.

Dryden.

This is not a poetic fiction; Seneca, the philosopher, in lib. iii.
Quaest. Natural., c. 57, says the same thing: Sic liquescit excussa
glans funda, et adtritu aeris velut igne distillat; "Thus the ball
projected from the sling melts, and is liquefied by the friction of the
air, as if it were exposed to the action of fire." I have often, by the
sudden and violent compression of the air, produced fire; and by this
alone inflamed tinder, and lighted a match. Vegetius de Re Militari,
lib. ii., cap. 23, tells us that slingers could in general hit the mark
at six hundred feet distance. Funditores scopas-pro signo ponebant; ita
ut Sexcentos Pedes removerentur a signo-signum saepius tangerent. These
things render credible what is spoken here of the Benjamite slingers.

[Judges 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 20:18</span></span>

Went up to the house of God - Some think that a deputation was sent from
Shiloh, where Phinehas the high priest was, to inquire, not concerning
the expediency of the war, nor of its success, but which of the tribes
should begin the attack. Having so much right on their side, they had no
doubt of the justice of their cause. Having such a superiority of
numbers, they had no doubt of success. See the note on [Jdg
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md).

And the Lord said, Judah - But he did not say that they should conquer.

[Judges 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 20:21</span></span>

Destroyed down to the ground - twenty-two thousand men - That is, so
many were left dead on the field of battle.

[Judges 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 20:23</span></span>

Go up against him - It appears most evident that the Israelites did not
seek the protection of God. They trusted in the goodness of their cause
and in the multitude of their army. God humbled them, and delivered them
into the hands of their enemies, and showed them that the race was not
to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.

[Judges 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 20:26</span></span>

And wept - Had they humbled themselves, fasted, and prayed, and offered
sacrifices at first, they had not been discomfited.

And fasted that day until even - This is the first place where fasting
is mentioned as a religious ceremony, or as a means of obtaining help
from God. And in this case, and many since, it has been powerfully
effectual. At present it is but little used; a strong proof that
self-denial is wearing out of fashion.

[Judges 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 20:28</span></span>

Phinehas, the son of Eleazar - This was the same Phinehas who is
mentioned [Num 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007.md), and consequently
these transactions must have taken place shortly after the death of
Joshua.

[Judges 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 20:29</span></span>

Israel set liers in wait - Though God had promised them success, they
knew they could expect it only in the use of the proper means. They used
all prudent precaution, and employed all their military skill.

[Judges 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jdg 20:32</span></span>

Let us - draw them from the city - They had two reasons for this:

1\. They had placed an ambuscade behind Gibeah, which was to enter and
burn the city as soon as the Benjamites had left it.

2\. It would seem that the slingers, by being within the city and its
fortifications, had great advantage against the Israelites by their
slings, whom they could not annoy with their swords, unless they got
them to the plain country.

[Judges 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 20:33</span></span>

Put themselves in array at Baal-tamar - The Israelites seem to have
divided their army into three divisions; one was at Baal-tamar, a second
behind the city in ambush, and the third skirmished with the Benjamites
before Gibeah.

[Judges 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 20:35</span></span>

Twenty and five thousand and a hundred - As the Benjamites consisted
only of twenty-six thousand and seven hundred slingers; or, as the
Vulgate, Septuagint, and others read, twenty-five thousand, which is
most probably the true reading; then the whole of the Benjamites were
cut to pieces, except six hundred men, who we are informed fled to the
rock Rimmon, where they fortified themselves.

[Judges 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jdg 20:38</span></span>

Now there was an appointed sign - From this verse to the end of the
chapter we have the details of the same operations which are mentioned,
in a general way, in the preceding part of the chapter.

[Judges 20:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jdg 20:45</span></span>

Unto the rock of Rimmon - This was some strong place, but where situated
is not known. Here they maintained themselves four months, and it was by
these alone that the tribe of Benjamin was preserved from utter
extermination. See the following chapter, Judges 21 (note).

It is scarcely possible to imagine any thing more horrid than the
indiscriminate and relentless slaughter of both innocent and guilty
mentioned in this chapter. The crime of the men of Gibeah was great, but
there was no adequate cause for this relentless extermination of a whole
tribe. There was neither justice nor judgment in this case; they were on
all sides brutal, cruel, and ferocious: and no wonder; there was no king
in Israel - no effective civil government, and every man did what was
right in his own eyes. There was no proper leader; no man that had
authority and influence to repress the disorderly workings of the
pell-mell mob.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 21](jdg021.md)

</div>
