<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer043)  [Next](jer045.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 44:0</span></span>

Jeremiah reproves the Jews in Egypt for continuing in idolatry after the
exemplary judgments indicted by God on their nation for that sin, [Jer
44:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001.md); and, upon their refusing to
reform, denounces destruction to them, and to that kingdom wherein they
sought protection, vv. 15-30.

[Jeremiah 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 44:1</span></span>

The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews - Dahler supposes
this discourse to have been delivered in the seventeenth or eighteenth
year after the taking of Jerusalem.

Which dwell at Migdol - A city of Lower Egypt, not far from Pelusium.

Tahpanhes - Daphne Pelusiaca, the place to which the emigrant Jews first
went.

Noph - מפס Maphes, Targum. Memphis. a celebrated city of Middle Egypt,
and the capital of its district.

The country of Pathros - A district of Upper Egypt, known by the name of
the Thebais. See Bochart, Lib. Phaleg, lib. iv., c. 22. Thus we find
that the Jews were scattered over the principal parts of Egypt.

[Jeremiah 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 44:2</span></span>

No man dwelleth therein - The desolation of the land of Judea must have
been exceedingly great when this, in almost any sense, could be spoken
of it.

[Jeremiah 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 44:4</span></span>

O, do not this abominable thing - A strong specimen of affectionate
entreaty. One of the finest figures of poetry, when judiciously managed,
the anthropopathia, the ascribing human passions to God, is often used
by this prophet: so God is said to grieve, to mourn, to have his bowels
moved with compassion, to repent, to be angry, etc. Here he is
represented as tenderly expostulating: O, do not; or, I entreat you, do
not that abominable thing which I hate.

1\. Do it not: your God commands.

2\. O, do it not: your Father entreats.

3\. It is an abominable thing, and should not be done.

4\. I hate it, and on that account ye should abstain from it.

[Jeremiah 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 44:5</span></span>

But they hearkened not -

1\. They disregarded the authority of their God.

2\. They were not moved by the entreaties of their most affectionate
Father.

3\. In abominations they delighted. And,

4\. They loved that which God hated; and, apparently, because he hated
it.

[Jeremiah 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 44:7</span></span>

This great evil against your souls - Will not self-interest weigh with
you? See what ruin your conduct has brought upon your country. Your
fathers sinned as you are doing; and where are they now? Either
destroyed, or in captivity. And you are now taking the same way to your
own destruction.

[Jeremiah 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 44:9</span></span>

Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers - It seems that the
women were principal agents in idolatrous practices; for the queens -
the wives, of rulers and of common people, burnt incense to the queen of
heaven, (the moon), [Jer 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017.md), and
poured out drink-offerings to her.

[Jeremiah 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 44:15</span></span>

Then all the men - and all the women - We have not seen the women in
determined rebellion before. Here they make a common cause with their
idolatrous husbands.

[Jeremiah 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 44:19</span></span>

And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven - The Moon seems to
have been called מלכת melecheth, as the sun was called מלך molech. The
Hindoos pour out water to the sun thrice a day; and to the moon whenever
they worship her.

The idolatrous worship of these people was a sort of imitation of the
worship of the true God; only sacrifice was not common in it. The
factious women here tell us in what it consisted.

1\. They burnt incense to the moon, and perhaps to the sun and the
planets.

2\. They poured out libations to her.

3\. They made and consecrated cakes to her.

All these were prescribed in the worship of the true God. See, among
others, [Exo 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#023.md), etc.; [Lev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004.md); [Lev
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#016.md); and [Num
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#015.md). And the women vindicate their
conduct by asserting that they did all this by the consent of their
husbands: "Did we worship her without our men?"

[Jeremiah 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 44:22</span></span>

Therefore is your land a desolation - I grant that ye and your husbands
have joined together in these abominations; and what is the consequence?
"The Lord could no longer bear because of your evil doings; and
therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse,
without an inhabitant, this day."

[Jeremiah 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 44:30</span></span>

Behold I will give Pharaoh-hophra - That is, Pharaoh Apries. How this
and the prophecies in the preceding chapter were fulfilled, we learn
from ancient historians. The sum of such information is this: the
subjects of Pharaoh Apries rebelling, he sent Amasis, one of his
generals, to reduce them to their duty. But no sooner had Amasis begun
to make his speech, than they fixed a helmet on his head, and proclaimed
him king. Amasis accepted the title, and confirmed the Egyptians in
their revolt; and the greater part of the nation declaring for him,
Apries was obliged to retire into Upper Egypt; and the country being
thus weakened by intestine war, was attacked and easily overcome by
Nebuchadnezzar, who on quitting it left Amasis his viceroy. After
Nebuchadnezzar's departure, Apries marched against Amasis; but, being
defeated at Memphis, was taken prisoner, carried to Sais, and was
strangled in his own palace, thus verifying this prophecy. See Herodotus
in Euterpe.

Thus Nebuchadnezzar made an easy conquest of the land. He conquered it
as easily as "a shepherd puts on his cloak: he went thence in peace,"
having clothed himself with its spoils; and left all quiet under a
viceroy of his own choosing. The rebellion of Pharaoh's subjects was the
"fire that God kindled in Egypt," [Jer
43:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#012.md). And thus was he "delivered into
the hands of his enemies," his revolted people; and "into the hand of
him who sought his life," i.e., Amasis his general. And thus the whole
prophecy was literally fulfilled.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 45](jer045.md)

</div>
