<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer011)  [Next](jer013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 12:0</span></span>

This chapter is connected with the foregoing. The prophet expostulates
with God concerning the ways of Providence in permitting the wicked to
prosper, [Jer 12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001.md). It is intimated
to him that he must endure still greater trials, [Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005.md), from his false and deceitful
brethren, [Jer 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006.md); but that still
heavier judgments awaited the nation for their crimes, [Jer
12:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007.md). That God, however, would at
length have compassion on them; restore them to their land; and turn his
judgments against those that oppressed them, if not prevented by their
becoming converts to the true religion, [Jer
12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014.md).

[Jeremiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 12:1</span></span>

Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee - The prophet was
grieved at the prosperity of the wicked; and he wonders how,
consistently with God's righteousness, vice should often be in
affluence, and piety in suffering and poverty. He knows that God is
righteous, that every thing is done well; but he wishes to inquire how
these apparently unequal and undeserved lots take place. On this subject
he wishes to reason with God, that he may receive instruction.

[Jeremiah 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 12:2</span></span>

Thou art near in their mouth - They have no sincerity: they have
something of the form of religion, but nothing of its power.

[Jeremiah 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 12:3</span></span>

But thou, O Lord, knowest me - I know that the very secrets of my heart
are known to thee; and I am glad of it, for thou knowest that my heart
is towards thee - is upright and sincere.

[Jeremiah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 12:4</span></span>

How long shall the land mourn - These hypocrites and open sinners are a
curse to the country; pull them out, Lord, that the land may be
delivered of that which is the cause of its desolation.

[Jeremiah 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 12:5</span></span>

If thou hast run with the footmen - If the smallest evils to which thou
art exposed cause thee to make so many bitter complaints, how wilt thou
feel when, in the course of thy prophetic ministry, thou shalt be
exposed to much greater, from enemies much more powerful? Footmen may
here be the symbol of common evil events; horsemen, of evils much more
terrible. If thou have sunk under small difficulties, what wilt thou do
when great ones come?

And if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst - I believe the
meaning is this, "If in a country now enjoying peace thou scarcely
thinkest thyself in safety, what wilt thou do in the swellings of
Jordan? in the time when the enemy, like an overflowing torrent, shall
deluge every part of the land?"

The overflowing of Jordan, which generally happened in harvest, drove
the lions and other beasts of prey from their coverts among the bushes
that lined its banks; who, spreading themselves through the country,
made terrible havoc, slaying men, and carrying off the cattle.

Perhaps by footmen may be meant the Philistines, Edomites, etc., whose
armies were composed principally of infantry; and by the horses, the
Chaldeans, who had abundance of cavalry and chariots in their army. But
still the words are proverbial, and the above is their meaning.

[Jeremiah 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 12:6</span></span>

For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father - Thou hast none to
depend on but God: even thy brethren will betray thee when they have it
in their power.

Believe them not - Do not trust to them, do not commit thyself to them;
they are in heart thy enemies, and will betray thee.

[Jeremiah 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 12:7</span></span>

I have forsaken mine house - I have abandoned my temple.

I have given the dearly beloved of my soul - The people once in covenant
with me, and inexpressibly dear to me while faithful.

Into the hand of her enemies - This was a condition in the covenant I
made with them; If they forsook me, they were to be abandoned to their
enemies, and cast out of the good land I gave to their fathers.

[Jeremiah 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 12:8</span></span>

Mine heritage is unto me as a lion - The people are enraged against me;
they roar like a furious lion against their God. They have proceeded to
the most open acts of the most flagrant iniquity.

[Jeremiah 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 12:9</span></span>

Is unto me as a speckled bird - A bird of divers colors. This is a
people who have corrupted the worship of the true God with heathenish
rites and ceremonies; therefore, the different nations, (see [Jer
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010.md); whose gods and forms of worship
they have adopted shall come and spoil them. As far as you have followed
the surrounding nations in their worship, so far shall they prevail over
your state. Every one shall take that which is his own; and wherever he
finds his own gods, he will consider the land consecrated to them, and
take it as his property, because those very gods are the objects of his
worship. The fable of the daw and borrowed plumes is no mean
illustration of this passage.

Dahler translates the whole verse thus: -

Birds of prey! inundate with blood my heritage.

Birds of prey! come against her from all sides.

Run together in crowds, ye savage beasts!

Come to the carnage!

[Jeremiah 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 12:10</span></span>

Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard - My people have had many kinds
of enemies which have fed upon their richest pastures; the Philistines,
the Moabites, Ammonites, Assyrians, Egyptians. and now the Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 12:11</span></span>

No man layeth it to heart - Notwithstanding all these desolations, from
which the land every where mourns, and which are so plainly the
consequences of the people's crimes, no man layeth it to heart, or
considereth that these are God's judgments; and that the only way to
have them removed is to repent of their sins, and turn to God with all
their hearts.

[Jeremiah 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 12:12</span></span>

The sword of the Lord shall devour - It is the sword of the Lord that
has devoured, and will devour: this is what no man layeth to heart. They
think these things come in the course of events.

[Jeremiah 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 12:13</span></span>

They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns - All their projects shall
fail: none of their enterprises shall succeed. They are enemies to God,
and therefore cannot have his blessing.

[Jeremiah 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 12:14</span></span>

Against all mine evil neighbors - All the neighboring nations who have
united in desolating Judea shall be desolated in their turn: they also
are wicked, and they shall be punished. If I make them executors of my
justice, it is to them no proof of my approbation. God often uses one
wicked nation to scourge another; and afterwards scourges the scourger
by some other scourge. In some places a felon who was condemned to be
hanged is made the common hangman for the county; he himself being still
under the sentence of death, -

Till soon some trusty brother of the trade

Shall do for him what he has done for others.

[Jeremiah 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 12:15</span></span>

I will return, and have compassion on them - This is a promise of
restoration from the captivity, and an intimation also that some of
their enemies would turn to the true God with them; learn the ways of
his people; that is, would abjure idols, and take Jehovah for their God;
and be built in the midst of his people, that is, Jew and Gentile
forming one Church of the Most High.

[Jeremiah 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 12:17</span></span>

I will - destroy that nation - Several of them did not obey, and are
destroyed. Of the Moabites, Ammonites, and Chaldeans, not one vestige
remains. The sixteenth verse is supposed to be a promise of the
conversion of the Gentiles. See [Eph
2:13-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013.md).

From the thirteenth verse to the end is a different discourse, and
Dahler supposes it to have been delivered in the seventh or eighth year
of the reign of Jehoiakim.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 13](jer013.md)

</div>
