<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer049)  [Next](jer051.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 50:0</span></span>

This and the following chapter contain a prophecy relating to the fall
of Babylon, interspersed with several predictions relative to the
restoration of Israel and Judah, who were to survive their oppressors,
and, on their repentance, to be pardoned and brought to their own land.
This chapter opens with a prediction of the complete destruction of all
the Babylonish idols, and the utter desolation of Chaldea, through the
instrumentality of a great northern nation, [Jer
50:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#001.md). Israel and Judah shall be
reinstated in the land of their forefathers after the total overthrow of
the great Babylonish empire, [Jer
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004.md), [Jer
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#005.md). Very oppressive and cruel
bondage of the Jewish people during the captivity, [Jer
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#006.md), [Jer
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#007.md). The people of God are commanded
to remove speedily from Babylon, because an assembly of great nations
are coming out of the north to desolate the whole land, [Jer
50:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#008.md). Babylon, the hammer of the
whole earth, the great desolator of nations, shall itself become a
desolation on account of its intolerable pride, and because of the iron
yoke it has rejoiced to put upon a people whom a mysterious Providence
had placed under its domination, vv. 11-34. The judgments which shall
fall upon Chaldea, a country addicted to the grossest idolatry, and to
every species of superstition, shall be most awful and general, as when
God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, [Jer
50:35-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#035.md). Character of the people
appointed to execute the Divine judgments upon the oppressors of Israel,
[Jer 50:41-45](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#041.md). Great sensation among
the nations at the very terrible and sudden fall of Babylon, [Jer
50:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#046.md).

[Jeremiah 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 50:1</span></span>

The Word that the Lord Spake Against Babylon - This is also a new head
of discourse.

The prophecy contained in this and the following chapter was sent to the
captives in Babylon in the fourth year of the reign of Zedekiah. They
are very important; they predict the total destruction of the Babylonish
empire, and the return of the Jews from their captivity. These chapters
were probably composed, with several additions, out of the book that was
then sent by Jeremiah to the captives by the hand of Seraiah. See [Jer
51:59-64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#059.md).

[Jeremiah 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 50:2</span></span>

Declare ye among the nations - God's determination relative to this
empire.

Set up a standard - Show the people where they are to assemble.

Say, Babylon is taken - It is a thing so firmly determined, that it is
as good as already done.

Bel - The tutelar deity of Babylon is confounded, because it cannot save
its own city.

Merodach - Another of their idols, is broken to pieces; it was not able
to save itself, much less the whole empire.

Her idols are confounded - It is a reproach to have acknowledged them.

Her images - Great and small, golden and wooden, are broken to pieces;
even the form of them no longer appears.

[Jeremiah 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 50:3</span></span>

Out of the north there cometh up a nation - The Medes, who formed the
chief part of the army of Cyrus, lay to the north or north-east of
Babylon.

Shall make her land desolate - This war, and the consequent taking of
the city, began those disasters that brought Babylon in process of time
to complete desolation; so that now it is not known where it stood, the
whole country being a total solitude.

[Jeremiah 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 50:4</span></span>

In those days, and in that time - In the times in which Babylon shall be
opposed by the Medes and Persians, both Israel and Judah, seeing the
commencement of the fulfilling of the prophecies, shall begin to seek
the Lord with much prayer, and broken and contrite hearts. When the
decree of Cyrus comes, they shall be ready to set off for their own
country, deploring their offenses, yet rejoicing in the mercy of God
which has given them this reviving in their bondage.

[Jeremiah 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 50:5</span></span>

Let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant - All our
former covenants have been broken; let us now make one that shall last
for ever. He shall be the Lord Our God, and We will no more worship
idols. This covenant they have kept to the present day; whatever their
present moral and spiritual state may be, they are no idolaters, in the
gross sense of the term.

The description that is here given of the state of this people, their
feelings and their conduct, finely exhibit the state of real penitents,
who are fervently seeking the salvation of their souls.

1\. In those days when Jesus Christ is manifested in the flesh; and in
that time, when through him is preached the remission of sins, and the
people who hear are pricked in their conscience.

2\. The children of Israel and the children of Judah together. - No
distinctions being then felt or attended to; for all feel themselves
sinners, who have come short of the glory of God. Even national
distinctions and religious differences, which bind men fastest, and hold
them longest, are absorbed in the deep and overpowering concern they
feel for their eternal interests.

3\. Going and weeping shall they go. - Religious sorrow does not
preclude activity and diligence. While they are weeping for their sins,
they are going on in the path of duty, seeking the Lord while he may be
found, and calling upon him while he is near.

4\. They shall ask the way to Zion. - Real penitents are the most
inquisitive of all mortals; but their inquiries are limited to one
object, they ask the way to Zion. What shall we do to be saved? How
shall we shun the perdition of ungodly men, etc.

5\. With their faces thitherward. - They have turned from sin, and
turned To God. They have left the paths of the destroyer, and their
hearts are towards God, and the remembrance of his name. Thus they are
profiting by that light which has convinced them of sin, righteousness,
and judgment.

6\. Come, and let us join ourselves to the Lord. - Religion is a social
principle, and begets a social feeling in the soul. No man who feels his
own sore, and the plague of his heart, wishes to venture alone in the
way to heaven. He feels he wants counsel, support, comfort and the
company of those who will watch over him in love. Like David, the true
penitent is a companion of all those who fear the Lord. These heavenly
feelings come from one and the same Spirit, and lead to the same end;
hence they say, -

7\. Let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant. It is
said, that to be undecided, is to be decided. They who are not
determined to go to heaven, will never reach it. If the heart be not
laid under obligation, it will do nothing. "I hope I am in earnest; I
trust I shall be in earnest about the salvation of my soul, it is very
proper I should be so;" and such like, show an irresolute soul. Such
persons are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth.

Let us therefore bind ourselves. We have trifled too long; been
indecisive too long; have halted too long between two opinions. We know
now that Jehovah is God; let us, therefore, enter into a covenant with
him. Let this covenant be a perpetual one: let us not make it for a day,
for any particular time, but for ever; and let it never be broken. Let
our part be kept inviolable: we Are and Will Be thy people; and God's
part will never fail, I Am and Will Be your God.

The covenant requires a sacrifice. - Hence ברית berith signifies both.
Christ crucified is the great covenant sacrifice. By him God becomes
united to us, and through him we become united to God.

[Jeremiah 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 50:6</span></span>

My people hath been lost sheep - He pities them; for their pastors,
kings, and prophets have caused them to err.

They have gone from mountain to hill - In all high places they have
practiced idolatry.

[Jeremiah 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 50:7</span></span>

Their adversaries said, We offend not - God has abandoned them; we are
only fulfilling his designs in plaguing them.

[Jeremiah 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 50:8</span></span>

Remove out of the midst of Babylon - The sentence of destruction is gone
out against it; prepare for your flight, that ye be not overwhelmed in
its ruin.

Be as the he-goats before the flocks - Who always run to the head of the
flock, giving the example for others to follow. This may be addressed to
the elders and persons of authority among the people.

[Jeremiah 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 50:9</span></span>

An assembly of great nations - The army of Cyrus was composed of Medes,
Persians, Armenians, Caducians, Sacae, etc. Though all these did not
come from the north; yet they were arranged under the Medes, who did
come from the north, in reference to Babylon.

Their arrows - They are such expert archers, that they shall never miss
their mark.

[Jeremiah 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 50:10</span></span>

Chaldea shall be a spoil - She has been a spoiler, and she shall be
spoiled. They had destroyed Judea, God's heritage; and now God shall
cause her to be destroyed.

[Jeremiah 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 50:11</span></span>

As the heifer at grass - Ye were wanton in the desolations ye brought
upon Judea.

[Jeremiah 50:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 50:12</span></span>

Your mother - Speaking to the Chaldeans: Babylon, the metropolis, or
mother city, shall be a wilderness, a dry land, a desert, neither fit
for man nor beast.

[Jeremiah 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 50:15</span></span>

Shout against her round about - Encompass her with lines and with
troops; let none go in with relief, none come out to escape from her
ruin.

[Jeremiah 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 50:16</span></span>

Cut off the sower - Destroy the gardens and the fields, that there may
be neither fruits nor tillage.

[Jeremiah 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 50:17</span></span>

Israel - All the descendants of Jacob have been harassed and spoiled,
first by the Assyrians, and afterwards by the Chaldeans. They acted
towards them as a lion to a sheep which he has caught; first he devours
all the flesh, next he breaks all the bones to extract the marrow.

[Jeremiah 50:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 50:18</span></span>

As I have punished the king of Assyria - The Assyrians were overthrown
by the Medes and the Chaldeans. The king is here taken for all their
kings, generals, etc., Tiglath-pileser, Shalmaneser, Sennacherib,
Esar-haddon, etc. To them succeeded the Chaldean or Babylonish kings.
Nebuchadnezzar came against Judea several times; and at last took the
city and burnt it, profaned and demolished the temple, wasted the land,
and carried the princes and people into captivity.

[Jeremiah 50:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 50:19</span></span>

I will bring Israel again - This seems to refer wholly to the ten
tribes; for Carmel, Bashan, Mount Ephraim, and Gilead, were in their
territories.

[Jeremiah 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 50:20</span></span>

In those days and in that time - This phrase appears to take in the
whole of an epoch, from its commencement to its end. See [Jer
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004.md).

I will pardon them - So as to deliver them from their captivity, and
exact no more punishment from them whom I reserve, namely, the remnant
left in the Babylonish captivity.

[Jeremiah 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 50:21</span></span>

Go up against the land of Merathaim - and against the inhabitants of
Pekod - No such places as these are to be found any where else; and it
is not likely that places are at all meant. The ancient Versions agree
in rendering the first as an appellative, and the last as a verb, except
the Chaldee, which has Pekod as a proper name. Dr. Blayney translates: -

"Against the land of bitternesses, go up:

Upon it, and upon its inhabitants, visit, O sword!"

Dr. Dahler renders thus: -

"March against the country doubly rebellious,

And against its inhabitants worthy of punishment."

The latter of these two versions I take to be the most literal. The
words are addressed to the Medes and Persians; and the country is
Chaldea, doubly rebellious by its idolatry and its insufferable pride.
In these two, it was exceeded by no other land.

[Jeremiah 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 50:23</span></span>

The hammer of the whole earth - Nebuchadnezzar dashed to pieces the
nations against whom he warred. He was the scourge of the Lord.

[Jeremiah 50:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 50:24</span></span>

I have laid a snare for thee - It was not by storm that Cyrus took the
city. The Euphrates ran through it; he dug a channel for the river in
another direction, to divert its stream; he waited for that time in
which the inhabitants had delivered themselves up to debauchery: in the
dead of the night he turned off the stream, and he and his army entered
by the old channel, now void of its waters. This was the snare of which
the prophet here speaks. See Nerodotus, lib. i., c. 191.

[Jeremiah 50:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 50:26</span></span>

Open her store-houses - At the time that Cyrus took the city, it was
full of provisions and treasures of all kinds; the walls had suffered no
injury; and when the inhabitants heard that the enemy was within, they
thought they must have arisen out of the earth in the center of the
city!

[Jeremiah 50:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 50:27</span></span>

Slay all her bullocks - Princes, magistrates, etc., etc.

[Jeremiah 50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 50:28</span></span>

Declare in Zion the vengeance of the Lord - Zion was desolated by
Babylon; tell Zion that God hath desolated the desolator.

The vengeance of his temple - Which Nebuchadnezzar had pillaged,
profaned, and demolished, transporting its sacred vessels to Babylon,
and putting them in the temple of his god Bel.

[Jeremiah 50:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 50:29</span></span>

Call together the archers - The preceding verses are the prediction:
here, God calls the Medes and Persians to fulfill it.

[Jeremiah 50:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 50:31</span></span>

O thou most proud - זדון zadon. Pride in the abstract; proudest of all
people.

[Jeremiah 50:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 50:32</span></span>

And the most proud - זדון zadon, as before. Here pride is personified
and addressed, as if possessing a being and rational powers.

[Jeremiah 50:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 50:34</span></span>

Their Redeemer is strong - And it was not that he wanted power, and that
Nebuchadnezzar had much, that Jerusalem was taken; but because the
people had sinned, and would not return; and therefore national sins
called for national punishments. These have taken place; and now the
Lord of hosts shows them that the power of the Chaldeans is mere
weakness against his might.

[Jeremiah 50:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 50:35</span></span>

A sword - War and its calamities, or any grievous plague; and so in the
following verses.

[Jeremiah 50:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jer 50:38</span></span>

A drought is upon her waters - May not this refer to the draining of the
channel of the Euphrates, by which the army of Cyrus entered the city.
See on [Jer 50:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#024) (note.md). The original
is, however, חרב chereb, a sword, as in the preceding verses, which
signifies war, or any calamity by which the thing on which it falls is
ruined.

[Jeremiah 50:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jer 50:39</span></span>

The wild beasts of the desert - Dahler translates these various terms,
"The wild cats, the jackals, and the ostriches." And Blayney the same.
Wicklif, "Dragons, woodewoses, and ostriches." Coverdale, "Wild beestes,
apes, and estriches."

[Jeremiah 50:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jer 50:40</span></span>

As God overthrew Sodom - As the very ground on which these cities stood,
with all the plain, now lies under the Dead Sea; so Babylon and the
adjacent country shall be rendered totally barren and unfruitful, and
utterly incapable of being inhabited. And this is the fact concerning
both countries. See [Jer 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#018.md).

[Jeremiah 50:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jer 50:41</span></span>

Behold, a people shall come from the north - This and the two following
verses are nearly the same with [Jer
6:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022.md). But here, destroyers against
Babylon are intended; there, destroyers against Jerusalem.

[Jeremiah 50:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jer 50:44</span></span>

Behold, he shall came up like a lion - The same words as in [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019) (note.md), etc., where see the
note.

[Jeremiah 50:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jer 50:46</span></span>

At the noise of the taking of Babylon - See the note on the parallel
place, [Jer 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#021) (note.md). In the
forty-ninth chapter, these words are spoken of Nebuchadnezzar; here, of
Cyrus. The taking of Babylon was a wonder to all the surrounding
nations. It was thought to be impregnable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 51](jer051.md)

</div>
