<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer008)  [Next](jer010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 9:0</span></span>

The prophet bitterly laments the terrible judgments about to be
inflicted upon his countrymen, and points out some of the evils which
have provoked the Divine Majesty, [Jer
9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001). Judea shall be utterly
desolated, and the inhabitants transplanted into heathen countries, [Jer
9:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010). In allusion to an ancient
custom, a band of mourning women is called to lament over the ruins of
Jerusalem, [Jer 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017), [Jer
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#018); and even the funeral dirge is
given in terms full of beauty, elegance, and pathos, [Jer
9:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#019). God is the fountain of all
good; man, merely an instrument by which a portion of this good is
distributed in the earth; therefore none should glory in his wisdom,
might, or riches, [Jer 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023), [Jer
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024). The judgments of God shall fall,
not upon the land of Judea only, but also upon many heathen nations,
[Jer 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#025), [Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026).

[Jeremiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 9:1</span></span>

O that my head were waters - מי יתן ראשי מים mi yitten roshi mayim, "who
will give to my head waters?" My mourning for the sins and desolations
of my people has already exhausted the source of tears: I wish to have a
fountain opened there, that I may weep day and night for the slain of my
people. This has been the sorrowful language of many a pastor who has
preached long to a hardened, rebellious people, to little or no effect.
This verse belongs to the preceding chapter.

[Jeremiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 9:2</span></span>

O that I had in the wilderness - In the eastern countries there are no
such inns or houses of entertainment as those in Europe. There are in
different places public buildings called caravanserais, where travelers
may lodge: but they are without furniture of any kind, and without food.
Indeed they are often without a root being mere walls for a protection
against the wild beasts of the desert. I wish to hide myself any where,
in the most uncomfortable circumstances, that I may not be obliged any
longer to witness the abominations of this people who are shortly to be
visited with the most grievous punishments. Several interpreters suppose
this to be the speech of God. I cannot receive this. I believe this
verse to be spoken by the prophet, and that God proceeds with the next
verse, and so on to the ninth inclusive.

[Jeremiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 9:3</span></span>

They bend their tongues like their bow for lies - And their lies are
such that they as fully take away life as the keenest arrow shot from
the best strung bow. The false prophets told the people that there was
no desolation at hand: the people believed them; made no preparation for
their defense; did not return to the Lord; and the sword came and
destroyed them.

They are not valiant for the truth - They are bold in sin, and
courageous to support their lies; but the truth they neither patronize
nor support.

[Jeremiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 9:5</span></span>

And weary themselves to commit iniquity - O, what a drudgery is sin! and
how much labor must a man take in order to get to hell! The tenth part
of it, in working together with God, would bring him to the gate of
glory.

[Jeremiah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 9:7</span></span>

Behold, I win melt them - I will put them in the furnace of affliction,
and see if this will be a means of purging away their dross. See on [Jer
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027) (note).

[Jeremiah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 9:10</span></span>

Both the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled - The land shall be
so utterly devastated, that neither beast nor bird shall be able to live
in it.

[Jeremiah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 9:11</span></span>

A den of dragons - תנים tannim is supposed to mean here jackals; the
chakal is a beast frequent in the east, an attendant on the lion, the
refuse of whose prey he devours. It is an animal that seems to have been
bred originally between the wolf and the dog. The original is sometimes
interpreted, dragons, whales, etc.

[Jeremiah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 9:12</span></span>

Who is the wise man - To whom has God revealed these things? He is the
truly wise man. But it is to his prophet alone that God has revealed
these things, and the speedy fulfillment of the predictions will show
that the prophet has not spoken of himself.

[Jeremiah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 9:15</span></span>

I will feed them - with wormwood - They shall have the deepest sorrow
and heaviest affliction. They shall have poison instead of meat and
drink.

[Jeremiah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 9:17</span></span>

Call for the mourning women - Those whose office it was to make
lamentations at funerals, and to bewail the dead, for which they
received pay. This custom continues to the present in Asiatic countries.
In Ireland this custom also prevails, which no doubt their ancestors
brought from the east. I have often witnessed it, and have given a
specimen of this elsewhere. See the note on [Mat
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023). The first lamentations for the
dead consisted only in the sudden bursts of inexpressible grief, like
that of David over his son Absalom, [Sa2
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#004). But as men grew refined, it was
not deemed sufficient for the surviving relatives to vent their sorrows
in these natural, artless expressions of wo, but they endeavored to join
others as partners in their sorrows. This gave rise to the custom of
hiring persons to weep at funerals, which the Phrygians and Greeks
borrowed from the Hebrews. Women were generally employed on these
occasions, because the tender passions being predominant in this sex,
they succeeded better in their parts; and there were never wanting
persons who would let out their services to hire on such occasions.
Their lamentations were sung to the pipe as we learn from [Mat
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023). See the funeral ceremonies
practiced at the burial of Hector, as described by Homer: -

Οἱ δ' επει εισαγαγον κλυτα δωματα, τον μεν επειτα

Τρητοις εν λεχεεσσι θεσαν, παρα δ' εἱσαν αοιδους,

Θρηνων εξαρχους, οἱ τε στονοεσσαν αοιδην

Οἱ μεν αρ' εθρηνεον, επι δε στεναχοντο γυναικες.

Il. lib. 24., ver. 719.

"Arrived within the royal house, they stretched

The breathless Hector on a sumptuous bed,

And singers placed beside him, who should chant

The strain funereal; they with many a groan

The dirge began; and still at every close

The female train with many a groan replied."

Cowper.

St. Jerome tells us that even to his time this custom continued in
Judea; that women at funerals, with dishevelled hair and naked breasts,
endeavored in a modulated voice to invite others to lament with them.
The poem before us, from the seventeenth to the twenty-second verse, is
both an illustration and confirmation of what has been delivered on this
subject, and worthy of the reader's frequent perusal, on account of its
affecting pathos, moral sentiments, and fine images, particularly in the
twenty-first verse, where death is described in as animated a
prosopopoeia as can be conceived. See Lototh's twenty-second Prelection,
and Dodd. The nineteenth verse is supposed to be the funeral song of the
women.

"How are we spoiled!

We are greatly confounded!

For we have forsaken the land;

Because they have destroyed our dwellings."

[Jeremiah 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 9:20</span></span>

Teach your daughters - This is not a common dirge that shall last only
till the body is consigned to the earth; it must last longer; teach it
to your children, that it may be continued through every generation,
till God turn again your captivity.

[Jeremiah 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 9:21</span></span>

For death is come up into our windows - Here Death is personified, and
represented as scaling their wall; and after having slain the playful
children without, and the vigorous youth employed in the labors of the
field, he is now come into the private houses, to destroy the aged and
infirm; and into the palaces, to destroy the king and the princes.

[Jeremiah 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 9:22</span></span>

And as the handful after the harvestman - The reapers, after having cut
enough to fill their hand, threw it down; and the binders, following
after, collected those handfuls, and bound them in sheaves. Death is
represented as having cut down the inhabitants of the land, as the
reapers do the corn; but so general was the slaughter, that there was
none to bury the dead, to gather up these handfuls; so that they lay in
a state of putrescence, as dung upon the open field.

[Jeremiah 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 9:23</span></span>

Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom - Because God is the Fountain
of all good, neither wisdom, nor might, nor riches, nor prosperity can
come but from or through him. Nothing can be more rational than that the
Source of all our blessings should be acknowledged. Riches cannot
deliver in the day of death; strength cannot avail against him; and as a
shield against him, our wisdom is foolishness.

[Jeremiah 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 9:24</span></span>

But let him that glorieth - To glory in a thing is to depend on it as
the means or cause of procuring happiness. But there can be no happiness
but in being experimentally acquainted with that God who exercises
loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth. He who has
God's mercy for his portion may well exult; for he need not fear the
power of any adversary.

Sometimes the ancient heathen poets uttered sentiments of morality far
beyond their dispensation. Witness Phocylides on this subject: -

Μη γαυρου σοφιῃ, μητ' αλκῃ, μητ' ενι πλουτῳ·

Εις Θεος εστι σοφος, δυνατος θ' ἁμα, και τολυολβος.

"If wisdom, strength, or riches be thy lot,

Boast not; but rather think thou hast them not.

One God alone from whom those gifts proceed

Is wise, is mighty, and is rich indeed."

[Jeremiah 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 9:25</span></span>

I will punish all them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised - Do
not imagine that you, because of your crimes, are the only objects of my
displeasure; the circumcised and the uncircumcised, the Jew and the
Gentile, shall equally feel the stroke of my justice, their
transgressions being alike, after their advantages and disadvantages are
duly compared. In like manner, other nations also were delivered into
the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, these he immediately enumerates: Egypt and
Edom, and the Moabites and the Ammonites, and the Arabians of the
desert. All these nations were uncircumcised in that way which God
required that rite to be practiced as a sign of his covenant; and the
Israelites, that did practice it as a sign of that covenant, did not
attend to its spiritual meaning, for they were all uncircumcised in
heart. And it may be remarked, that these people were in general
confederated against the Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 9:26</span></span>

All that are in the utmost corners - כל קצוצי פאה col ketsutsey pheah.
These words have been variously understood. The Vulgate translates:
Omnes qui attonsi sunt in comam; "All who have their hair cut short."
The Targum, Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic have understood it nearly in
the same way; and so our margin. Others think that the insular or
peninsular situation of the people is referred to. Dr. Blayney thinks
the Arabians are meant, who dwelt in the great desert, between
Mesopotamia and Palestine. I really think our marginal reading should be
preferred, as expressing the sense of all the ancient Versions.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 10](jer010)

</div>
