<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer046)  [Next](jer048.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 47:0</span></span>

Among the nations doomed to suffer from the hostilities of
Nebuchadnezzar are the Philistines, (see [Jer
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#020)..md) And the calamities predicted
in this chapter befell them probably during the long siege of Tyre, when
their country was desolated to prevent their giving Tyre or Sidon any
assistance, [Jer 47:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001.md). The whole of
this chapter is remarkably elegant. The address to the sword of Jehovah,
at the close of it, is particularly a very beautiful and bold
personification, [Jer 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006.md), [Jer
47:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#007.md).

[Jeremiah 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 47:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord - against the Philistines - The date of this
prophecy cannot be easily ascertained. Dr. Blayney thinks it was
delivered about the fourth year of Zedekiah, while Dahler assigns it
some time in the reign of Josiah.

Before that Pharaoh smote Gaza - We have no historical relation of any
Egyptian king smiting Gaza. It was no doubt smitten by some of them; but
when, and by whom, does not appear either from sacred or profane
history.

[Jeremiah 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 47:2</span></span>

Waters rise up out of the north - Waters is a common prophetic image for
a multitude of people. The north here, as in other places of this
prophecy, means Chaldea.

[Jeremiah 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 47:3</span></span>

The stamping of the hoofs - At the galloping sound, -

Quadrupedante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum,

is a line of Virgil, (Aen. 8:596), much celebrated; and quoted here by
Blayney, where the galloping sound of the horses' hoofs is heard. In the
stamping of the horses, the rushing of the chariots, and the rumbling of
the wheels, our translators intended to convey the sense by the sound of
the words, and they have not been unsuccessful. Their translation of the
original is at the same time sufficiently literal.

The fathers shall not look back - Though their children are left behind,
they have neither strength nor courage to go back to bring them off.

[Jeremiah 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 47:4</span></span>

To spoil all the Philistines - These people, of whom there were five
seignories, occupied the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, to the south of
the Phoenicians.

Tyrus and Zidon - Places sufficiently remarkable both in the Old and New
Testament, and in profane history. They belonged to the Phoenicians; and
at this time were depending on the succor of their allies, the
Philistines. But their expectation was cut off.

The remnant of the country of Caphtor - Crete, or Cyprus. Some think it
was a district along the coast of the Mediterranean, belonging to the
Philistines; others, that the Cappadocians are meant.

[Jeremiah 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 47:5</span></span>

Baldness is come upon Gaza - They have cut off their hair in token of
deep sorrow and distress.

Ashkelon is cut off - Or put to silence; another mark of the deepest
sorrow. Ashkelon was one of the five seignories of the Philistines, Gaza
was another.

The remnant of their valley - Or plain; for the whole land of the
Philistines was a vast plain, which extended along the coast of the
Mediterranean Sea from Phoenicia to the frontiers of Egypt. The whole of
this plain, the territory of the Philistines, shall be desolated.

[Jeremiah 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 47:6</span></span>

O thou sword of the Lord - This is a most grand prosopopoeia - a
dialogue between the sword of the Lord and the prophet. Nothing can be
imagined more sublime.

Put up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still - Shed no more
blood, destroy no more lives, erase no more cities, desolate no more
countries. Rest: - hast thou not been long enough at this work of
judgment? O be still: - let wars and desolations cease for ever.

[Jeremiah 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 47:7</span></span>

How can it be quiet - This is the answer of the Sword. I am the officer
of God's judgments, and he has given me a commission against Ashkelon,
and against the sea shore; all the coast where the Philistines have
their territories. The measure of their iniquities is full; and these
God hath appointed this sword to ravage. The Philistines were ever the
implacable enemies of the Jews, and the basest and worst of all
idolaters. On these accounts the sword of the Lord had its commission
against them; and it did its office most fearfully and effectually by
the hand of the Chaldeans.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 48](jer048.md)

</div>
