<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer030)  [Next](jer032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 31:0</span></span>

This chapter continues the subject of the preceding in a beautiful
vision represented at a distant period. God is introduced expressing his
continual regard for Israel, and promising to restore them to their land
and liberty, [Jer 31:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001). Immediately
heralds appear, proclaiming on Mount Ephraim the arrival of the great
year of jubilee, and summoning the people to gather unto Zion, [Jer
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006). Upon which God resumes the
speech; and makes such gracious promises both of leading them tenderly
by the way, and making them happy in their own land, that all the
nations of the world are called upon to consider with deep attention
this great salvation, [Jer 31:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007).
The scene is then diversified by a very happy invention. Rachel, the
another of Joseph and Benjamin, is represented as risen from her tomb,
in a city of Benjamin near Jerusalem, looking about for her children,
and bitterly lamenting their fate, as none of them are to be seen in the
land of their fathers, [Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015). But
she is consoled with the assurance that they are not lost, and that they
shall in due time be restored, [Jer
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#016), [Jer
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017). To this another tender and
beautiful scene immediately succeeds. Ephraim, (often put for the Ten
tribes), comes in view. He laments his past errors, and expresses the
most earnest desires of reconciliation; upon which God, as a tender
parent, immediately forgives him, [Jer
31:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018). The virgin of Israel is then
directed to prepare for returning home, [Jer
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021), [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022); and the vision closes with a
promise of abundant peace and security to Israel and Judah in the latter
days, [Jer 31:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023). The blessed
condition of Israel under the Messiah's reign is then beautifully
contrasted with their afflicted state during the general dispersion,
[Jer 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027), [Jer
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#028). In the remaining part of the
chapter the promises to the posterity of Jacob of the impartial
administration of justice, increasing peace and prosperity, the
universal diffusion of righteousness, and stability in their own land
after a general restoration in Gospel tines, are repeated, enlarged on,
and illustrated by a variety of beautiful figures, [Jer
31:29-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029).

Dr. Blayney has introduced this and the preceding chapter with the
following excellent observations: -

"There are many prophecies," says he, "in various parts of the Old
Testament, which announce the future restoration of Israel to their own
land, and the complete re-establishment of both their civil and
religious constitution in the latter days, meaning the times of the
Gospel dispensation. These two chapters contain a prophecy of this kind;
which must necessarily be referred to these times, because it points out
circumstances which certainly were not fulfilled at the return of the
Jews from the Babylonish captivity, nor have hitherto had their
completion. For the people who returned from Babylon were the people of
Judah only, who had been carried away captive by Nebuchadnezzar; but
here it is foretold, that not only should the captivity of Judah be
restored, but the captivity of Israel also, meaning those ten tribes
which were carried away before, by Shalmaneser king of Assyria; and who
still remain in their several dispersions, having never returned, in a
national capacity at least, to their own land, whatever some few
individuals have done. But the terms of the prophecy entitle us to
expect, not an obscure and partial, but a complete and universal,
restoration; when God will manifest himself, as formerly, the God and
Patron of all the families of Israel, and not of a few only. Again it is
promised that, after this restoration, they should no more fall under
the dominion of foreigners, but be governed by princes and magistrates
of their own nation, independently of any but God, and David their king.
But this was not the case with the Jews who returned from Babylon. They
then indeed had a leader, Zerubbabel, one of their own nation, and also
of the family of David; but both the nation and their leader continued
still in a state of vassalage, and the most servile dependence upon the
Persian monarchy. And when the Grecian monarchy succeeded, they changed
their masters only, but not their condition; till at length under the
Asmonean princes they had for a while an independent government of their
own, but without any title to the name of David. At last they fell under
the Roman yoke; since which time their situation has been such as not to
afford the least ground to pretend that the promised restoration has yet
taken place. It remains therefore to be brought about in future under
the reign of the Messiah, emphatically distinguished by the name of
David; when every particular circumstance predicted concerning it will
no doubt be verified by a distinct and unequivocal accomplishment. There
is no particular date annexed to this prophecy, whereby to ascertain the
precise time of its delivery. But it may not unreasonably be presumed to
have followed immediately after the preceding one in which the
restoration of the people from their Babylonish captivity is in direct
terms foretold. From hence the transition is natural and easy to the
more glorious and general restoration which was to take place in a more
distant period, and was designed for the ultimate object of the national
hopes and expectations. Both events are frequently thus connected
together in the prophetic writings; and perhaps with this design, that
when that which was nearest at hand should be accomplished, it might
afford the clearest, and strongest, and most satisfactory kind of
evidence that the latter, how remote soever its period, would in like
manner be brought about by the interposition of Providence in its due
season. But though this prophecy relates wholly to one single subject,
it seems naturally to divide itself into three distinct parts.

The first part, after a short preface, in which the prophet is required
to commit to writing the matters revealed to him, commences with
representing, in a style of awe and energy, the consternation and
distress which, in some future day of visitation, should fall upon all
nations, preparatory to the scene of Jacob's deliverance, [Jer
30:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#005). Israel is encouraged to
confide in the Divine assurance of restoration and protection, [Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010), [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011). He is prepared previously to
expect a severe chastisement for the multitude of his sins; but consoled
with the prospect of a happy termination, [Jer
30:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012). This is followed by an
enumeration at large of the blessings and privileges to which the Jews
should be restored upon their re-admission into God's favor, [Jer
30:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018). Again, however, it is
declared that the anger of Jehovah would not subside till his purposed
vengeance against the wicked should have been fully executed; and then,
but not till then, an entire reconciliation would take place between him
and all the families of Israel, [Jer
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023), [Jer
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001).

The second part of this prophecy begins chap. [Jer
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002), and is marked by a sudden
transition to a distant period of time, represented in a vision, and
embellished with a variety of beautiful scenes and images. God announces
the renewal of his ancient love for Israel; and promises, in consequence
thereof, a speedy restoration of their former privileges and happiness,
[Jer 31:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002). Already the heralds have
proclaimed on Mount Ephraim the arrival of the joyful day; they summon
the people to re-assemble once more in Zion; and promulge by special
command the glad tidings of salvation which God had accomplished for
them. God himself declares his readiness to conduct home the remnant of
Israel from all parts of their dispersion, to compassionate and relieve
their infirmities, and to provide them with all necessary accommodations
by the way, [Jer 31:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006). The news is
carried into distant lands; and the nations are summoned to attend to
the display of God's power and goodness in rescuing his people from
their stronger enemies, and in supplying them after their return with
all manner of good things to the full extent of their wants and desires,
[Jer 31:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#010). Here the scene changes;
and two new personages are successively introduced, in order to
diversify the same subject, and to impress it more strongly. Rachel
first; who is represented as just risen from the grave, and bitterly
bewailing the loss of her children; for whom she anxiously looks about,
but none are to be seen. Her tears are dried up; and she is consoled
with the assurance that they are not lost for ever, but shall in time be
brought back to their ancient borders, [Jer
31:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015). Ephraim comes next. He
laments his past undutifulness with great contrition and penitence, and
professes an earnest desire of amendment. These symptoms of returning
duty are no sooner discerned in him, than God acknowledges him once more
as a darling child and resolves with mercy to receive him, [Jer
31:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018). The virgin of Israel is then
earnestly exhorted to hasten the preparations for their return; and
encouraged with having the prospect of a signal miracle wrought in her
favor, [Jer 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021), [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022). And the vision closes at last
with a promise that the Divine blessing should again rest upon the land
of Judah; and that the men of Judah should once more dwell there,
cultivating it according to the simplicity of ancient institutions, and
fully discharged from every want, [Jer
31:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023). In the third part, by way of
appendix to the vision, the following gracious promises are specifically
annexed: That God would in time to come supply all the deficiencies of
Israel and Judah; and would be as diligent to restore as he had ever
been to destroy them; and would not any more visit the offenses of the
fathers upon the children, [Jer
31:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027). That he would make with them
a better covenant than he had made with their forefathers, [Jer
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031). That they should continue
his people by an ordinance as firm and as lasting as that of the
heavens, [Jer 31:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035). And that
Jerusalem should again be built, enlarged in its extent, and secure from
future desolation, [Jer 31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)."

[Jeremiah 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 31:1</span></span>

At the same time - This discourse was delivered at the same time with
the former; and, with that, constitutes the Book which God ordered the
prophet to write.

Will I be the God of all the families of Israel - I shall bring back the
ten tribes, as well as their brethren the Jews. The restoration of the
Israelites is the principal subject of this chapter.

[Jeremiah 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 31:2</span></span>

The people which were left of the sword - Those of the ten tribes that
had escaped death by the sword of the Assyrians.

Found grace in the wilderness - The place of their exile; a wilderness,
compared to their own land. - Dahler. See [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003)

[Jeremiah 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 31:3</span></span>

I have loved thee with an everlasting love - ואהבת עולם אהבתיך veahabath
olam ahabtich, "and with the old love I have loved thee." "Also, with a
love of long standing have I loved thee." - Blayney. "But I love thee
always." - Dahler. I still bear to the Jewish people that love which I
showed to their fathers in Egypt, in the wilderness, and in the promised
land. Can it be supposed, by any person seriously considering the
context, that these words are spoken of God's decree of election in
behalf of the Jews? Those who make it such, act most injudiciously on
their own principle; for, how few of the Jews have ever given evidence
that they were the children of God, from their restoration from Babylon
to the present day! The words refer simply to their state as a people,
most wondrously preserved by the providence and mercy of God, as a
standing proof of the Divine authority of the Scriptures, and as an
evidence of God's displeasure against sin.

Therefore with loving-kindness have I drawn thee - "Therefore have I
lengthened out mercy to thee." - Blayney,

C'est pourquoi je t'ai conserve ma grace.

Dahler.

"Therefore I have preserved my grace to thee."

The exiles, who had not for a long time received any proofs of the
Divine protection, are represented as deploring their state; but God
answers, that though this may seem to be the case, he has always loved
them; and this continued love he will show by bringing them out of their
captivity. However creeds may fare, this is the sense of the passage;
all the context proves this.

[Jeremiah 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 31:4</span></span>

O virgin of Israel - Israelites in general; now called virgin, because
restored to their ancient purity.

With thy tabrets - Women in general played on these; they were used in
times of rejoicing, and accompanied with dancing. To these customs,
still preserved, the prophet alludes.

[Jeremiah 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 31:5</span></span>

Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria - This was the
regal city of the Israelites, as Jerusalem was of the Jews.

Shall eat them as common things - By the law of Moses no man was
permitted to eat of the fruit of his vineyard till the fifth year after
planting. For the first three years it was considered uncircumcised,
unclean, not fit to be eaten; in the fourth year it was holy to the
Lord, the fruit belonged to Him; in the fifth year he might use it for
himself, [Lev 19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023). But in the
time here mentioned the fruit should be considered common - lawful at
all times to be eaten.

[Jeremiah 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 31:6</span></span>

For there shall be a day - Literally, for this is the day, or the day is
come. The watchmen - the prophets.

Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion - Let both Israelites and Jews join
together in the worship of the Lord.

[Jeremiah 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 31:7</span></span>

The chief of the nations - The same as Jacob or Israel; for most
certainly this people was once the most honorable on the face of the
earth.

O Lord, save thy people - Let the Jews earnestly intercede in behalf of
their Israelitish brethren; or let them rejoice and praise the Lord, who
hath saved the remnant of Israel. So Dr. Blayney thinks the clause
should be understood.

[Jeremiah 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 31:8</span></span>

I will bring them from the north country - From Babylon.

From the coasts of the earth - The ten tribes were carried away partly
into Assyria by Tiglath-pileser, and partly into Mesopotamia and Media
by Shalmaneser, [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029); [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006). Assyria and Media, being very
distant from Palestine, might have been called, in prophetic language,
the coasts of the earth.

The blind and the lame - I will so effectually remove all difficulties
out of the way, so provide for them on the journey, so supernaturally
support their bodies and minds, that the veriest invalids shall safely
proceed to, and happily arrive at, the end of their journey.

[Jeremiah 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 31:9</span></span>

They shall come with weeping - Duly penetrated with a sense of their
sins, they shall deeply deplore them; and, while weeping for them,
earnestly supplicate God to have mercy upon them.

By the rivers of waters - I will so guide and provide for them in the
arid deserts, that they shall find streams of water whenever necessary.
Every one knows of how much consequence water is to travelers in the
eastern deserts.

Ephraim is my first-born - Ephraim, being the most considerable, is
often put for the whole of the ten tribes.

[Jeremiah 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 31:12</span></span>

And shall flow together - Perhaps this may refer to their assembling at
the three great national feasts, the passover, pentecost, and
tabernacles.

Their soul shall be as a watered garden - Full of the light, life, and
power of God; so that they shall rejoice evermore, pray without ceasing,
and give thanks in every thing.

[Jeremiah 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 31:14</span></span>

And I will satiate the soul of the priests - The worship of God being
restored, they shall have their proper share of the victims brought to
the temple.

[Jeremiah 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 31:15</span></span>

A voice was heard in Ramah - The Ramah mentioned here, (for there were
several towns of this name), was situated in the tribe of Benjamin,
about six or seven miles from Jerusalem. Near this place Rachel was
buried; who is here, in a beautiful figure of poetry, represented as
coming out of her grave, and lamenting bitterly for the loss of her
children, none of whom presented themselves to her view, all being slain
or gone into exile. St. Matthew, who is ever fond of accommodation,
applies these words, [Mat 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017), [Mat
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018), to the massacre of the children
at Bethlehem. That is, they were suitable to that occasion, and
therefore he so applied them; but they are not a prediction of that
event.

[Jeremiah 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 31:16</span></span>

They shall come again from the land of the enemy - This could not be
said of the murdered innocents at Bethlehem; they never came again; but
the Jews, who had gone into captivity, did come again from the land of
their enemy to their own border.

[Jeremiah 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 31:18</span></span>

I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself - The exiled Israelites
are in a state of deep repentance.

Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised - I was at first like an
unbroken and untoward steer, the more I was chastised the more I
rebelled; but now I have benefited by thy correction.

Turn thou me - I am now willing to take thy yoke upon me, but I have no
power. I can only will and pray. Take the matter into thy own hand, and
fully convert my soul.

[Jeremiah 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 31:19</span></span>

After that I was turned - Converted from my sin, folly, and idolatry.

I repented - To conviction of sin, I now added contrition for sin.
Conviction, in this sense of the word, must precede contrition or
repentance. As soon as a man sees himself lost and undone, he is
convicted of sin; when convicted, he begins to mourn. Thus contrition
follows conviction.

I smote upon my thigh - My sorrow grew deeper and deeper; I smote upon
my thigh through the extremity of my distress. This was a usual sign of
deep affliction. See [Eze 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#012). It
was the same among the ancient Greeks. So Homer: -

Ως εφατ' αυταρ Αρης θαλερω πεπληγετο μηρω

Χερσι καταπρηνεσσ,ολοφυρομενος δε προσηυδα.

IL. lib. 15:113.

"She spake: and with expanded arms, his thighs

Smiting, thus sorrowful, the god exclaimed."

Cowper.

\- αυταρ Αχιλλευς

Μηρω πληξαμενος Πατροκληα προσεειπεν.

IL. lib. 16:124.

"Achilles saw it, smote his thigh, and said."

Cowper.

I have often seen persons in deep grief act thus.

[Jeremiah 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 31:20</span></span>

Is Ephraim my dear son? - It is impossible to conceive any thing more
tenderly affectionate than this. Let us consider the whole account. The
ten tribes, called here Ephraim, for the reason before alleged, are
represented as acknowledging their sins. I have heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself; and in his lamentation he says,

1\. Thou hast chastised me.

2\. Though he at first rebelled against the chastisement, yet at last he
submitted and acknowledged his offenses.

3\. He turned from all his offenses; he was converted.

4\. After his conversion, (שובי shubi), he repented; after conviction
came contrition, as before stated.

5\. Being in a state of godly sorrow, he was instructed, הודעי hivvadei,
he got a thorough knowledge of the desperate wickedness of his heart and
life.

6\. Having received this instruction, he was filled with excessive
grief; which is signified here by smiting on his thigh. See above.

7\. He finds that from his youth up he had been sinning against God; and
although his youthful sins had long passed from his memory, yet the
light of God brought them back, and he was ashamed and confounded at the
sight of them.

8\. In this state of confusion and distress God sees him; and,
commiserating his state, thus speaks: -

1\. Is Ephraim my dear son? Bad as he is in his own sight, and in the
sight of my justice, he is now a penitent, and to me is precious.

2\. However loathsome and disfigured he may be with sin and sorrow, he
is to me a pleasant child - a child of delights; one in whose conversion
I delight, and my angels rejoice.

3\. I did speak against him: כי מדי דברי בו ki middey dabberi bo, for
"from the abundance of my speaking in him;" accusing, threatening,
promising, exhorting, encouraging; "I do still earnestly remember him."
God has taken much pains with him, and is unwilling to give him up; but
now that he repents, he has not received the grace of God utterly in
vain.

4\. God feels a yearning desire towards him; המו מעי לו hamu meai lo,
"my bowels are agitated for him." I feel nothing towards him but pity
and love. When a sinner turns to God, God ceases to be angry with him.

5\. God expresses his determination to save him; ארחמנו רחם rachem
arachamennu, "I will be affectionately merciful to him, with tender
mercy, saith the Lord." He shall find that I treat him as a father does
a returning prodigal son. So every penitent is sure to find mercy at the
hand of God.

[Jeremiah 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 31:21</span></span>

Set thee up waymarks - Alluding to stones, or heaps of stones, which
travelers in the desert set up to ascertain the way, that they may know
how to return. Mark the way to Babylon: thither ye shall certainly go;
but from it ye shall as certainly return.

[Jeremiah 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 31:22</span></span>

A woman shall compass a man - נקבה תסובב גבר nekebah tesobeb gaber, "A
weak woman shall compass or circumvent a strong man." This place has
given much trouble to Biblical critics. By many Christian writers it is
considered a prophecy of the miraculous conception of the holy virgin;
but as I am sure no such meaning is in the words, nor in the context, so
I am satisfied no such meaning can be fairly brought out of them.
Houbigant thinks there is a small error in the text, i.e., תשובב
teshobeb, shall return, and not תסובב tesobeb, shall compass. This
reading is found in two of Kennicott's MSS., and he contends that the
passage should be read, "The wife shall return to her husband;" alluding
to the conversion of the Jewish people, called above a backsliding
daughter. This makes a good sense; but I do not see why this should be
called a new thing in the earth. After all, I think it likely that the
Jews in their present distressed circumstances are represented under the
similitude of a weak defenseless female נקבה nekebah; and the Chaldeans
under that of a fierce strong man, גבר gaber, who had prevailed over and
oppressed this weak woman. But, notwithstanding the disparity between
them, God would cause the woman - the weak defenseless Jews, to compass
- to overcome, the strong man - the powerful Babylonians. And this the
prophet says would be a new thing in the land; for in such a case the
lame would take the prey. The context favors both these meanings. Dr.
Blayney gives a sense very near to this: "A weak woman shall repulse a
strong or mighty man." It is most likely a proverbial expression.

[Jeremiah 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 31:23</span></span>

The Lord bless thee, O habitation of justice - After their return they
shall De remarkably prosperous. Piety and industry shall go hand in
hand; they shall have their husbandmen, their shepherds, and neatherds,
[Jer 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#024). And Jerusalem shall become
a righteous city, and the temple shall be a place of holiness; so the
weary there shall have rest, and the sorrowful shall be abundantly
comforted, [Jer 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#024), [Jer
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025).

[Jeremiah 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 31:26</span></span>

Upon this I awaked - It appears that the prophecy, commencing with [Jer
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#002) and ending with [Jer
31:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#025) of this chapter, was delivered
to the prophet in a dream. Dahler supposes it to be a wish; that the
prophet, though he could not hope to live to that time, might be
permitted to awake up from his tomb; and, having seen this prosperity,
would be content to return to his grave.

[Jeremiah 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 31:27</span></span>

I will sow - with the seed of man and with the seed of beast - I will
multiply both men and cattle.

[Jeremiah 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 31:29</span></span>

The fathers have eaten a sour grape - A proverbial expression for, "The
children suffer for the offenses of their parents." This is explained in
the next verse: "Every one shall die for his own iniquity." No child
shall suffer Divine punition for the sin of his father; only so far as
he acts in the same way can he be said to bear the sins of his parents.

[Jeremiah 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 31:31</span></span>

A new covenant - The Christian dispensation.

[Jeremiah 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 31:33</span></span>

After those days - When vision and prophecy shall be sealed up, and
Jesus have assumed that body which was prepared for him, and have laid
down his life for the redemption of a lost world, and, having ascended
on high, shall have obtained the gift of the Holy Spirit to purify the
heart; then God's law shall, by it, be put in their inward parts, and
written on their hearts; so that all within and all without shall be
holiness to the Lord. Then God will be truly their God, received and
acknowledged as their portion, and the sole object of their devotion;
and they shall be his people, filled with holiness, and made partakers
of the Divine nature, so that they shall perfectly love him and worthily
magnify his name.

[Jeremiah 31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 31:34</span></span>

And they shall teach no more - It shall be a time of universal light and
knowledge; all shall know God in Christ, from the least to the greatest;
the children shall be taught to read the New Covenant, and to understand
the terms of their salvation.

I will forgive their iniquity - It shall be a time of General Pardon;
multitudes shall be daily in the Christian Church receiving the witness
of God's Spirit, and in their life and conversation witnessing a good
confession. How wonderfully is this prophecy fulfilled in the age of
Bibles, Sunday schools, and village preaching.

[Jeremiah 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 31:36</span></span>

If those ordinances - As sure as the sun shall give light to the day,
and the moon to the night, so surely shall the Jews continue to be a
distinct people. The same thing is expressed in other words in the next
verse. Hitherto this prophecy has been literally fulfilled; the Jews are
still a distinct people from all the dwellers upon earth. Every attempt
that has been made in any country to naturalize and unite them with the
people of that country, has proved abortive. The well-circumstanced
attempt made this year (1830) in England, when the strongest interest
was excited in their behalf, has also utterly failed. And why? Because
of God's purpose expressed in [Jer
31:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#035) of the Book of the Prophet
Jeremiah.

[Jeremiah 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jer 31:38</span></span>

The city shall be built to the Lord - This cannot mean the city built
after the return from Babylon, for two reasons:

1\. This is to be much greater in extent;

2\. It is to be permanent, never to be thrown down, [Jer
31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040). It must therefore mean, if
taken literally at all, the city that is to be built by them when they
are brought in with the fullness of the Gentiles.

The tower of Hananeel - This stood in the northeast part of the city;
from thence the wall proceeded to the corner gate, (probably the same as
the old gate), thus named from its running out into an angle in that
part.

[Jeremiah 31:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jer 31:39</span></span>

Upon the hill Gareb - Gareb and Goath are out of the limits of this
city. The latter is supposed to be Golgotha; that is, the heap of Gotha,
which, being the place where our Lord was crucified, was without the
city. These hills were a little to the north-west of the old city walls:
but are destined to be within the new city. See Dr. Blayney on all these
verses.

[Jeremiah 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jer 31:40</span></span>

The whole valley of the dead bodies - The valley of the son of Hinnom.

And all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the corner of the
horse-gate toward the east - All these places, the fuller's field, etc.,
shall be consecrated to the Lord, and become a part of this new city; so
that this will appear to be a city much more extensive than the city of
Jerusalem ever was; and to be suited to that time, when the people shall
have the law written in their hearts, and God shall have filled the land
with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast. Talia saecla currite!
"Make speed, ye happy times!"

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 32](jer032)

</div>
