<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer045)  [Next](jer047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 46:0</span></span>

The difference between the preceding and the subsequent prophecies in
point of composition is very remarkable; the last excelling much in
majesty and elegance. This chapter (of which the first verse forms a
general title to this and the five chapters following) contains two
distinct prophecies relating to Egypt. The first was delivered previous
to an engagement between Pharaoh-necho, king of Egypt, and
Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon; in which the Egyptians were routed in
Carchemish with great slaughter, as here predicted. The prophet sees the
mighty preparations; but they are all declared to be of no avail, as God
had decreed their fall, [Jer 46:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001).
The King of Egypt, however, is represented as marching with all the
confidence of victory, like a river overflowing its banks, and
threatening all around with its inundation, [Jer
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007), [Jer
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#008). But this immense armament of
Pharaoh-necho, consisting of various nations, shall, by a righteous
judgment of God, receive such a signal overthrow near the river
Euphrates, that the political consequence of Egypt shall be thereby
irretrievably ruined, and its remaining power become contemptible in the
sight of the nations, [Jer 46:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009).
The other prophecy, beginning at the thirteenth verse, relates to the
memorable overthrow of the Egyptians by Nebuchadnezzar, subsequent to
his siege of Tyre, in the sixteenth year after the destruction of
Jerusalem, [Jer 46:13-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#013). The promise,
in the conclusion of the chapter, of preservation to the Jews, (who have
for many ages continued a distinct people, when the various nations of
antiquity who oppressed them, or with whom they had any intercourse,
have long ago ceased to have any separate and visible existence), has
been most remarkably fulfilled; and is a very signal act of providence,
and a pledge of the restoration of Israel to the Divine favor, when the
time of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled, [Jer
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027), [Jer
46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028).

[Jeremiah 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 46:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord - against the Gentiles - This is a general title to
the following collection of prophecies, written concerning different
nations, which had less or more connection with the Jews, either as
enemies, neighbors, or allies.

They were not written at the same time; and though some of them bear
dates, yet it would be difficult to give them any chronological
arrangement. Dahler's mode of ascertaining the times of their delivery
may be seen in the table in the introduction.

[Jeremiah 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 46:2</span></span>

Pharaoh-necho - This was the person who defeated the army of Josiah, in
which engagement Josiah received a mortal wound, of which he died,
greatly regretted, soon after at Megiddo. After this victory, he
defeated the Babylonians, and took Carchemish; and, having fortified it,
returned to his own country. Nabopolassar sent his son Nebuchadnezzar
with an army against him, defeated him with immense slaughter near the
river Euphrates, retook Carchemish, and subdued all the revolted
provinces, according to the following prophecies.

[Jeremiah 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 46:3</span></span>

Order ye the buckler - This is the call to the general armament of the
people against the Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 46:4</span></span>

Furbish the spears - Cleanse, brighten, and sharpen them; from the
Franco-Gallic fourbir, to polish, brighten.

Brigandines - A coat of mail, especially that which was made scale
fashion; one plate overlapping the other, like the scales of fish.

[Jeremiah 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 46:5</span></span>

Wherefore have I seen them dismayed - What! such a numerous, formidable,
and well-appointed army panic-struck? So that they have turned back -
fled apace, and looked not round; while their mighty ones - their
generals and commanders, striving to rally them, are beaten down.

[Jeremiah 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 46:6</span></span>

Let not the swift flee away - Even the swiftest shall not be able to
escape.

They shall - fall toward the north - By the Euphrates, which was
northward of Judea. Here the Egyptian army was routed with great

slaughter.

[Jeremiah 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 46:7</span></span>

Who is this that cometh up as a flood - The vast concourse of people is
here represented as a river: for instance, the Jordan, suddenly swollen
with the rains in harvest, rolling its waters along, and overflowing the
whole country. A fine image to represent the incursions of vast armies
carrying all before them. Such was the army of Pharaoh-necho in its
march to Carchemish.

[Jeremiah 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 46:9</span></span>

The Ethiopians - Hebrews Cush, Phut, and the Ludim. This army was
composed of many nations. Cush. which we translate Ethiopians, almost
invariably means the Arabians; and here, those Arabs that bordered on
Egypt near the Red Sea. Phut probably means the Libyans; for Phut
settled in Libya, according to Josephus. Phut and Cush were two of the
sons of Ham, and brothers to Mitsraim, the father of the Egyptians, [Gen
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006); and the Ludim were descended
from Mitsraim; see [Gen 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013). Bochart
contends that the Ludim were Ethiopians, and that they were famous for
the use of the bow. Phaleg, lib. 4:26.

[Jeremiah 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 46:10</span></span>

For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts - The prophet represents
this as a mighty sacrifice, where innumerable victims were slain.

[Jeremiah 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 46:11</span></span>

Go up into Gilead, and take balm - An irony. Egypt is so completely
enfeebled by this overthrow, that her political wound is utterly
incurable. This figure is used with the more propriety here, as the
Egyptians have been celebrated from the remotest antiquity for their
knowledge of medicine.

[Jeremiah 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 46:12</span></span>

The nations have heard of thy shame - Of thy disgrace, by this
prodigious slaughter of thy troops.

[Jeremiah 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 46:13</span></span>

How Nebuchadrezzar - should come and smite the land of Egypt - See on
Jeremiah 44 (note). This was after Amasis had driven Pharaoh-necho into
Upper Egypt. See [Jer 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#030).

[Jeremiah 46:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 46:14</span></span>

Migdol - Magdolum, a city of Lower Egypt. Noph, Memphis. Tahpanhes,
Daphne. See before, [Jer 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001) (note).

Round about thee - The Phoenicians, Philistines, Ammonites, Moabites,
and Edomites, all prostrated by the arms of the Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 46:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 46:15</span></span>

They stood not, because the Lord did drive them - The Lord panic-struck
them, and drove them back.

[Jeremiah 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 46:16</span></span>

One fell upon another - In their terror and confusion ranks fell on
ranks, and overturned each other.

Let us go again to our own people - Let us flee to our own country with
all possible speed. These were the auxiliaries.

[Jeremiah 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 46:17</span></span>

They did cry there - Dr. Blayney translates this cry thus: -

\- "O Pharaoh, king of Egypt, A tumult hath frustrated the appointed
meeting."

These allies sent their excuse to Pharaoh, that the disasters they had
met with had prevented them from joining him as they had intended.

[Jeremiah 46:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 46:18</span></span>

As Tabor is among the mountains - This mountain is situated in the plain
of Esdraelon in Galilee, on the confines of the tribes of Zebulun and
Issachar, [Jos 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#022). It stood by
itself, separated from all the other mountains by deep valleys, and is
the highest of the whole.

And as Carmel by the sea - Carmel is a mountain on the coast of the
Mediterranean Sea, on the southern frontier of the tribe of Asher. Were
the Egyptians as distinguished for valor and strength as the mountains
Tabor and Carmel are for height among the other mountains in their
vicinity, they should not be able to stand the shock of the Chaldean
army.

[Jeremiah 46:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 46:19</span></span>

Furnish thyself to go into captivity - The thing is unavoidable; prepare
for this calamity.

[Jeremiah 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 46:20</span></span>

Egypt is like a very fair heifer - Fruitful and useful; but destruction
cometh out of the north, from Chaldea. It may be that there is an
allusion here to Isis, worshipped in Egypt under the form of a beautiful
cow.

[Jeremiah 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 46:21</span></span>

Are fled away together - Perhaps there is a reference here to the case
of a cow stung with gnats. She runs hither and thither not knowing where
to go; so shall it be with this scattered people.

[Jeremiah 46:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 46:22</span></span>

The voice - shall go like a serpent - See [Isa
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#004) (note), and the note there.

[Jeremiah 46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 46:23</span></span>

They shall cut down her forest - Supposed to mean her cities, of which
Egypt had no fewer than one thousand and twenty.

[Jeremiah 46:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 46:24</span></span>

The hand or the people of the north - The Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 46:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 46:25</span></span>

The multitude of No - אמון מנא Amon minno, the Amon of No, called by the
Greeks Διοσπολις, or Jupiter's city. It was the famous Thebes,
celebrated anciently for its hundred gates. Amon was the name by which
the Egyptians called Jupiter, who had a famous temple at Thebes.

The word Pharaoh is twice repeated here; and Dr. Dahler thinks that one
may design Pharaoh Hophrah, and the other Amasis, the new king.

[Jeremiah 46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 46:26</span></span>

Afterward it shall be inhabited - That is, within forty years, as
Ezekiel had predicted, [Eze 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#013).

[Jeremiah 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 46:27</span></span>

Fear not - my servant Jacob - In the midst of wrath God remembers mercy.
Though Judah shall be destroyed, Jerusalem taken, the temple burnt to
the ground, and the people carried into captivity, yet the nation shall
not be destroyed. A seed shall be preserved, out of which the nation
shall revive.

[Jeremiah 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 46:28</span></span>

I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have driven thee;
but I will not make a full end of thee - The Jews still remain as a
distinct people, while the Assyrians, Chaldeans, Egyptians, etc., are no
more!

On this subject, I cannot withhold from my readers the following very
judicious remarks of Bp. Newton, in his Dissertations on the Prophecies.

"The preservation of the Jews through so many ages, and the total
destruction of their enemies, are wonderful events; and are made still
more wonderful by being signified beforehand by the spirit of prophecy,
as particularly in the passage before us. Their preservation is really
one of the most illustrious acts of Divine Providence. They are
dispersed among all nations, yet not confounded with any. The drops of
rain which fall, nay the great rivers which flow into the ocean, are
soon mingled with and lost in that immense body of waters. And the same,
in all human probability, would have been the fate of the Jews; they
would have been mingled and lost in the common mass of mankind: but, on
the contrary, they flow into all parts of the world, mix with all
nations, and yet keep separate from all. They still live as a distinct
people; and yet they nowhere live according to their own laws, nowhere
elect their own magistrates, nowhere enjoy the full exercise of their
religion. Their solemn feasts and sacrifices are limited to one certain
place; and that hath been now for many ages in the hands of strangers
and aliens, who will not suffer them to come thither. No people have
continued unmixed so long as they have done; not only of those who have
sent colonies into foreign countries, but even of those who have
remained in their own country. The northern nations have come in swarms
into the more southern parts of Europe: but where are they now to be
discerned and distinguished? The Gauls went forth in great bodies to
seek their fortune in foreign parts; but what traces or footsteps of
them are now remaining any where? In France, who can separate the race
of the ancient Gauls from the various other people who from time to time
have settled there? In Spain, who can distinguish between the first
possessors, the Spaniards, and the Goths and Moors, who conquered and
kept possession of the country for some ages? In England, who can
pretend to say certainly which families are derived from the ancient
Britons, and which from the Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans? The most
ancient and honorable pedigrees can be traced up only to a certain
period; and beyond that there is nothing but conjecture and uncertainty,
obscurity and ignorance. But the Jews can go up higher than any nation;
they can even deduce their pedigree from the beginning of the world.
They may not know from what particular tribe or family they are
descended; but they know certainly that they all sprang from the stock
of Abraham. And yet the contempt with which they have been treated, and
the hardships they have undergone in almost all countries, should, one
would think, have made them desirous to forget or renounce their
original: but they profess it; they glory in it; and after so many wars,
massacres, and persecutions, they still subsist; they are still very
numerous. And what but a supernatural power could have preserved them in
such a manner as no other nation upon earth has been preserved? Nor is
the providence of God less remarkable in the destruction of their
enemies, than in their own preservation. For, from the beginning, who
have been the great enemies and oppressors of the Jewish nation, removed
them from their own land, and compelled them into captivity and slavery?
The Egyptians afflicted them much, and detained them in bondage several
years. The Assyrians carried away captive the ten tribes of Israel; and
the Babylonians, afterwards, the two remaining tribes of Judah and
Benjamin. The Syro-Macedonians, especially Antiochus Epiphanes, cruelly
persecuted them; and the Romans utterly dissolved the Jewish state, and
dispersed the people so as that they have never been able to recover
their city and country again. And where are now those great and famous
monarchies, which in their turn subdued and oppressed the people of God?
Are they not vanished as a dream; and not only their power, but their
very names, lost in the earth? The Egyptians, Assyrians, and Babylonians
were overthrown and entirely subjugated by the Persians; and the
Persians, it is remarkable, were the restorers of the Jews as well as
the destroyers of their enemies. The Syro-Macedonians were swallowed up
by the Romans; and the Roman empire, great and powerful as it was, was
broken into pieces by the incursions of the northern nations; while the
Jews are subsisting as a distinct people at this day. And what a wonder
of providence is it, that the vanquished should so many ages survive the
victors; and the former be spread all over the world, while the latter
are no more! Nay, not only nations have been punished for their
cruelties to the Jews, but Divine vengeance has pursued even single
persons who have been their persecutors and oppressors. The first-born
of Pharaoh was destroyed; and he himself with his host, drowned in the
sea. Nebuchadnezzar was stricken with madness, and the crown was
transferred from his family to strangers. Antiochus Epiphanes and Herod
died in great agonies, with ulcers and vermin issuing from them.
Flaccus, governor of Egypt, who barbarously plundered and oppressed the
Jews of Alexandria, was afterwards banished and slain; and Caligula, who
persecuted the Jews for refusing to do Divine honors to his statue, was
murdered in the flower of his age, after a short and wicked reign. But
where are now, - since they have absolutely rejected the Gospel. and
been no longer the peculiar people of God, - where are now such visible
manifestations of a Divine interposition in their favor? The Jews would
do well to consider this point; for, rightly considered, it may be an
effectual means of opening their eyes, and of turning them to Christ our
Savior." See Bp. Newton on the prophecies, dissert. 8 sect. 2. And see
the notes on Ezekiel, where the calamities of these miserable people are
largely detailed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 47](jer047)

</div>
