<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer001)  [Next](jer003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 2:0</span></span>

God expresses his continued regard for his people, long since chosen,
[Jer 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001). He then expostulates with
them on their ungrateful and worse than heathen return to his regard,
[Jer 2:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#004); at which even the
inanimate creation must be astonished, [Jer
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012), [Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013). After this their guilt is
declared to be the sole cause of the calamities which their enemies had
power to inflict on them, [Jer
2:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014). They are upbraided for their
alliances with idolatrous countries, [Jer
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018), [Jer
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019); and for their strong propensity
to idolatry, notwithstanding all the care and tender mercy of God, [Jer
2:20-29](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020). Even the chastenings of the
Almighty have produced in this people no repentance, [Jer
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030). The chapter concludes with
compassionately remonstrating against their folly and ingratitude in
revolting so deeply from God, and with warning them of the fearful
consequences, [Jer 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031), [Jer
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#037).

[Jeremiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 2:2</span></span>

I remember thee - The youth here refers to their infant political state
when they came out of Egypt; they just then began to be a people. Their
espousals refer to their receiving the law at Mount Sinai, which they
solemnly accepted, [Exo 24:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006), and
which acceptance was compared to a betrothing or espousal. Previously to
this they were no people, for they had no constitution nor form of
government. When they received the law, and an establishment in the
Promised Land, then they became a people and a nation.

Wentest after me - Receivedst my law, and wert obedient to it; confiding
thyself wholly to my guidance, and being conscientiously attached to my
worship. The kindness was that which God showed them by taking them to
be his people, not their kindness to him.

[Jeremiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 2:3</span></span>

Israel was holiness unto the Lord - Fully consecrated to his service.

The first fruits of his increase - They were as wholly the Lord's, as
the first fruits were the property of the priests according to the law
[Num 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#013). These the priests alone
had a right to devote to their own use.

All that devour him shall offend - As they were betrothed to the Lord,
they were considered his especial property; they therefore who injured
them were considered as laying violent hands on the property of God.
They who persecute God's children have a grievous burden to bear, an
awful account to give.

[Jeremiah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 2:5</span></span>

What iniquity have your fathers found in me - Have they ever discovered
any thing cruel, unjust, oppressive in my laws? Any thing unkind or
tyrannical in my government? Why then have they become idolaters?

[Jeremiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 2:6</span></span>

Through the wilderness - Egypt was the house of their bondage: the
desert through which they passed after they came out of Egypt, was a
place where the means of life were not to be found; where no one family
could subsist, much less a company of 600, 000 men. God mentions these
things to show that it was by the bounty of an especial providence that
they were fed and preserved alive. Previously to this, it was a land
through which no man passed, and in which no man dwelt. And why? because
it did not produce the means of life; it was the shadow of death in its
appearance, and the grave to those who committed themselves to it.

[Jeremiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 2:7</span></span>

And I brought you into a plentiful country - The land of Canaan.

My land - The particular property of God, which he gave to them as an
inheritance, they being his peculiar people.

[Jeremiah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 2:8</span></span>

They that handle the law - ותפשי vethophe shey, they that draw out the
law; they whose office it is to explain it, draw out its spiritual
meanings, and show to what its testimonies refer.

The pastors also - Kings, political and civil rulers.

Prophesied by Baal - Became his prophets, and were inspired with the
words of lying spirits.

[Jeremiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 2:9</span></span>

I will yet plead with you - אריב arib, I will maintain my process,
vindicate my own conduct, and prove the wickedness of yours.

[Jeremiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 2:10</span></span>

The isles of Chittim - This is the island of Cyprus, according to
Josephus. In 1 Maccabees 8:5, it is taken for Macedonia. Besides this,
how they (the Romans) had discomfited in battle Philip and Perseus, king
of the Chittims. Chittim was the grandson of Japhet; and Bochart has
made it appear that the countries inhabited by the Chittim were Italy
and the adjacent provinces of Europe, lying along the coast of the
Mediterranean Sea; and probably this is the prophet's meaning.

Send unto Kedar - The name of an Arabian tribe. See if nations either
near or remote, cultivated or stupid, have acted with such fickleness
and ingratitude as you have done! They have retained their gods to whom
they had no obligation; ye have abandoned your God, to whom ye owe your
life, breath, and all things!

[Jeremiah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 2:12</span></span>

Be astonished, O ye heavens - Or, the heavens are astonished. The
original will admit either sense. The conduct of this people was so
altogether bad, that among all the iniquities of mankind, neither heaven
nor earth had witnessed any thing so excessively sinful and profligate.

[Jeremiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 2:13</span></span>

Two evils - First, they forsook God, the Fountain of life, light,
prosperity, and happiness. Secondly, they hewed out broken cisterns;
they joined themselves to idols, from whom they could receive neither
temporal nor spiritual good! Their conduct was the excess of folly and
blindness. What we call here broken cisterns, means more properly such
vessels as were ill made, not staunch, ill put together, so that the
water leaked through them.

[Jeremiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 2:14</span></span>

Is Israel a servant? - Is he a slave purchased with money, or a servant
born in the family? He is a son himself. If so, then, why is he spoiled?
Not because God has not shown him love and kindness; but because he
forsook God, turned to and is joined with idols.

[Jeremiah 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 2:15</span></span>

The young lions roared upon him - The Assyrians, who have sacked and
destroyed the kingdom of Israel, with a fierceness like that of pouncing
upon their prey.

[Jeremiah 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 2:16</span></span>

The children of Noph and Tahapanes - Noph and Tahapanes were two cities
of Egypt, otherwise called Memphis and Daphni. It is well known that the
good king was defeated by the Egyptians, and slain in battle. Thus was
the crown of Judah's head broken.

[Jeremiah 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 2:18</span></span>

What hast thou to do in the way of Egypt - Why dost thou make alliances
with Egypt?

To drink the waters of Sihor? - This means the Nile. See on [Isa
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#003) (note).

The way of Assyria - Why make alliances with the Assyrians? All such
connections will only expedite thy ruin.

To drink the waters of the river? - The Euphrates, as נהר nahar or הנהר
hannahar always means Euphrates, the country between the Tigris and
Euphrates, is termed to this day Maher alnahar, "the country beyond the
river," i.e., Mesopotamia.

Instead of cleaving to the Lord, they joined affinity and made alliances
with those two nations, who were ever jealous of them, and sought their
ruin. Egypt was to them a broken reed instead of a staff; Assyria was a
leaky cistern, from which they could derive no help.

[Jeremiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 2:20</span></span>

Of old time I have broken thy yoke - It is thought by able critics that
the verbs should be read in the second person singular, Thou hast broken
thy yoke, Thou hast burst thy bonds; and thus the Septuagint, συνετριψας
τον ζυγον σου, "thou hast broken thy yoke." And the Vulgate, Confregisti
jugum meum, rupisti, vincula mea; "Thou hast broken my yoke; thou hast
burst my bonds;" and so the Arabic. But the Chaldee gives it a meaning
which removes the difficulty: "I have broken the yoke of the people from
thy neck; I have cut your bonds asunder." And when this was done, they
did promise fair: for "thou saidst, I will not transgress;" but still
they played the harlot - committed idolatrous acts in the high places,
where the heathen had built their altars, pretending that elevation of
this kind assisted their devotion.

[Jeremiah 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 2:21</span></span>

I had planted thee a noble vine - I gave thee the fullest instruction,
the purest ordinances, the highest privileges; and reason would that I
should expect thee to live suitably to such advantages; but instead of
this thou art become degenerate; the tree is deteriorated, and the fruit
is bad. Instead of being true worshippers, and of a holy life and
conversation, ye are become idolaters of the most corrupt and profligate
kind. See [Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001), etc., where the
same image is used.

[Jeremiah 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 2:22</span></span>

For though thou wash thee with nitre - It should be rendered natar or
natron, a substance totally different from our nitre. It comes from the
root נתר nathar, to dissolve, loosen, because a solution of it in water
is abstersive, taking out spots, etc., from clothes. It is still used in
the east for the purpose of washing. If vinegar be poured on it, Dr.
Shaw says, a strong effervescence is the immediate consequence, which
illustrates [Pro 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#020) : "The singing
of songs to a heavy heart is like vinegar upon natron;" that is, there
is no affinity between them; opposition and strife are occasioned by any
attempt to unite them.

Thine iniquity is marked before me - No washing will take out thy spots;
the marks of thy idolatry and corruption are too deeply rooted to be
extracted by any human means.

[Jeremiah 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 2:23</span></span>

See thy way in the valley - The valley of Hinnom, where they offered
their own children to Moloch, an idol of the Ammonites.

A swift dromedary traversing her ways - Dr. Blayney translates, "A fleet
dromedary that hath taken to company with her." Dr. Dahler rather
paraphrases, thus: -

Semblable a une dromedaire en chaleur,

Qui court d'une tote a l'autre.

"Like to a dromedary in her desire for the male,

Which runs hither and thither."

This is an energetic comparison; and shows the unbridled attachment of
those bad people to idolatry, and the abominable practices by which it
was usually accompanied.

[Jeremiah 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 2:24</span></span>

A wild ass used to the wilderness - Another comparison to express the
same thing.

Snuffeth up the wind - In a high fever from the inward heat felt at such
times, these animals open their mouths and nostrils as wide as possible,
to take in large draughts of fresh air, in order to cool them.

In her mouth they shall find her - The meaning is, that although such
animals are exceedingly fierce and dangerous when they are in this
state; yet, as soon as they have found the male, the desire is
satisfied, and they become quiet and governable as before. But it was
not so with this idolatrous people: their desires were ever fierce and
furious; they were never satiated, one indulgence always leading to an
other. The brute beasts had only a short season in which this appetite
prevailed; but they acted without restraint or limit.

[Jeremiah 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 2:25</span></span>

Withhold thy foot from being unshod - When it was said to them, "Cease
from discovering thy feet; prostitute thyself no more to thy idols."

And thy throat from thirst - Drink no more of their libations, nor use
those potions which tend only to increase thy appetite for pollution.
Thou didst say, There is no hope: it is useless to advise me thus; I am
determined; I have loved these strange pods, and to them will I cleave.

[Jeremiah 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 2:26</span></span>

As the thief is ashamed - As the pilferer is confounded when he is
caught in the fact; so shalt thou, thy kings, princes, priests, and
prophets, be confounded, when God shall arrest thee in thy idolatries,
and deliver thee into the hands of thine enemies.

[Jeremiah 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 2:27</span></span>

Thou art my father - By thee we have been produced, and by thee we are
sustained. This was the property of the true God; for he is the Author
and Supporter of being. How deeply fallen and brutishly ignorant must
they be when they could attribute this to the stock of a tree!

[Jeremiah 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 2:28</span></span>

According to the number of thy cities are thy gods - Among heathen
nations every city had its tutelary deity. Judah, far sunk in idolatry,
had adopted this custom. The Church of Rome has refined it a little:
every city has its tutelary saint, and this saint has a procession and
worship peculiar to himself. So here; not much of the old idolatry is
lost.

[Jeremiah 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 2:31</span></span>

Have I been a wilderness unto Israel? - Have I ever withheld from you
any of the blessings necessary for your support?

A land of darkness - Have you, since you passed through the wilderness,
and came out of the darkness of Egypt, ever been brought into similar
circumstances? You have had food and all the necessaries of life for
your bodies; and my ordinances and word to enlighten and cheer your
souls. I have neither been a wilderness nor a land of darkness to you.

We are lords - We wish to be our own masters; we will neither brook
religious nor civil restraint; we will regard no laws, human or Divine.
It was this disposition that caused them to fall in so fully with the
whole system of idolatry.

[Jeremiah 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 2:32</span></span>

Can a maid forget her ornaments - This people has not so much attachment
to me as young females have to their dress and ornaments. They never
forget them and even when arrived at old age, look with pleasure on the
dress and ornaments which they have worn in their youth.

Days without number - That is, for many years; during the whole reign of
Manasses, which was fifty-five years, the land was deluged with
idolatry, from which the reform by good King Josiah his grandson had not
yet purified it.

[Jeremiah 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 2:33</span></span>

Why trimmest thou thy way - Ye have used a multitude of artifices to
gain alliances with the neighboring idolatrous nations.

Hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways - Ye have made even these
idolaters worse than they were before. Dr. Blayney translates,
"Therefore have I taught calamity thy ways." A prosopopoeia: "I have
instructed calamity where to find thee." Thou shalt not escape
punishment.

[Jeremiah 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 2:34</span></span>

The blood of the souls of the poor innocents - We find from the sacred
history that Manasseh had filled Jerusalem with innocent blood; see [Kg2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016), and [Eze
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#010).

I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these - Such deeds of
darkness and profligacy are found only in Israel. Dr. Blayney
translates, "I have not found it in a digged hole, but upon every oak."
Others cover the blood that it may not appear; but ye have shed it
openly, and sprinkled it upon your consecrated oaks, and gloried in it.

[Jeremiah 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 2:35</span></span>

Because I am innocent - They continued to assert their innocence, and
therefore expected that God's judgments would be speedily removed!

I will plead with thee - I will maintain my process, follow it up to
conviction, and inflict the deserved punishment.

[Jeremiah 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 2:36</span></span>

Why gaddest thou about - When they had departed from the Lord, they
sought foreign alliances for support.

1\. The Assyrians [Ch2 28:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#013); but
they injured instead of helping them.

2\. The Egyptians: but in this they were utterly disappointed, and were
ashamed of their confidence.

See [Jer 37:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#007) (note), for the
fulfillment of this prediction.

[Jeremiah 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jer 2:37</span></span>

Thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head - Thou
shalt find all thy confidence in vain, - thy hope disappointed; - and
thy state reduced to desperation. The hand being placed on the head was
the evidence of deep sorrow, occasioned by utter desolation. See the
case of Tamar, when ruined and abandoned by her brother Amnon, [Sa2
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#019).

Thou shalt not prosper in them - They shall all turn to thy
disadvantage; and this as we shall see in the history of this people,
was literally fulfilled. O what a grievous and bitter thing it is to sin
against the Lord, and have him for an enemy!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 3](jer003)

</div>
