<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer006)  [Next](jer008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 7:0</span></span>

Mere begins another section of prophecy, ending with the ninth chapter.
It opens with exhorting to amendment of life, without which the
confidence of the Jews in their temple is declared vain, [Jer
7:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001). God bids them take warning
from the fate of their brethren the Israelites, who had been carried
away captive on account of their sins without any regard to that sacred
place, (Shiloh), where the ark of God once resided, [Jer
7:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012). The iniquities of Judah are
so great in the sight of God that the prophet is commanded not to
intercede for the people, [Jer 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016);
the more especially as they persisted in provoking God by their
idolatrous practices, [Jer 7:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#017).
The Jewish sacrifices, if not accompanied with obedience to the moral
law, are of no avail, [Jer 7:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021).
Notwithstanding the numerous messages of mercy from the time of the
exodus, the people revolted more and more; and have added to their other
sins this horrible evil, the setting up of their abominations in the
temple of Jehovah; or, in other words, they have encumbered the Mosaic
economy, which shadowed forth the glorious truths of Christianity, with
a heterogeneous admixture of the idolatrous, impure, and cruel rites of
heathenism; consequently, the whole land shall be utterly desolated,
[Jer 7:25-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#025).

[Jeremiah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 7:1</span></span>

The word that came to Jeremiah - This prophecy is supposed to have been
delivered in the first year of the reign of Jehoiakim, son of Josiah,
who, far from following the example of his pious father, restored
idolatry, maintained bad priests and worse prophets, and filled
Jerusalem with abominations of all kinds.

[Jeremiah 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 7:2</span></span>

Stand in the gate of the Lord's house - There was a show of public
worship kept up. The temple was considered God's residence; the usual
ceremonies of religion restored by Josiah were still observed; and the
people were led to consider the temple and its services as sacred
things, which would be preservatives to them in case of the threatened
invasion.

[Jeremiah 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 7:4</span></span>

The temple of the Lord - In the Chaldee the passage stands thus: - "Do
not trust in the words of lying prophets, which say, Before the temple
of the Lord ye shall worship; Before the temple of the Lord ye shall
sacrifice; Before the temple of the Lord ye shall adore; thrice in the
year ye shall appear before it." This the Targumist supposes to have
been the reason why the words are here thrice repeated. They rather seem
to express the conviction which the people had, that they should be safe
while their temple service continued; for they supposed that God would
not give it up into profane hands. But sacred places and sacred symbols
are nothing in the sight of God when the heart is not right with him.

[Jeremiah 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 7:5</span></span>

If ye throughly amend your ways - Literally, If in making good ye fully
make good your ways. God will no longer admit of half-hearted work.
Semblances of piety cannot deceive him; he will not accept partial
reformation; there must be a thorough amendment.

[Jeremiah 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 7:9</span></span>

Will ye steal, murder - Will you continue to commit such abominations,
and pretend to worship me; and thus defile the place that is called by
my name; and so make my house a den of robbers? I have seen this, - and
can you expect to escape condign punishment? Ye shall not escape.

[Jeremiah 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 7:12</span></span>

But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh - See what I did to my
tabernacle and ark formerly: after a long residence at Shiloh, for the
iniquity of the priests and the people, I suffered it to fall into the
hands of the Philistines, and to be carried captive into their land, and
to be set up in the house of their idols. And because of your
iniquities, I will deal with you and this temple in the same way; for as
I spared not Shiloh, though my ark was there, but made it a victim of my
wrath, so will I do to Jerusalem and her temple.

[Jeremiah 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 7:15</span></span>

The whole seed of Ephraim - Taken here for all the ten tribes, that of
Ephraim being the principal.

[Jeremiah 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 7:16</span></span>

Therefore pray not thou for this people - They have filled up the
measure of their iniquity, and they must become examples of my justice.
How terrible must the state of that place be, where God refuses to pour
out the spirit of supplication on his ministers and people in its
behalf!

[Jeremiah 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 7:18</span></span>

The children gather wood - Here is a description of a whole family
gathered together, and acting unitedly in idolatrous worship.

1\. The children go and collect wood, and bring it to the place of
sacrifice.

2\. The fathers lay it in order, and kindle a fire.

3\. The mother and her maids knead dough, make their batch, and out of
it form cakes, and bake them for the honor of the queen of heaven; most
probably the moon, though perhaps not exclusive of the sun and planets,
generally called the host of heaven.

Family worship is a most amiable and becoming thing when performed
according to truth. What a pity that so few families show such zeal for
the worship of God as those apostate Israelites did for that of their
idols!

[Jeremiah 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 7:21</span></span>

Put your burnt-offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh - I will
receive neither sacrifice nor oblation from you; therefore you may take
the beasts intended for sacrifice, and slay and eat them for your common
nourishment. See on [Jer 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029) (note).

[Jeremiah 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 7:23</span></span>

This thing commanded I them - Obey my voice - It was not sacrifices and
oblations which I required of your fathers in the wilderness, but
obedience; it was to walk in that way of righteousness which I have
commanded; then I should have acknowledged them for my people, and I
should have been their God, and then it would have been well with them.
But to my commands,

1\. They hearkened not - paid no regard to my word.

2\. They inclined not the ear - showed no disposition to attend to my
counsels.

3\. They walked in the imaginations of their evil heart - followed its
irregular and impure motions, rather than the holy dictates of my
Spirit.

4\. They went backward and not forward. Instead of becoming more wise,
obedient, and holy, they grew more corrupt; so that they became more
profligate than their fathers.

[Jeremiah 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 7:28</span></span>

Nor receiveth correction - They have profited neither by mercies nor by
judgments: blessings and corrections have been equally lost upon them.

[Jeremiah 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 7:29</span></span>

Cut off thine hair - גזי נזרך gozzi nizrech, shear thy nazarite. The
Nazarite was one who took upon him a particular vow, and separated
himself from all worldly connections for a certain time, that he might
devote himself without interruption to the service of God; and during
all this time no razor was to pass on his head, for none of his hair was
to be taken off. After the vow was over, he shaved his head and beard,
and returned to society. See [Num 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#002)
(note), etc., and the notes there. Jerusalem is here considered under
the notion of a Nazarite, by profession devoted to the service of God:
but that profession was empty; it was not accompanied with any suitable
practice. God tells them here to cut off their hair; to make no vain
pretensions to holiness or religion; to throw off the mask, and attempt
no longer to impose upon themselves and others by their hypocritical
pretensions. On the same ground he orders them, [Jer
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021), to devote to common use the
animals destined for sacrifice; and to make no more vain shows of
religion while their hearts were not right with him. Dr. Blayney thinks
the address is to the prophet, who was a Nazarite by virtue of his
office, and who was called to cut off his hair as a token of mourning
for the desolations which were coming upon his people. That cutting off
the hair was a sign of distress and mourning may be seen, [Ezr
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003); [Isa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002); [Jer
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#005), etc. But I think the other the
more natural construction.

On high places - That the lamentation may be heard to the greater
distance.

The generation of his wrath - Persons exposed to punishment: used here
as children of wrath, [Eph 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003).

[Jeremiah 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 7:31</span></span>

Tophet - in the valley of the son of Hinnom - Tophet was the place in
that valley where the continual fires were kept up, in and through which
they consecrated their children to Moloch.

[Jeremiah 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 7:32</span></span>

The valley of slaughter - The place where the slaughtered thousands of
this rebellious people shall be cast, in order to their being burnt, or
becoming food for the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, [Jer
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#033). These words are repeated, and
their meaning more particularly explained, [Jer
19:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 7:34</span></span>

Then will I cause to cease - the voice of mirth - There shall no longer
be in Jerusalem any cause of joy; they shall neither marry nor be given
in marriage, for the land shall be totally desolated. Such horrible sins
required such a horrible punishment. And they must be horrible, when
they move God to destroy the work of his own hands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 8](jer008)

</div>
