<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer029)  [Next](jer031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 30:0</span></span>

This and the following chapter must relate to a still future restoration
of the posterity of Jacob from their several dispersions, as no
deliverance hitherto afforded them comes up to the terms of it; for,
after the return from Babylon, they were again enslaved by the Greeks
and Romans, contrary to the prediction in the eighth verse; in every
papistical country they have labored under great civil disabilities, and
in some of them have been horribly persecuted; upon the ancient people
has this mystic Babylon very heavily laid her yoke; and in no place in
the world are they at present their own masters; so that this prophecy
remains to be fulfilled in the reign of David, i.e., the Messiah; the
type, according to the general structure of the prophetical writings,
being put for the antitype. The prophecy opens by an easy transition
from the temporal deliverance spoken of before, and describes the mighty
revolutions that shall precede the restoration of the descendants of
Israel, [Jer 30:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001), who are
encouraged to trust in the promises of God, [Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010), [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011). They are, however, to expect
corrections; which shall have a happy issue in future period, [Jer
30:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012). The great blessings of
Messiah's reign are enumerated, [Jer
30:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018); and the wicked and
impenitent declared to have no share in them, [Jer
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023), [Jer
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024).

[Jeremiah 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 30:1</span></span>

The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord - This prophecy was
delivered about a year after the taking of Jerusalem; so Dahler. Dr.
Blayney supposes it and the following chapter to refer to the future
restoration of both Jews and Israelites in the times of the Gospel;
though also touching at the restoration from the Babylonish captivity,
at the end of seventy years. Supposing these two chapters to be penned
after the taking of Jerusalem, which appears the most natural, they will
refer to the same events, one captivity shadowing forth another, and one
restoration being the type or pledge of the second.

[Jeremiah 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 30:2</span></span>

Write thee all the words that I have spoken unto thee in a book - The
book here recommended I believe to be the thirtieth and thirty-first
chapters; for among the Hebrews any portion of writing, in which the
subject was finished, however small, was termed ספר sepher, a Book, a
treatise or discourse.

[Jeremiah 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 30:3</span></span>

The days come - First, After the conclusion of the seventy years.
Secondly, Under the Messiah.

That I will bring again the captivity of Israel - The ten tribes, led
captive by the king of Assyria, and dispersed among the nations.

And Judah - The people carried into Babylon at two different times;
first, under Jeconiah, and, secondly, under Zedekiah, by Nebuchadnezzar.

[Jeremiah 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 30:5</span></span>

We have heard a voice of trembling - This may refer to the state and
feelings of the people during the war which Cyrus carried on against the
Babylonians. Trembling and terror would no doubt affect them, and put an
end to peace and all prosperity; as they could not tell what would be
the issue of the struggle, and whether their state would be better or
worse should their present masters fall in the conflict. This is well
described in the next verse, where men are represented as being, through
pain and anguish, like women in travail. See the same comparison [Isa
13:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006).

[Jeremiah 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 30:7</span></span>

Alas! for that day is great - When the Medes and Persians with all their
forces shall come on the Chaldeans, it will be the day of Jacob's
trouble - trial, dismay, and uncertainty; but he shall be delivered out
of it - the Chaldean empire shall fall, but the Jews shall be delivered
by Cyrus. Jerusalem shall be destroyed by the Romans, but the Israel of
God shall be delivered from its ruin. Not one that had embraced
Christianity perished in the sackage of that city.

[Jeremiah 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 30:8</span></span>

I will break his yoke - That is, the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar.

Of him - Of Jacob, ([Jer 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007)), viz.,
the then captive Jews.

[Jeremiah 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 30:9</span></span>

But they shall serve the Lord their God, and David their King - This
must refer to the times of the Messiah and hence the Chaldee has, "They
shall obey the Lord their God, וישת מאון למשיחה בר דוד veyishta meun
limschicha bar David, and they shall obey the Messiah, the Son of
David." This is a very remarkable version; and shows that it was a
version, not according to the letter, but according to their doctrine
and their expectation. David was long since dead; and none of his
descendants ever reigned over them after the Babylonish captivity, nor
have they since been a regal nation. Zerubbabel, under the Persians, and
the Asmoneans, can be no exception to this. They have been no nation
since; they are no nation now; and it is only in the latter days that
they can expect to be a nation, and that must be a Christian nation.

Christ is promised under the name of his progenitor, David, [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003), [Isa
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004); [Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023), [Eze
34:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024); [Eze
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#024), [Eze
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#025); [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005).

[Jeremiah 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 30:11</span></span>

Though I make a full end of all nations - Though the Persians destroy
the nations whom they vanquish, yet they shall not destroy thee.

[Jeremiah 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 30:12</span></span>

Thy bruise is incurable - אנוש anush, desperate, not incurable; for the
cure is promised in [Jer 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017), I will
restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds.

[Jeremiah 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 30:13</span></span>

There is none to plead thy cause - All thy friends and allies have
forsaken thee.

[Jeremiah 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 30:15</span></span>

Thy sorrow is incurable - אנוש anush, desperate. See [Jer
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#012).

[Jeremiah 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 30:16</span></span>

They that devour thee - The Chaldeans.

Shall be devoured - By the Medes and Persians.

All that prey upon thee will I give for a prey - The Assyrians were
destroyed by the Babylonians; the Babylonians, by the Medes and
Persians; the Egyptians and Persians were destroyed by the Greeks, under
Alexander. All these nations are now extinct, but the Jews, as a
distinct people, still exist.

[Jeremiah 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 30:18</span></span>

The city shall be builded upon her own heap - Be re-edified from its own
ruins. See the book of Nehemiah, passim.

And the palace shall remain - Meaning, the king's house shall be
restored; or, more probably, the temple shall be rebuilt; which was
true, for after the Babylonish captivity it was rebuilt by Nehemiah,
etc. By the tents, distinguished from the dwelling-places of Jacob, we
may understand all the minor dispersions of the Jews, as well as those
numerous synagogues found in large cities.

[Jeremiah 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 30:19</span></span>

I will multiply them - They shall be very numerous; even where at
present they have but tents.

I will also glorify them - I will put honor upon them every where, so
that they shall be no longer contemptible. This will be a very great
change, for they are now despised all over the earth.

[Jeremiah 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 30:20</span></span>

Their children also - They shall have the education of their own
children as formerly.

And their congregation - Their religious assemblies.

Shall be established - Being, in the latter days, incorporated with
those "who serve the Lord their God, and worship the Messiah, the son of
David."

[Jeremiah 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 30:21</span></span>

Their nobles shall be of themselves - Strangers shall not rule over
them; and -

Their governor shall proceed from the midst of them - Both Nehemiah and
Zerubbabel, their nobles and governors after the return from Babylon,
were Jews.

[Jeremiah 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 30:22</span></span>

Ye shall be my people - The old covenant shall be renewed.

[Jeremiah 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 30:23</span></span>

The whirlwind of the Lord - A grievous tempest of desolation, -

Shall fall with pain upon the head of the wicked - On Nebuchadnezzar and
the Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 30:24</span></span>

In the latter days ye shall consider it - By the latter days the Gospel
dispensation is generally meant; and that restoration which is the
principal topic in this and the succeeding chapter refers to this time.
Had the Jews properly considered this subject, they would long ere this
have been brought into the liberty of the Gospel, and saved from the
maledictions under which they now groan. Why do not the Jews read their
own prophets more conscientiously?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 31](jer031)

</div>
