<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer009)  [Next](jer011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 10:0</span></span>

The Jews, about to be carried into captivity, are here warned against
the superstition and idolatry of that country to which they were going.
Chaldea was greatly addicted to astrology, and therefore the prophet
begins with warning them against it, [Jer
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001), [Jer
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002). He then exposes the absurdity of
idolatry in short but elegant satire; in the midst of which he turns, in
a beautiful apostrophe, to the one true God, whose adorable attributes
repeatedly strike in view, as he goes along, and lead him to contrast
his infinite perfections with those despicable inanities which the
blinded nations fear, [Jer 10:3-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003).
The prophet again denounces the Divine judgments, [Jer
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#017), [Jer
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#018); upon which Jerusalem laments
her fate, and supplicates the Divine compassion in her favor, [Jer
10:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019).

[Jeremiah 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 10:1</span></span>

Hear ye the word which the Lord speaketh unto you - Dr. Dahler supposes
this discourse to have been delivered in the fourth year of the reign of
Jehoiakim. It contains an invective against idolatry; showing its
absurdity, and that the Creator alone should be worshipped by all
mankind.

[Jeremiah 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 10:2</span></span>

Learn not the way of the heathen - These words are more particularly
addressed to the ten tribes scattered among the heathen by the
Assyrians, who carried them away captive; they may also regard those in
the land of Israel who still had the customs of the former heathen
settlers before their eyes.

Be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are dismayed -
The Chaldeans and Egyptians were notoriously addicated to astrology; and
the Israelites here are cautioned against it. The signs of the heavens
may mean either the sun, moon, planets, and particular stars or
constellations; or the figures or characters by which they represented
these heavenly bodies.

[Jeremiah 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 10:3</span></span>

The customs of the people are vain - חקות chukkoth; the statutes and
principles of the science are vain, empty, and illusory. They are
founded in nonsense, ignorance, idolatry, and folly.

One cutteth a tree out of the forest - See the notes on [Isa
40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019) (note), and [Isa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009) (note), etc., which are all
parallel places and where this conduct is strongly ridiculed.

[Jeremiah 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 10:5</span></span>

They are upright as the palm tree - As straight and as stiff as the
trees out of which they are hewn.

[Jeremiah 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 10:7</span></span>

Who would not fear thee - Who would not worship thee as the Author and
Giver of all good? The fear of God is often taken for the whole of true
religion.

Among all the wise men of the nation - Not even the wisest and most
cultivated of the nations have ever found out any one equal to thee; but
so exalted and holy art thou, that in all their wisdom and research they
have never been able to find out the true God.

[Jeremiah 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 10:8</span></span>

The stock is a doctrine of vanities - Dr. Blayney translates, - "The
wood itself is a rebuker of vanities." The very tree out of which the
god is hewn demonstrates the vanity and folly of the idolaters; for, can
all the art of man make out of a log of wood an animate and intelligent
being?

[Jeremiah 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 10:9</span></span>

Brought from Tarshish - Some suppose this to be Tartessus in Spain, from
which the Phoenicians brought much silver. Uphaz, Calmet thinks to be
the river Pison; some think Ophir is intended.

Blue and purple is their clothing - These were the most precious dyes;
very rare, and of high price.

[Jeremiah 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 10:10</span></span>

But the Lord - The original word should be preserved, however we agree
to pronounce it: יהוה Yehovah is the true God. He is without beginning,
and without end. This is true of no being else.

He is the living God - His being is underived; and he gives life to all.
He is the very Fountain whence all life is derived.

And an everlasting king - As he has made, so he governs, all things. His
sway is felt both in the heavens and in the earth.

At his wrath the earth shall tremble - All storms, tempests, tornadoes,
and earthquakes are the effects of his power; and when the nations are
destroyed, or turned upside down, it is the effect of his displeasure.

[Jeremiah 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 10:11</span></span>

Thus shall ye say unto them - This is the message you shall deliver to
the Chaldean idolaters.

The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall
perish - Both they and their worshippers shall be destroyed; and
idolatry shall finally be destroyed from the earth; and the heavens
shall look no more on so great an abomination. It is suffered for a
while: but in the end shall be destroyed. This verse is written in a
sort of Hebraeo-Syriaco-Chaldee; such a dialect as I suppose was spoken
at that time in Babylon, or during the captivity. As it is a message to
the Babylonians therefore, it is given in their own language. The
Chaldee makes it the beginning of the copy of the epistle which the
Prophet Jeremiah sent to the rest of the elders of the captivity who
were in Babylon. All the ancient Versions acknowledge this verse; and it
is found in all MSS. hitherto collated, except one of Dr. Kennicott's
numbered 526; and he has included it between lines, as doubting its
authenticity. Dr. Blayney supposes that some public teacher during the
captivity, deducing it by direct inference from the prophet's words, had
it inserted in the margin, and perhaps usually read together with this
section, in the assemblies of the people, in order that they might have
their answer always ready, whenever they were molested on the point of
religion, or importuned to join the idolatrous worship of the Chaldeans.

Dahler has left it entirely out of the text, and introduces it in a note
thus: - "After [Jer 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010) the Hebrew
text is interrupted by a verse written in the Chaldean or Babylonish
tongue. It is thus expressed: -

Ye shall say unto them, Let the gods perish!

Who have not made the heavens and the earth.

Let them be banished from above the earth,

and from under the heavens.

This verse can be considered only as a foreign insertion, not only on
account of the difference of the language, but also because it
interrupts the natural course of the ideas, and of the connection of the
tenth and twelfth verses."

As a curiosity I shall insert it in Hebrew, which the reader may compare
with the Chaldee text, which I also subjoin.

כזאת תאמרו להם האלהים אשר לא עשו השמים והארץ יאבדו מן הארץ ומן תחת השמים
אלה cazoth tomeru lahem; haelohim asher lo asu hashshamayim vehaarets,
yobedu min haarets, umin tachath hashshamayim elleh. כדנא תאמרון להון
אלהיא די שמיא וארקא לא עבדו יאבדו מארעא ומן תחות שמיא אלה kidna temerun
lehon; elahaiya di shemaiya vearka la abadu, yebadu meara umin techoth
shemaiya elleh.

The Hebrew is the translation of Leusden; the Chaldee is that of the
common text. Had not all the ancient Versions acknowledged it, I also,
principally on account of the strangeness of the language, as being
neither Chaldee nor Syriac, should have doubted its authenticity.

[Jeremiah 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 10:13</span></span>

When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters - This is a
plain allusion to a storm of thunder and lightning, and the abundance of
rain which is the consequence. Water is composed of two gases, hydrogen
and oxygen: the electric or galvanic spark decomposes them, and they
become air; when recomposed, they form water. The lightning acts upon
the hydrogen and oxygen, which are found In the atmospheric air: they
are decomposed, and water or rain is the consequence; which, being
heavier than the air falls down in the form of rain.

This verse and the three following are the same in substance, and nearly
in words, as [Jer 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#016), and
following.

[Jeremiah 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 10:14</span></span>

Every man is brutish - נבער nibar, is a boor, acts as a brute, who may
suppose that a stock of a tree, formed like a man, may be an
intellectual being; and therefore shuns the form as though it had life.
See [Isa 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010), [Isa
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#011). Of which verses, by the way,
Dr. Blayney gives the following version to correct that of Bishop Lowth:
-

[Isa 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010). Who hath formed a god? Or
set up a graven image that profiteth not?

[Isa 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#011). Behold, all that are
connected with it shall be ashamed, And the artificers, they above all
men! They shall assemble all of them; they shall stand forth; They shall
fear; they shall be ashamed at the same time.

"That is, while they stand before the image they have set up, and
worship it with a religious dread, the glaring absurdity of their
conduct shall lead to their shame and disgrace."

With due deference to this learned man, I think this interpretation too
refined.

[Jeremiah 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 10:16</span></span>

The Portion of Jacob is not like them - Every nation had its tutelary
god; this was its portion; in reference to this God says [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019), "He has divided the sun, moon,
and stars, to all the nations under the heaven." And the Lord had taken
the Israelites to be his portion; for "the Lord's portion is his
people," [Deu 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009), and David says,
"The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance," [Psa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005); [Psa
119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067). And hence Isaiah terms the
smooth stones of the brook, to which Divine honors were paid, the
portion of those idolaters, [Isa 57:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#006).
But in the text he says, "The Portion, i.e., the God of Jacob is not
like them; for he is the former of all things," and they are formed by
their foolish worshippers.

[Jeremiah 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 10:17</span></span>

Gather up thy wares - Pack up your goods, or what necessaries of life
your enemies will permit you to carry away; for,

[Jeremiah 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 10:18</span></span>

I will sling out the inhabitants of the land - I will project you with
violence from your country. I will send you all into captivity. This
discourse, from [Jer 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#017), is
supposed to have been delivered in the eleventh year of Jehoiakim.

[Jeremiah 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 10:19</span></span>

This is a grief, and I must bear it - Oppressive as it is, I have
deserved it, and worse; but even in this judgment God remembers mercy.

[Jeremiah 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 10:20</span></span>

My tabernacle is spoiled - The city is taken, and all our villages
ruined and desolated.

[Jeremiah 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 10:21</span></span>

The pastors are become brutish - The king and his counselors, who, by
refusing to pay the promised tribute to Nebuchadnezzar, had kindled a
new war.

[Jeremiah 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 10:22</span></span>

The noise of the bruit is come - How this silly French word bruit, which
signifies noise, got in here, I cannot imagine. The simple translation
is this: "The voice of the report! behold, it is come; yea, great
commotion from the land of the north; (Chaldea); to make the cities of
Judea a desolation, a habitation of wild beasts." That is, the report we
had heard of the projected invasion of Judea by Nebuchadnezzar is
confirmed. He has entered the land; the Chaldeans are at the doors, and
the total desolation of Judea is their sole object.

[Jeremiah 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 10:23</span></span>

O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself - I will not
pretend to dispute with thee; thou dost every thing wisely and justly;
we have sinned, and thou hast a right to punish; and to choose that sort
of punishment thou thinkest will best answer the ends of justice. We
cannot choose; thou hast appointed us to captivity; we must not repine:
yet,

[Jeremiah 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 10:24</span></span>

Correct me, but with judgment - Let not the punishment be to the
uttermost of the demerit of the offense; else we shall be brought to
nothing - totally and irrecoverably ruined.

[Jeremiah 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 10:25</span></span>

Pour out thy fury upon the heathen - Even those who are now the
executors of thy justice upon us will, in their turn, feel its scourge;
for if judgment begins at us, who have been called thy house and thy
people, shall they who have not acknowledged thee escape? It is
impossible. The families and tribes which invoke thee not shall have thy
fury poured out upon them, and especially they who "have eaten up Jacob
and consumed him, and have made his habitation desolate." This was
fulfilled in the Chaldeans. Nebuchadnezzar was punished with madness,
his son was slain in his revels, and the city was taken and sacked by
Cyrus; and the Babylonish empire was finally destroyed! This verse has
been often quoted against those ungodly families who set not up the
worship of God in their houses. These are spiritual Chaldeans, worse
indeed than the Chaldeans ever were: they acknowledge God and his
Christ; and yet neither worship nor serve him. How can that family
expect the blessing of God, where the worship of God is not daily
performed? No wonder their servants are wicked, their children
profligate, and their goods cursed! What an awful reckoning shall such
heads of families have with the Judge in the great day, who have refused
to petition for that mercy which they might have had for the asking.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 11](jer011)

</div>
