<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer034)  [Next](jer036.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 35:0</span></span>

Jeremiah is commanded to go to the Rechabites, who, on the approach of
the Chaldean army, took refuge in Jerusalem; and to try their obedience
to the command of Jonadab, (or Jehonadab, [Kg2
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#015.md), [Kg2
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#016).md), their great progenitor, who
lived in the reign of Jehu, king of Israel, upwards of two hundred and
fifty years before this time, offers them wine to drink, which they
refuse, [Jer 35:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#001.md). Hence occasion
is taken to upbraid the Jews with their disobedience to God, their
heavenly Father, [Jer 35:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#012.md); and a
blessing is pronounced on the Rechabites, [Jer
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#018.md), [Jer
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#019.md).

[Jeremiah 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 35:1</span></span>

The word which came - in the days of Jehoiakim - What strange confusion
in the placing of these chapters! Who could have expected to hear of
Jehoiakim again, whom we have long ago buried; and we have now arrived
in the history at the very last year of the last Jewish king.

This discourse was probably delivered in the fourth or fifth year of
Jehoiakim's reign.

[Jeremiah 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 35:2</span></span>

The house of the Rechabites - The Rechabites were not descendants of
Jacob; they were Kenites, [Ch1 2:55](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#055.md), a
people originally settled in that part of Arabia Petroea, called the
land of Midian; and most probably the descendants of Jethro, the
father-in-law of Moses. Compare [Num
10:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029.md), with [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016.md); [Jdg
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#011.md).

Those mentioned here seem to have been a tribe of Nomades or Scenite
Arabs, who fed their flocks in the deserts of Judea; they preserved the
simple manners of their ancestors, considering the life of the
inhabitants of cities and large towns as the death of liberty; believing
that they would dishonor themselves by using that sort of food that
would oblige them to live a sedentary life. Jonadab, one of their
ancestors, had required his children and descendants to abide faithful
to the customs of their forefathers; to continue to live in tents, and
to nourish themselves on the produce of their flocks; to abstain from
the cultivation of the ground, and from that particularly of the vine
and its produce. His descendants religiously observed this rule, till
the time when the armies of the Chaldeans had entered Judea; when, to
preserve their lives, they retired within the walls of Jerusalem. But
even there we find, from the account in this chapter, they did not quit
their frugal manner of life: but most scrupulously observed the law of
Jonadab their ancestor, and probably of this family.

When the children of Hobab, or Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, were
invited by him to accompany them in their journeying to the Promised
Land, it is very likely that they continued their ancient usages, and
lived a patriarchal life. Their property, consisting in nothing but
their cattle and tents, was easily removable from place to place; and
their manner of living was not likely to excite the envy or jealousy of
those who had learnt to relish the luxuries of life; and therefore we
may naturally conclude that as they were enemies to none, so they had no
enemies themselves. Nature has few wants. Most of those which we feel
are factitious; and howsoever what we call civilization may furnish us
with the conveniences and comforts of life, let us not deceive ourselves
by supposing that these very things do not create the very wants which
they are called in to supply; and most certainly do not contribute to
the comfort of life, when the term of life is considerably abridged by
their use. But it is time to return to the case of the Rechabites before
us.

[Jeremiah 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 35:3</span></span>

The whole house of the Rechabites - That is, the family - the chiefs of
which are here specified.

[Jeremiah 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 35:4</span></span>

Igdaliah, a man of God - A prophet or holy man, having some office in
the temple.

[Jeremiah 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 35:5</span></span>

Pots full of wine, and cups - The cups were to draw the wine out of the
pots, in order to drink it.

[Jeremiah 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 35:6</span></span>

We will drink no wine - The reason is given above. Their whole religious
and political institution consisted in obedience to three simple
precepts, each of which has an appropriate spiritual meaning: -

1\.

Ye shall drink no wine - Ye shall preserve your bodies in temperance,
shall use nothing that would deprive you of the exercise of your sober
reason at any time; lest in such a time ye should do what might be
prejudicial to yourselves, injurious to your neighbor, or dishonorable
to your God.

2\.

Neither shall ye build house - Ye shall not become residents in any
place; ye shall not court earthly possessions; ye shall live free from
ambition and from envy, that ye may be free from contention and strife.

3\.

But - ye shall dwell in tents - Ye shall imitate your forefathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest of the patriarchs, who dwelt in
tents, being strangers and pilgrims upon earth, looking for a heavenly
country, and being determined to have nothing here that would indispose
their minds towards that place of endless rest, or prevent them from
passing through temporal things so as not to lose those that are
eternal.

There must necessarily be more in these injunctions than meets the eye
in the letter of this account.

[Jeremiah 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 35:8</span></span>

Thus have we obeyed the voice - We have considered these precepts so
very reasonable, so very useful, so conducive to the health of both body
and mind, and sanctioned by such a respectable antiquity that we
scrupulously and religiously observe them.

[Jeremiah 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 35:11</span></span>

But - when Nebuchadnezzar - came up - If at present we appear to be
acting contrary in any respect to our institutions, in being found in
the city, necessity alone has induced us to take this temporary step. We
have sought the shelter of the city for the preservation of our lives;
so now we dwell at Jerusalem.

[Jeremiah 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 35:14</span></span>

The words of Jonadab - are performed - but ye hearkened not unto me -
The Lord, knowing the fidelity of this people, chose to try them in this
way, that he might, by their conscientious obedience to the precepts of
their forefathers, show the Jews, to their confusion, their

ingratitude to him, and their neglect of his precepts, which if a man
do, he shall live by them.

[Jeremiah 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 35:17</span></span>

I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all
the evil - Having, by the conduct of the Rechabites, clearly and fully
convicted them of ingratitude and rebellion, he now proceeds to
pronounce sentence against them.

[Jeremiah 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 35:19</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord - Jonadab shall not want a man to stand before me
for ever - His name shall ever be honorable, and his posterity shall
enjoy my continual protection, and there shall never be found a time in
which men of his spirit shall be wanting as patterns of genuine
simplicity, filial obedience, purity of manners, and deadness to the
world. True Christians may be considered as the genuine successors of
these ancient Rechabites; and some suppose that the Essenes, in our
Lord's time, were literally their descendants and that these were they
who followed our Lord particularly, and became the first converts to the
Gospel. If so, the prophecy is literally fulfilled: they shall never
want a man to stand before God, to proclaim his salvation, and minister
to the edification and salvation of others, as long as the earth shall
endure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 36](jer036.md)

</div>
