<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer023)  [Next](jer025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 24:0</span></span>

Under the emblem of the good and bad figs is represented the fate of the
Jews already gone into captivity with Jeconiah, and of those that
remained still in their own country with Zedekiah. It is likewise
intimated that God would deal kindly with the former, but that his wrath
would still pursue the latter, [Jer
24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001.md).

[Jeremiah 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 24:1</span></span>

The Lord showed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs - Besides the
transposition of whole chapters in this book, there is not unfrequently
a transposition of verses, and parts of verses. Of this we have an
instance in the verse before us; the first clause of which should be the
last. Thus: -

"After that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive
Jeconiah, the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, with the carpenters and
smiths from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon, the Lord showed
me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set before the temple of the
Lord."

[Jer 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002.md) - "One basket had very good
figs, even like the figs that are first ripe; and the other basket had
very naughty figs, which could not be eaten, they were so bad."

This arrangement restores these verses to a better sense, by restoring
the natural connection.

This prophecy was undoubtedly delivered in the first year of the reign
of Zedekiah.

Under the type of good and bad figs, God represents the state of the
persons who had already been carried captives into Babylon, with their
king Jeconiah, compared with the state of those who should be carried
away with Zedekiah. Those already carried away, being the choice of the
people, are represented by the good figs: those now remaining, and soon
to be carried into captivity, are represented by the bad figs, that were
good for nothing. The state also of the former in their captivity was
vastly preferable to the state of those who were now about to be
delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon. The latter would be
treated as double rebels; the former, being the most respectable of the
inhabitants, were treated well; and even in captivity, a marked
distinction would be made between them, God ordering it so. But the
prophet sufficiently explains his own meaning.

Set before the temple - As an offering of the first-fruits of that kind.

Very good figs - Or, figs of the early sort. The fig-trees in Palestine,
says Dr. Shaw, produce fruit thrice each year. The first sort, called
boccore, those here mentioned, come to perfection about the middle or
end of June. The second sort, called kermez, or summer fig, is seldom
ripe before August. And the third, which is called the winter fig, which
is larger, and of a darker complexion than the preceding, hangs all the
winter on the tree, ripening even when the leaves are shed, and is fit
for gathering in the beginning of spring.

Could not be eaten - The winter fig, - then in its crude or unripe
state; the spring not being yet come.

[Jeremiah 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 24:5</span></span>

Like these good figs, so will I acknowledge - Those already carried away
into captivity, I esteem as far more excellent than those who still
remain in the land. They have not sinned so deeply, and they are now
penitent; and, therefore, I will set mine eyes upon them for good, [Jer
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#006.md). I will watch over them by an
especial providence, and they shall be restored to their own land.

[Jeremiah 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 24:7</span></span>

They shall be my people - I will renew my covenant with them, for they
will return to me with them whole heart.

[Jeremiah 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 24:8</span></span>

So will I give Zedekiah - I will treat these as they deserve. They shall
be carried into captivity, and scattered through all nations. Multitudes
of those never returned to Judea; the others returned at the end of
seventy years.

[Jeremiah 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 24:10</span></span>

I will send the sword - Many of them fell by sword and famine in the war
with the Chaldeans, and many more by such means afterwards. The first
received their captivity as a correction, and turned to God; the latter
still hardened their hearts more and more, and probably very many of
them never returned: perhaps they are now amalgamated with heathen
nations. Lord, how long?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 25](jer025.md)

</div>
