<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer048)  [Next](jer050.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 49:0</span></span>

This chapter is a collection of prophecies relating to several nations
in the neighborhood of Judea; and, like those preceding, are supposed to
have been fulfilled by the ministry of Nebuchadnezzar during the
thirteen years' siege of Tyre. The chapter opens with a prophecy
concerning the Ammonites, whose chief city, Rabbah, shall be destroyed;
and Malcom, the supreme divinity of the people, with all his retinue of
priests and officers, carried into captivity, [Jer
49:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001.md). Promise that the Ammonites
shall be restored to their liberty, [Jer
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#006.md). Prophecy against the Edomites,
(very like that most dreadful one in the thirty-fourth chapter of Isaiah
against the same people), who shall be utterly exterminated, after the
similitude of Sodom and Gomorrah, vv. 7-22. Prophecy against Damascus,
[Jer 49:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023.md); and against Kedar, [Jer
49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028.md), [Jer
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#029.md). Utter desolation of the
kingdoms of Hazor foretold, [Jer
49:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#030.md). The polity of the Elamites
shall be completely dissolved, and the people dispersed throughout the
nations, [Jer 49:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034.md). The Elamites
shall be delivered from their captivity in the latter days, [Jer
49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039.md). It wilt be proper here to
observe that these predictions should not be so explained as if they
admitted of merely a private interpretation; for, as Bishop Lowth
remarks upon Isaiah's prophecy concerning the Idumeans, "by a figure
very common in the prophetical writings, any city or people, remarkably
distinguished as enemies of the people and kingdom of God, is put for
those enemies in general;" therefore, it is under the Gospel
dispensation that these prophecies shall be accomplished to their
fullest extent upon all the antichrtstian nations that have sinned after
the similitude of the ancient enemies of the people of God under the
Mosaic economy.

[Jeremiah 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 49:1</span></span>

Concerning the Ammonites - This prophetic discourse was also delivered
after the capture of Jerusalem.

Hath Israel no sons? - no heir? - The Ammonites, it appears, took
advantage of the depressed state of Israel, and invaded their
territories in the tribe of Gad, hoping to make them their own for ever.
But the prophet intimates that God will preserve the descendants of
Israel, and will bring them back to their forfeited inheritances.

Why then doth their king - מלכם Malcom or Milcom, the chief idol of the
Ammonites. That the idol Milcom is here meant is sufficiently evident
from [Jer 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003.md), where it is said:
"Milcom (not their king) shall go into captivity; his Priests and his
princes together." Milcom is also called Molech. Malcom is put here for
the Ammonites, as the people of Chemosh in the preceding chapter are put
for the Moabites in general.

[Jeremiah 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 49:3</span></span>

Run to and fro by the hedges - It is supposed that this may refer to the
women making lamentations for the dead, that were in general buried by
the walls of their gardens; but others think that it refers to the
smaller cities or villages, called here the daughters of Rabbah, the
metropolis; the inhabitants of which are exhorted to seek safety
somewhere else, as none can be expected from them, now that the enemy is
at hand.

[Jeremiah 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 49:4</span></span>

Wherefore gloriest thou - Though thy valleys be fruitful, yet glory not
in them. Though thou have much political and military power, do not
trust in them, nor in the multitude of thy cities; a stronger than thou
is coming against thee.

[Jeremiah 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 49:6</span></span>

Afterward I will bring again - The Ammonites are supposed to have
returned with the Moabites and Israelites, on permission given by the
edict of Cyrus.

[Jeremiah 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 49:7</span></span>

Concerning Edom - This is a new and separate discourse.

Teman - A part of Idumea, put here for the whole country.

[Jeremiah 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 49:8</span></span>

Dwell deep - An allusion to the custom of the Arabs, who, when about to
be attacked by a powerful foe, strike their tents, pack up their
utensils, lade their camels, which they can do in a couple of hours, and
set off to the great desert, and so bury themselves in it that no enemy
either will or can pursue, as it is the Arabs alone that know the
deserts, and can find water and provender for their support.

Dedan - Was a city of Idumea, not far from Teman.

[Jeremiah 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 49:9</span></span>

If grape-gatherers - Both in vintage and harvest every grape and every
stalk are not gathered; hence the gleaners get something for their
pains: but your enemies shall not leave one of you behind; all shall be
carried into captivity.

[Jeremiah 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 49:10</span></span>

I have made Esau bare - I have stripped him of all defense, and have
discovered his hiding-places to his enemies.

[Jeremiah 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 49:11</span></span>

Leave thy fatherless children - The connection of this with the context
is not easy to be discerned; but, as a general maxim, it is of great
importance. Widows and orphans are the peculiar care of God. He is as
the best of fathers to the one, and the most loving of husbands to the
other. Even the widows and orphans of Esau, who escape the general
destruction, shall be taken care of by the Lord.

[Jeremiah 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 49:12</span></span>

Art thou he that shall altogether go unpunished? - A similar form of
speech appears, [Jer 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029.md). Others,
less wicked than thou, have been punished and canst thou expect to
escape? Thou shalt not escape.

[Jeremiah 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 49:13</span></span>

Bozrah shall become a desolation - Bozrah, a city of Idumea, is here put
for the whole country.

[Jeremiah 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 49:14</span></span>

I have heard a rumor - The Lord has revealed to me what he is about to
do to the Edomites.

An ambassador is sent - I believe this means only that God has given
permission, and has stirred up the hearts of these nations to go against
those whom he has doomed to destruction.

[Jeremiah 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 49:16</span></span>

O thou that dwellest - All Idumea is full of mountains and rocks, and
these rocks and mountains full of caves, where, in time of great heats,
and in time of war, the people take shelter.

[Jeremiah 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 49:18</span></span>

As in the overthrow of Sodom - The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah and
the neighboring cities was so terrible, that, when God denounces
judgments against incorrigible sinners, he tells them they shall be like
Sodom and Gomorrah.

No man shall abide there - It shall be so desolate as not to be
habitable. Travellers may lodge on the ground for a night; but it cannot
become a permanent dwelling.

[Jeremiah 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 49:19</span></span>

Behold, he shall come up like a lion - See the note on [Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005.md). The similitude used here is well
illustrated by Dr. Blayney: "When I shall occasion a like commotion in
her (Idumea) as a fierce and strong lion may be supposed to do in the
sheep-folds, then I will cause him (the man of whom it is said in the
preceding verse that he should not dwell in it) to run away from her as
the affrighted shepherds and their flocks run from the lion."

A chosen man - Nebuchadnezzar. That is, God has chosen this man, and
given him a commission against Idumea.

[Jeremiah 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 49:20</span></span>

The inhabitants of Teman - Taken here for the whole of Idumea. These are
a kind of synonyms which prevent monotony, and give variety to the
poet's versification.

Surely the least or the flock shall draw them out - They shall be like
timid sheep; the weakest foe shall overcome them.

[Jeremiah 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 49:21</span></span>

The earth is moved - The whole state is represented here as a vast
building suddenly thrown down, so as to cause the earth to tremble, and
the noise to be heard at a great distance.

[Jeremiah 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 49:22</span></span>

He shall come up and fly as the eagle - Nebuchadnezzar. See [Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040.md).

[Jeremiah 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 49:23</span></span>

Concerning Damascus - This is the head or title of another prophecy.
Damascus was one of the principal cities of Syria. It was taken by
David, [Sa2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006.md), was retaken in the
reign of Solomon, [Kg1 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#024.md), etc.,
and regained its independence. Its kings were often at war with the ten
tribes, and once it joined with them for the destruction of Judah. To
defend himself against these powerful enemies Ahaz made a league with
the king of Assyria, who besieged Damascus, took, and demolished it.
From that time we hear nothing of Damascus till we meet with it in this
prophecy. It appears to have been rebuilt and restored to some
consequence. It made an obstinate resistance to Nebuchadnezzar; but was
at last taken and sacked by him. At present it is both a large and
populous city, with considerable commerce.

Hamath is confounded - This is a city of Syria, on the Orontes. The
Greeks called it Epiphania.

Arpad - Not far from Damascus.

Sorrow on the sea - They are like the troubled sea, that cannot rest.

[Jeremiah 49:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 49:25</span></span>

How is the city of praise not left - Damascus is so ruined that she can
no more be called a praiseworthy or happy city.

[Jeremiah 49:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 49:27</span></span>

The palaces of Ben-hadad - Damascus was a seat of the Syrian kings, and
Ben-hadad was a name common to several of its kings.

[Jeremiah 49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 49:28</span></span>

Concerning Kedar, and Concerning the Kingdoms of Hazor - This is the
title of another new prophecy.

Kedar was the name of one of the sons of Ishmael ([Gen
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013).md) who settled in Arabia, and who
gave name to a powerful tribe of Arabs who used to traffic with the
Tyrians in cattle. It appears from this prophecy that Nebuchadnezzar got
a commission to go against and reduce them to great misery.

[Jeremiah 49:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 49:29</span></span>

Their tents and their flocks - This description of property shows that
they were Scenite or Nomad Arabs; persons who dwell in tents, and whose
principal property was cattle, especially camels, of the whole of which
they were plundered by the Chaldeans.

[Jeremiah 49:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 49:30</span></span>

Dwell deep - Retire into the depths of the desert. See on [Jer
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#008) (note.md).

Inhabitants of Hazor - I cannot find this place. It was no doubt in
Arabia, and a place of considerable importance; but it is now no more.

[Jeremiah 49:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 49:31</span></span>

The wealthy nation - גוי שליו goi sheleiv, "the peaceable nation" -

Have neither gates nor bars - The Arabs, who had nothing but their
tents; no cities, nor even permanent villages.

[Jeremiah 49:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 49:32</span></span>

The utmost corners - Even in these utmost inaccessible recesses the
sword and pillage shall reach them. "'The utmost corners;' insulated
coasts; the peninsula of Arabia." - Blayney.

[Jeremiah 49:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 49:33</span></span>

Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons - Shall be turned into a
wilderness.

A desolation for ever - Never to be repeopled.

There shalt no man abide there - It may occasionally be visited, but
never made a permanent abode.

[Jeremiah 49:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 49:34</span></span>

The Word - Against Elam - Another new head of prophecy. As this was
delivered in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah, it can have no
natural nor historical connection with the other prophecies in this
various chapter. Some think that by Elam Persia is always meant; but
this is not at all likely. It was a part of the Babylonian empire in the
time of Daniel, ([Dan 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002).md), and is
most probably what is called Elymais by the Greeks. This, with Susiana,
Nebuchadnezzar subdued, and took from Astyages, king of Media.

[Jeremiah 49:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 49:35</span></span>

I will break the bow of Elam - They were eminent archers; and had
acquired their power and eminence by their dexterity in the use of the
bow. See [Isa 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006.md). Strabo, Livy, and
others speak of their eminence in archery.

[Jeremiah 49:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 49:36</span></span>

Will I bring the four winds - Nebuchadnezzar and his armies, gathered
out of different provinces, and attacking this people at all points in
the same time.

There shall be no nation, etc. - They shall be scattered through the one
hundred and twenty-seven provinces of which the Babylonish empire is
composed.

[Jeremiah 49:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jer 49:38</span></span>

I will set my throne in Elam - This is spoken either of Nebuchadnezzar
or Cyrus. It is certain that Cyrus did render himself master of Elymais
and Media, which are in the land of Elam.

[Jeremiah 49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jer 49:39</span></span>

I will bring again the captivity of Elam - As this is to be in the
latter days, probably it may mean the spiritual freedom which these
people would receive under the Gospel dispensation. Under Cyrus, the
Elamites, collected out of all quarters, were united with the Persians,
their neighbors, and became, with them, masters of the east. See Calmet
and Dahler. There are still, however, difficulties on this subject. Who
the Elamites were is still a question. That which appears to be nearest
the truth is, that the Elamites and Persians were two distinct people,
and continued so till blended together under Cyrus. It is in this light
that I have considered the subject in the preceding notes. Neighboring
people are frequently confounded in history, and sometimes the name of a
people is given to those who have the same character.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 50](jer050.md)

</div>
