<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer035)  [Next](jer037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 36:0</span></span>

God commands Jeremiah to write down in one roll or volume all the
predictions he had uttered against Israel and Judah, and all the
surrounding nations, from the day of his vocation to the prophetic
office, that the house of Judah might have abundant warning of the
dreadful calamities with which their country was about to be visited, if
not prevented by a timely repentance, [Jer
36:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001). The prophet employs Baruch the
scribe, the son of Neriah, to write from his mouth all the words of the
Lord, and then to read them publicly upon a fast day in the Lord's
house, [Jer 36:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#004). A general fast is
proclaimed in the following year, viz., the fifth year of the reign of
Jehoiakim; upon which occasion Baruch, in obedience to the prophet's
command, reads the words of Jeremiah to all the people at the entry of
the new gate of the temple, [Jer 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009),
[Jer 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010). The princes, hearing of
this, send for Baruch, who reads the roll to them; at the contents of
which they are greatly alarmed, and solemnly resolve to give information
to the king, at the same time advising both the prophet and his scribe
to hide themselves, [Jer 36:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#011).
Jehoiakim likewise having sent for the roll, Jehudi reads to him a part;
and then the king, though advised to the contrary by some of has
princes, having cut the leaves, throws the whole into the fire, [Jer
36:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#020), and orders Jeremiah and
Baruch to be seized; but they could not be found, because a special
providence of God had concealed them, [Jer
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026). Jeremiah is commanded to
re-write his prophecies, and to denounce the judgments of God against
the king who had destroyed the first roll, [Jer
36:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#027). Baruch accordingly writes
from the mouth of Jeremiah a new copy, with numerous additions, [Jer
36:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#032).

[Jeremiah 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 36:1</span></span>

And it came to pass in the fourth year - About the end of this year, see
[Jer 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009). This discourse also bears
its own date, and was probably delivered at a time when the people
enjoyed peace, and were about to celebrate one of their annual fasts.

[Jeremiah 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 36:2</span></span>

Take thee a roll of a book - Take a sufficient quantity of parchment;
cut and stitch it together, that it may make a roll on which to write
the words that I have already spoken, that they may serve for a
testimony to future generations. The Jewish rolls, several of which now
lie before me, were made of vellum, or of sheep-skins dressed in the
half-tanned or Basil manner. These were cut into certain lengths, and
those parts were all stitched together, and rolled upon a roller. The
matter was written on these skins in columns or pages. Sometimes two
rollers are used, that as the matter is read from the roll in the left
hand, the reader may coil it on the roller in his right. In this form
the Pentateuch is written which is read in the synagogues.

[Jeremiah 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 36:3</span></span>

It may be that the house of Judah will hear - It was yet possible to
avert the judgments which had been so often denounced against them. But
in order to this they must -

1\. Hear what God has spoken.

2\. Every man turn from his evil way.

3\. If they do so, God graciously promises to forgive their iniquity and
their sin.

[Jeremiah 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 36:4</span></span>

Then Jeremiah called Baruch - This man, so useful to the prophet, and so
faithfully attached to him, was by office a scribe; which signifies, not
only a writer, but also a man in office; a chancellor, secretary, etc.,
a learned man; one acquainted with laws and customs.

[Jeremiah 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 36:6</span></span>

Upon the fasting day - A day when multitudes of people would be gathered
together from all parts to implore the mercy of God. This was a
favorable time to read these tremendous prophecies.

[Jeremiah 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 36:7</span></span>

Present their supplication - "Let their supplication fall," that they
may fall down before God, and deplore their sins.

[Jeremiah 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 36:9</span></span>

In the ninth month - Answering to a part of our December.

[Jeremiah 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 36:10</span></span>

In the chamber of Gemariah - He was one of the princes of Judah. See
[Jer 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012).

[Jeremiah 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 36:17</span></span>

How didst thou write all these words? - At his mouth? - So the text
should be pointed. They wished to know whether he had not copied them,
or whether he wrote as Jeremiah prophesied.

[Jeremiah 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 36:19</span></span>

Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah - They saw that the king would be
displeased, and most probably seek their lives; and as they believed the
prophecy was from God, they wished to save both the prophet and his
scribe; but they were obliged to inform the king of what they had heard.

[Jeremiah 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 36:22</span></span>

Winterhouse - A warm apartment suited to the season of the year,
(December), when in Palestine there is often snow upon the ground,
though it does not last long. A fire on the hearth - a pan or brazier of
burning coals. This is the case to the present day. In cold weather the
rich burn wood in brass or earthen pans, placed in any part of the room;
the indigent burn sticks on the floor.

[Jeremiah 36:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 36:23</span></span>

When Jehudi had read three or four leaves - Rather columns; for the law,
and the sacred Hebrew Books, are written in columns of a certain
breadth. דלתות delathoth, signifies gates or openings between column and
column, or between section and section.

He cut it with the penknife - בתער הספר bethaar hassopher, "the knife of
the scribe," properly enough penknife.

And cast it into the fire - To show his contempt for God's words.

[Jeremiah 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 36:25</span></span>

Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah - Three of the princes wished to save
the roll, and entreated the king that it might not be burnt. They would
have saved it out of the fire, but the king would not permit it to be
done.

[Jeremiah 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 36:26</span></span>

But the Lord hid them - They had, at the counsel of some of the princes
hidden themselves, [Jer 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#019). And
now, though a diligent search was made, the Lord did not permit them to
be found.

[Jeremiah 36:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 36:28</span></span>

Take thee again another roll - There was no duplicate of the former
preserved; and now God inspired the prophet with the same matter that he
had given him before; and there is to be added the heavy judgment that
is to fall on Jehoiakim and his courtiers.

[Jeremiah 36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 36:30</span></span>

He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David - He shall have no
successor and himself shall have an untimely end, and shall not even be
buried, but his body be exposed to the open air, both night and day. He
who wishes to hide his crimes, or take away the evidence which is
against him, adds thereby to his iniquities, and is sure in consequence
to double his punishment. See the threatening against Jehoiakim, [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019) (note), and the note there.

[Jeremiah 36:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 36:32</span></span>

There were added - many like words - All the first roll, with many other
threatening and perhaps more minute declarations which were merely of a
temporary importance and local application; and the Holy Spirit did not
think proper to record them here.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 37](jer037)

</div>
