<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer033)  [Next](jer035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 34:0</span></span>

This chapter contains two prophecies: the first, delivered during the
siege of Jerusalem, predicts to Zedekiah the taking and burning of the
city, with his own peaceful death and honorable burial, [Jer
34:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001). The second was delivered when
the Chaldeans had for some time broken up the siege. It reproves the
Jews for their conduct towards their brethren of the poorer sort, whom
they released, by a solemn covenant, from bondage, in the extremity of
their danger; but compelled to return to it when they thought that
danger over, [Jer 34:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008). For this
God threatens them with the sword, pestilence, and famine; and with the
return of the Chaldeans, who should take the city, destroy it and the
other cities by fire, and make an utter desolation of the whole land of
Judea, [Jer 34:12-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#012).

[Jeremiah 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 34:1</span></span>

The word which came unto Jeremiah - This discourse was delivered in the
tenth year of the reign of Zedekiah. The chapter contains two
discourses; one, [Jer 34:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#001), which
concerns the taking of the city, and Zedekiah's captivity and death; the
other, [Jer 34:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008), which is an
invective against the inhabitants of Jerusalem for having Hebrew male
and female slaves. These, having been manumitted at the instance of the
prophet, were afterwards brought back by their old masters, and put in
the same thraldom; for which God threatens them with severe judgments.

Nebuchadnezzar - and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the earth of
his dominion - That is, his army was composed of soldiers gathered out
of Babylon, and out of all his tributary dominions: one hundred and
twenty provinces.

[Jeremiah 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 34:2</span></span>

He shall burn it with fire - This was a newly-added circumstance. Among
many ancient nations they burned the bodies of the more illustrious
dead. Odours were used in the burning: they then gathered the ashes, and
put them into an urn or pitcher, sometimes into a strong vessel, and
buried them. Many of these have been digged up in different parts of
England, where the Romans had stations.

[Jeremiah 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 34:3</span></span>

Thou shalt not escape - This, however, he had attempted, but was taken
in his flight. See [Jer 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004), and [Jer
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007), etc.

[Jeremiah 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 34:5</span></span>

Thou shalt die in peace - Thou shalt not die a violent death; and at thy
death thou shalt have all those funereal solemnities which were usual at
the demise of kings. See [Ch2 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014).

So shall they burn odours for thee - Scented wood and other odoriferous
substances are placed on the funeral pile of the rich Hindoos, and
burned with the body.

And they will lament thee, saying, Ah lord! - They will recite the
funeral dirge that begins with those words. See the note on [Jer
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018) (note).

[Jeremiah 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 34:6</span></span>

Spake all these Words unto Zedekiah - He delivered this message at the
hazard of his life. Jeremiah feared God, and had no other fear.

[Jeremiah 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 34:7</span></span>

Against Lachish, and against Azekah - These were two cities of Judah of
considerable importance: they had been strongly fortified by Rehoboam,
[Ch2 11:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#009); [Ch2
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#009).

[Jeremiah 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 34:8</span></span>

The word that came unto Jeremiah - Here the second discourse begins,
which was delivered probably a short time, even a few days, after the
former.

Zedekiah had made a covenant - We find no account elsewhere of this
covenant: "Every man should let his man-servant and his maid-servant go
free;" i.e., as we learn from [Jer
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#014), on the sabbatical year; for the
seventh year was the year of release. See [Deu
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#012).

[Jeremiah 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 34:11</span></span>

But afterward they turned - They had agreed to manumit them at the end
of the seventh year; but when the seventh year was ended, they recalled
their engagement, and detained their servants. This, I believe, is what
is here meant.

[Jeremiah 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 34:16</span></span>

Ye - polluted my name - Had made the covenant in my name, calling me to
witness it; now ye have dishonored my name, by breaking that covenant,
and acting contrary to my law.

[Jeremiah 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 34:17</span></span>

I proclaim a liberty for you - Ye proclaimed liberty to your slaves, and
afterward resumed your authority over them; and I had in consequence
restrained the sword from cutting you off: but now I give liberty to the
sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine, and to the captivity, to
destroy and consume you, and enslave you: for ye shall be removed to all
the kingdoms of the earth. The prophet loves to express the conformity
between the crime and its punishment. You promised to give liberty to
your enslaved brethren; I was pleased, and bound the sword in its
sheath. You broke your promise, and brought them again into bondage; I
gave liberty to the sword, pestilence, and famine, to destroy multitudes
of you, and captivity to take the rest. Thus you are punished according
to your crimes, and in the punishment you may see the crime. Sword,
pestilence, and famine are frequently joined together, as being often
the effects of each other. The sword or war produces famine; famine, the
pestilence.

[Jeremiah 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 34:18</span></span>

When they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof -
This was the ancient and most solemn way of making a covenant.

1\. A calf as sacrifice was offered to God to secure his approbation and
support.

2\. The victim was then exactly divided from the nose to the rump; the
spinal marrow being divided longitudinally, in the most careful manner,
that the half of it might remain on each side.

3\. These divided parts were laid opposite to each other, a passage
being left between them.

4\. The contracting parties entered this passage at each end, met in the
middle, and there took the covenant oath; adjudging themselves to death
should they break this covenant.

5\. Then they both feasted on the victim. In reference to this last
circumstance, God says he will give their bodies for meat to the fowls
of heaven and to the beasts. This is a farther conformity between the
crime and the punishment. See my notes on [Gen
15:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009) (note).

[Jeremiah 34:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 34:21</span></span>

The king of Babylon's army, which are gone up from you - Nebuchadnezzar,
hearing that there was an Egyptian army coming to the relief of
Jerusalem, raised the siege, went out, and met and defeated the
Egyptians. It was in the interim this prophecy was delivered.

[Jeremiah 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 34:22</span></span>

I will - cause them to return - They did return; re-invested the city;
and, after an obstinate defense, took it, plundered it, and burned it to
the ground, taking Zedekiah and his princes captive.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 35](jer035)

</div>
