<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer005)  [Next](jer007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 6:0</span></span>

Jeremiah, in the spirit of prophecy, seeing the Chaldeans on their
march, bids his people set up the usual signals of distress, and spread
the general alarm to betake themselves to flight, [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001.md). Then, by a beautiful allusion to
the custom of shepherds moving their flocks to the richest pastures,
Jerusalem is singled out as a place devoted to be eaten up or trodden
down by the armies of the Chaldeans, who are called up against her, and
whose ardor and impatience are so great that the soldiers, when they
arrive in the evening, regret they have no more day, and desire to begin
the attack without waiting for the light of the morning, [Jer
6:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#002.md). God is then represented as
animating and directing the besiegers against this guilty city, which
sinned as incessantly as a fountain flows, [Jer
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#006.md), [Jer
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#007.md), although warned of the fatal
consequence, [Jer 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#008.md). He intimates
also, by the gleaning of the grapes, that one invasion should carry away
the remains of another, till their disobedience, hypocrisy, and other
sins should end in their total overthrow, [Jer
6:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009.md). And to show that God is clear
when he judgeth, he mentions his having in vain admonished and warned
them, and calls upon the whole world to witness the equity of his
proceedings, [Jer 6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016.md), in
punishing this perverse and hypocritical people, [Jer
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#019.md), [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020.md), by the ministry of the cruel
Chaldeans, [Jer 6:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#021.md). Upon this a
chorus of Jews is introduced expressing their fears and alarm, [Jer
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024.md), [Jer
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#025.md); to which the prophet echoes a
response full of sympathy and tenderness, [Jer
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#026.md). The concluding verses, by
metaphors taken from the process of refining gold and silver, represent
all the methods hitherto used to amend them as wholly ineffectual, [Jer
6:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027.md).

[Jeremiah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 6:1</span></span>

O ye children of Benjamin, gather yourselves to flee - As the invading
armies are fast approaching, the prophet calls on the inhabitants of
Jerusalem to sound an alarm, and collect all the people to arm
themselves and go against the invaders. They are called the children of
Benjamin, because Jerusalem was in the tribe of Benjamin.

Tekoa - Was a city about twelve miles to the south of Jerusalem.

Beth-haccerem - Was the name of a small village situated on an eminence
between Jerusalem and Tekoa. On this they were ordered to set up a
beacon, or kindle a large fire, which might be seen at a distance, and
give the people to understand that an enemy was entering the land.

Out of the north - From Babylon. The Scythians. - Dahler.

[Jeremiah 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 6:3</span></span>

The shepherds with their flocks - The chiefs and their battalions. The
invading army is about to spoil and waste all the fertile fields round
about the city, while engaged in the siege.

[Jeremiah 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 6:4</span></span>

Prepare ye war against her - The words of the invaders exciting each
other to the assault, and impatient lest any time should be lost; lest
the besieged should have time to strengthen themselves, or get in
supplies.

[Jeremiah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 6:5</span></span>

Arise, and let us go by night - Since we have lost the day, let us not
lose the night; but, taking advantage of the darkness, let us make a
powerful assault while they are under the impression of terror.

[Jeremiah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 6:6</span></span>

Hew ye down trees - To form machines.

And cast a mount - That may overlook the city, on which to place our
engines.

This is the city to be visited - We are sure of success, for their God
will deliver it into our hands, for it is full of oppression, and he has
consigned it to destruction.

[Jeremiah 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 6:7</span></span>

As a fountain casteth out her waters - The inhabitants are incessant in
their acts of iniquity; they do nothing but sin.

[Jeremiah 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 6:8</span></span>

Be thou instructed - Still there is respite: if they would even now
return unto the Lord with all their heart, the advancing Chaldeans would
be arrested on their march and turned back.

[Jeremiah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 6:9</span></span>

They shall thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back
thine hand - The Chaldeans are here exhorted to turn back and glean up
the remnant of the inhabitants that were left after the capture of
Jerusalem; for even that remnant did not profit by the Divine judgments
that fell on the inhabitants at large.

[Jeremiah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 6:10</span></span>

The word of the Lord is unto them a reproach - It is an object of
derision; they despise it.

[Jeremiah 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 6:11</span></span>

I am full of the fury of the Lord - God has given me a dreadful
revelation of the judgments he intends to inflict: my soul is burdened
with this prophecy. I have endeavored to suppress it; but I must pour it
forth upon the children, on the young people, on husbands and wives, on
the old and the super-annuated. All must partake in these judgments.

[Jeremiah 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 6:14</span></span>

They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly -
Of the daughter is not in the text, and is here improperly added: it is,
however, in some MSS.

Peace, peace - Ye shall have prosperity - when there was none, and when
God had determined that there should be none. Here the prophets
prophesied falsely; and the people continued in sin, being deceived by
the priests and the prophets.

[Jeremiah 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 6:16</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see - Let us observe the
metaphor. A traveler is going to a particular city; he comes to a place
where the road divides into several paths, he is afraid of going astray;
he stops short, - endeavors to find out the right path: he cannot fix
his choice. At last he sees another traveler; he inquires of him, gets
proper directions - proceeds on his journey - arrives at the desired
place - and reposes after his fatigue. There is an excellent sermon on
these words in the works of our first poet, Geoffrey Chaucer; it is
among the Canterbury Tales, and is called Chaucer's Tale. The text, I
find, was read by him as it appears in my old MS. Bible: - Standith upon
weies and seeth, and asketh of the olde pathes; What is the good weie?
and goth in it, and gee schul fynden refreschimg to your soulis. The
soul needs rest; it can only find this by walking in the good way. The
good way is that which has been trodden by the saints from the
beginning: it is the old way, the way of faith and holiness. Believe,
Love, Obey; be holy, and be happy. This is the way; let us inquire for
it, and walk in it. But these bad people said, We will not walk in it.
Then they took another way, walked over the precipice, and fell into the
bottomless pit; where, instead of rest, they find: -

\- a fiery deluge, fed

With ever-burning sulfur, unconsumed.

[Jeremiah 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 6:17</span></span>

I set watchmen - I have sent prophets to warn you.

[Jeremiah 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 6:20</span></span>

Incense frown Sheba - Sheba was in Arabian famous for the best incense.
It was situated towards the southern extremity of the peninsula of
Arabia; and was, in respect of Judea, a far country.

And the sweet cane from a far country - The calamus aromaticus, which,
when dried and pulverized, yields a very fine aromatic smell; see on
[Isa 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024) (note.md). This was employed
in making the holy anointing oil. See [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023.md).

[Jeremiah 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 6:23</span></span>

They shall lay hold on bow and spear - Still pointing out the Chaldeans:
or according to Dahler, the Scythians, who had before their invasion of
Palestine overrun many parts of Asia, and had spread consternation
wherever their name was heard.

[Jeremiah 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 6:27</span></span>

I have set thee for a tower and a fortress - Dr. Blayney translates, I
have appointed thee to make an assay among my people. The words refer to
the office of an assayer of silver and gold; and the manner of assaying
here intended is by the cupel, a flat broad iron ring filled with the
ashes of burnt bones. To separate the alloy from the silver they add a
portion of lead; and when all is fused together, and brought into a
state of ebullition, the cupel absorbs the lead, and with it the dross
or alloy, and the silver is left pure and motionless on the top of the
cupel. The people are here represented under the notion of alloyed
silver. They are full of impurities; and they are put into the hands of
the prophet, the assayer, to be purified. The bellows are placed, the
fire is lighted up, but all to no purpose: so intensely commixed is the
alloy with the silver, that it can not be separated. The nozzle of the
bellows is even melted with the intensity of the fire used to effect the
refinement; and the lead is carried off by the action of the heat; and
the assayer melteth in vain, for the alloy still continues in union with
the metal. The assayer gives up the process, - will not institute one
more expensive or tedious - pronounces the mass unfit to be coined, and
denominates it reprobate silver, [Jer
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#030.md). Thus, the evil habits and
dispositions of the Israelites were so ingrained that they would not
yield to either the ordinary or extraordinary means of salvation. God
pronounces them reprobate silver, - not sterling, - full of alloy; -
having neither the image nor the superscription of the Great King either
on their hearts or on their conduct. Thus he gave them up as
incorrigible, and their adversaries prevailed against them. This should
be a warning to other nations, and indeed to the Christian Church; for
if God did not spare the natural branches, neither will he spare these.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 7](jer007.md)

</div>
