<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer039)  [Next](jer041.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 40:0</span></span>

This and the four following chapters contain a distinct account of what
passed in the land of Judah from the taking of Jerusalem to the retreat
of the remnant of the people to Egypt; together with the prophecies of
Jeremiah concerning that place, whither he himself accompanied them. In
this chapter we have an account of the enlargement of Jeremiah by
Nebuzar-adan, the captain of the guard, who advises him to put himself
under the jurisdiction of Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, whom the king of
Babylon had made governor over the land of Judea, [Jer
40:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001.md). The prophet and many of the
dispersed Jews repair to Gedaliah, [Jer
40:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#006.md). Johanan acquaints the
governor of a conspiracy against him, but is not believed, [Jer
40:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#013.md).

[Jeremiah 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 40:1</span></span>

The word that came to Jeremiah - This and the four following chapters
contain a particular account of what passed in the land of Judea from
the taking of the city to the retreat of the people into Egypt, and the
prophecies of Jeremiah concerning them there.

Had let him go from Ramah - This has embarrassed most of the
commentators. Dr. Blayney has thrown much light upon it by his
translation and note: -

"The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, after that Nebu-Zaradan
captain of the guards had taken him, and let him go from Ramah: for he
had been bound with chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and
Judah, who were carried away captive to Babylon."

"Had Taken Him, and Let Him Go. - Most interpreters have understood
בקחתו אתו bekachto otho of Nebuchadnezzar's having first taken Jeremiah
as a captive unto Ramah. But if the order of the sentence be well
observed, as well as the more common use of the verb לקח lakach, it
will, I think, rather appear that those words relate to his taking or
having him brought to him, in order to give him his discharge."

[Jeremiah 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 40:2</span></span>

The Lord thy God hath pronounced - I know that thou art a true prophet,
for what thou hast predicted from thy God is come to pass.

[Jeremiah 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 40:4</span></span>

Come; and I will look well unto thee - Thou art now at full liberty to
do as thou pleasest; either to come to Babylon or to stay in thy own
land.

[Jeremiah 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 40:5</span></span>

Go back also to Gedaliah - If thou wilt stay in thy own land, thou hadst
best put thyself under the protection of thy countryman Gedaliah, whom
the King of Babylon has made governor of the land.

[Jeremiah 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 40:8</span></span>

Ishmael the son of Nethaniah - This is he who afterwards murdered
Gedaliah. He had been employed to do this by Baalis, king of the
Ammonites, with whom he appears to have taken refuge during the siege.
See [Jer 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#014.md).

[Jeremiah 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 40:14</span></span>

But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed then not - The account given of
this man proves him to have been a person of uncommon greatness of soul.
Conscious of his own integrity and benevolence, he took the portrait of
others from his own mind; and therefore believed evil of no man, because
he felt none towards any in his own breast. He may be reproached for
being too credulous and confident: but any thing of this kind that may
be justly charged against him serves only to show the greatness of his
mind. A little soul is ever suspicious, and ready to believe the worst
of every person and thing. A great mind acts always on the contrary.

[Jeremiah 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 40:16</span></span>

Thou shalt not do this thing - He cannot be so base.

Thou speakest falsely of Ishmael - He thought it quite possible that the
man who was capable of becoming an assassin was capable of telling a
lie; and therefore he would not credit what he said. Had he been a
little more distrustful, he would have saved his own life. The next
chapter shows that Johanan's information was too true. So noble Gedaliah
lost his life by not believing that evil of others of which he himself
was incapable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 41](jer041.md)

</div>
