<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer028)  [Next](jer030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 29:0</span></span>

This chapter contains the substance of two letters sent by the prophet
to the captives in Babylon. In the first he recommends to them patience
and composure under their present circumstances, which were to endure
for seventy years, [Jer 29:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#001); in
which, however, they should fare better than their brethren who remained
behind, [Jer 29:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#015). But, finding
little credit given to this message, on account of the suggestions of
the false prophets, Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and Zedekiah, the son of
Maaseiah, who flattered them with the hopes of a speedy end to their
captivity, he sends a second, in which he denounces heavy judgments
against those false prophets that deceived them, [Jer
29:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#020); as he did afterwards against
Shemaiah the Nehelamite, who had sent a letter of complaint against
Jeremiah, in consequence of his message, [Jer
29:24-32](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#024).

[Jeremiah 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 29:1</span></span>

Now these are the words of the letter - This transaction took place in
the first or second year of Zedekiah. It appears that the prophet had
been informed that the Jews who had already been carried into captivity
had, through the instigations of false prophets, been led to believe
that they were to be brought out of their captivity speedily. Jeremiah,
fearing that this delusion might induce them to take some hasty steps,
ill comporting with their present state, wrote a letter to them, which
he entrusted to an embassy which Zedekiah had sent on some political
concerns to Nebuchadnezzar. The letter was directed to the elders,
priests, prophets, and people who had been carried away captives to
Babylon.

[Jeremiah 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 29:4</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts - This was the commencement of the letter.

[Jeremiah 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 29:5</span></span>

Build ye houses - Prepare for a long continuance in your present
captivity. Provide yourselves with the necessaries of life, and multiply
in the land, that ye may become a powerful people.

[Jeremiah 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 29:7</span></span>

Seek the peace of the city - Endeavor to promote, as far as you can, the
prosperity of the places in which ye sojourn. Let no disaffection appear
in word or act. Nothing can be more reasonable than this. Wherever a man
lives and has his nourishment and support, that is his country as long
as he resides in it. If things go well with that country, his interest
is promoted by the general prosperity, he lives at comparative ease, and
has the necessaries of life cheaper; and unless he is in a state of
cruel servitude, which does not appear to have been the case with those
Israelites to whom the prophet writes, (those of the first captivity),
they must be nearly, if not altogether, in as good a state as if they
had been in the country that gave them birth. And in this case they were
much better off than their brethren now in Judea, who had to contend
with famine and war, and scarcely any thing before them but God's curse
and extermination.

[Jeremiah 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 29:8</span></span>

Neither hearken to your dreams - Rather, dreamers; for it appears there
was a class of such persons, who not only had acquired a facility of
dreaming themselves, but who undertook to interpret the dreams of
others.

[Jeremiah 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 29:10</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord - It has been supposed that a very serious
transposition of verses has taken place here; and it has been proposed
to read after [Jer 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#009) the sixteenth
to the nineteenth inclusive; then the tenth, and on to the fourteenth
inclusive; then the twentieth, the fifteenth, the twenty-first, and the
rest regularly to the end.

That after seventy years be accomplished - לפי מלאת lephi meloth, "at
the mouth of the accomplishment," or "fill to the mouth." Seventy years
is the measure which must be filled; - fill this to the brim; - complete
this measure, and then you shall be visited and released. The whole
seventy must be completed; expect no enlargement before that time.

[Jeremiah 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 29:11</span></span>

Thoughts of peace - Here God gives them to understand,

1\. That his love was moved towards them.

2\. That he would perform his good word, his promises often repeated, to
them.

3\. That for the fulfillment of these they must pray, seek, and search.

4\. That he would hearken, and they should find him; provided,

5\. They sought him with their whole heart, [Jer
29:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010).

[Jeremiah 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 29:14</span></span>

I will gather you from all the nations - A quotation from [Deu
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003), and see also [Deu
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007).

[Jeremiah 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 29:15</span></span>

Because ye have said - The Septuagint very properly insert this verse
between the twentieth and the twenty-first, and thus the connection here
is not disturbed, and the connection below completed.

[Jeremiah 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 29:17</span></span>

Behold, I will send upon them the sword - Do not envy the state of
Zedekiah who sits on the throne of David, nor that of the people who are
now in the land whence ye have been carried captive, ([Jer
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#016)), for "I will send the sword,
the pestilence, and the famine upon them;" and afterwards shall cause
them to be carried into a miserable captivity in all nations, ([Jer
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#018)); but ye see the worst of your
own case, and you have God's promise of enlargement when the proper time
is come. The reader will not forget that the prophet is addressing the
captives in Babylon.

[Jeremiah 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 29:20</span></span>

Hear ye therefore the word - Dr. Blayney thinks there were two letters
written by the prophet to the captives in Babylon, and that the first
ends with this verse. That having heard, on the return of the embassy
(Elasah and Gemariah, whom Zedekiah had sent to Babylon, and to whom the
prophet entrusted the above letter, [Jer
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#003)), that the captives had not
received his advises favourably, because they were deceived by false
prophets among them, who promised them a speedier deliverance, he
therefore wrote a second letter, beginning with the fifteenth verse, and
going on with the twenty-first, etc., in which he denounces God's
judgments on three of the chief of those, Ahab, Zedekiah, and Shemaiah.

[Jeremiah 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 29:21</span></span>

He shall slay them before your eyes - Nebuchadnezzar would be led by
political reasons to punish these pretended prophets, as their
predictions tended to make his Israelitish subjects uneasy and
disaffected, and might excite them to rebellion. He therefore slew them;
two of them, it appears, he burnt alive, viz., Ahab and Zedekiah, who
are supposed by the rabbins to be the two elders who endeavored to
seduce Susanna, see [Jer 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#023).
Burning alive was a Chaldean punishment, [Dan
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#006), and [Amo
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001). From them other nations borrowed
it.

[Jeremiah 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 29:23</span></span>

Have committed adultery with their neighbors' wives - This is supposed
to refer to the case of Susanna. See above.

[Jeremiah 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 29:24</span></span>

Speak to Shemaiah - Zephaniah was the second priest, sagan, or chief
priest's deputy, and Seraiah, high priest, when Jerusalem was taken. See
[Jer 52:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024). Shemaiah directs his
letter to the former, and tells him that God had appointed him to supply
the place of the high priest, who was probably then absent. His name was
either Azariah or Seraiah his son, but called Jehoiada from the
remarkable zeal and courage of that pontiff. See the passages in the
margin. - Dodd. After the taking of Jerusalem, Zephaniah was put to
death by Nebuchadnezzar at Riblah, see [Jer
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#003). The history of Jehoiada may be
seen [Kg2 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#003), etc.

[Jeremiah 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 29:26</span></span>

For every man that is mad, and maketh himself a prophet - Mad, משגע
meshugga, in ecstatic rapture; such as appeared in the prophets, whether
true or false, when under the influence, the one of God, the other of a
demon. See [Kg2 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#011); [Hos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007).

[Jeremiah 29:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 29:32</span></span>

I will punish Shemaiah -

1\. He shall have no posterity to succeed him.

2\. His family, i.e., relations, etc., shall not be found among those
whom I shall bring back from captivity.

3\. Nor shall he himself see the good that I shall do for my people.

And all this shall come upon him and his because he hath taught
rebellion against the Lord. He excited the people to reject Jeremiah,
and to receive the lying words of the false prophets; and these led them
to rebel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 30](jer030)

</div>
