<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](jo1001)  [Next](jo1003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 2:0</span></span>

He exhorts them not to sin; yet encourages those who may have fallen, by
the hope of mercy through Christ, who is a propitiation for the sins of
the whole world, [Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md), [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md). He who knows God keeps his
commandments; and he who professes to abide in Christ ought to walk as
Christ walked, [Jo1 2:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#003.md). The old and
new commandment, that we should walk in the light, and love the
brethren, [Jo1 2:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007.md). The apostle's
description of the different states in the family of God; little
children, young men, and fathers; and directions to each, [Jo1
2:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012.md). A statement of what prevails
in the world, [Jo1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016.md), [Jo1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017.md). Cautions against antichrists,
[Jo1 2:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md). Exhortations to
persevere in what they had received, and to continue to follow that
anointing of the Divine Spirit, by which they could discern all men, and
know all things necessary to their salvation, and proper to prepare them
for eternal glory, [Jo1 2:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#024.md).

[1 John 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 2:1</span></span>

My little children - Τεκνια μου· My beloved children; the address of an
affectionate father to children whom he tenderly loves. The term also
refers to the apostle's authority as their spiritual father, and their
obligation to obey as his spiritual children.

That ye sin not - This is the language of the whole Scripture; of every
dispensation, ordinance, institution, doctrine, and word of God. Sin not
- do not run into ruin; live not so as to promote your own misery; be
happy, for it is the will of God that ye should be so; therefore he
wills that ye should be holy: holiness and happiness are inseparable;
sin and misery are equally so.

And if any man sin - If, through ignorance, inexperience, the violence
of temptation, unwatchfulness, etc., ye have fallen into sin, and
grieved the Spirit of God, do not continue in the sin, nor under the
guilt; do not despair of being again restored to the favor of God; your
case, it is true, is deeply deplorable, but not desperate; there is
still hope, for -

We have an advocate with the Father - We still have him before the
throne who died for our offenses, and rose again for our justification;
and there he makes intercession for us. He is the righteous; he who
suffered, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. Do
not, therefore, despair, but have immediate recourse to God through him.

[1 John 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 2:2</span></span>

And he is the propitiation - 'Ἱλασμος· The atoning sacrifice for our
sins. This is the proper sense of the word as used in the Septuagint,
where it often occurs; and is the translation of אשם asham, an oblation
for sin, [Amo 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014.md). חטאת chattath, a
sacrifice for sin, [Eze 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#027.md). כפור
kippur, an atonement, [Num 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008.md). See
the note on [Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md), and
particularly the note on [Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md).
The word is used only here and in [Jo1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010.md).

And not for ours only - It is not for us apostles that he has died, nor
exclusively for the Jewish people, but περι ὁλου του κοσμου, for the
whole world, Gentiles as well as Jews, all the descendants of Adam. The
apostle does not say that he died for any select part of the inhabitants
of the earth, or for some out of every nation, tribe, or kindred; but
for All Mankind; and the attempt to limit this is a violent outrage
against God and his word.

For the meaning of the word παρακλητος, which we here translate
advocate, see the note on [Joh 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016.md).

From these verses we learn that a poor backslider need not despair of
again finding mercy; this passage holds out sufficient encouragement for
his hope. There is scarcely another such in the Bible, and why? That
sinners might not presume on the mercy of God. And why this one? That no
backslider might utterly despair. Here, then, is a guard against
presumption on the one hand, and despondency on the other.

[1 John 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 2:3</span></span>

And hereby we do know that we know him - If we keep the commandments of
God, loving him with all our heart, and our neighbor as ourselves, we
have the fullest proof that we have the true saving knowledge of God and
his Christ. The Gnostics pretended to much knowledge, but their
knowledge left them in possession of all their bad passions and unholy
habits; they, therefore, gave no proof that they had known either God or
his Son Jesus - nor is any man properly acquainted with God, who is
still under the power of his sins.

[1 John 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 2:4</span></span>

He that saith, I know him - This is a severe blow against those false
teachers, and against all pretenders to religious knowledge, who live
under the power of their sins; and against all Antinomians, and false
boasters in the righteousness of Christ as a covering for their personal
unholiness. They are all liars, and no truth of God is in them.

[1 John 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 2:5</span></span>

But whoso keepeth his word - Conscientiously observes his doctrine, the
spirit and letter of the religion of Christ.

Is the love of God perfected - The design of God's love in sending Jesus
Christ into the world to die for the sin of man τετελειωται, is
accomplished, in that man who receives the doctrine, and applies for the
salvation provided for him. This seems to be the meaning of the apostle.

That we are in him - That we have entered into his spirit and views,
received his salvation, have been enabled to walk in the light, and have
communion with him by the Holy Spirit.

[1 John 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 2:6</span></span>

Abideth in him - He who not only professes to have known Christ, but
also that he has communion with him, and abides in his favor, should
prove the truth of his profession by walking as Christ walked; living a
life of devotion and obedience to God, and of benevolence and
beneficence to his neighbor. Thus Christ walked; and he has left us an
example that we should follow his steps.

To be in Christ, [Jo1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#005.md), is to be
converted to the Christian faith, and to have received the remission of
sins. To abide in Christ, [Jo1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#006.md), is
to continue in that state of salvation, growing in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

[1 John 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 2:7</span></span>

Brethren, I write no new commandment - There seems a contradiction
between this and the next verse. But the apostle appears to speak, not
so much of any difference in the essence of the precept itself, as in
reference to the degrees of light and grace belonging to the Mosaic and
Christian dispensations. It was ever the command of God that men should
receive his light, walk by that light, and love him and one another. But
this commandment was renewed by Christ with much latitude and
spirituality of meaning; and also with much additional light to see its
extent, and grace to observe it. It may therefore be called the Old
commandment, which was from the beginning; and also a New commandment
revealed afresh and illustrated by Christ, with the important addition
to the meaning of Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, ye shall love
the brethren so as to lay down your lives for each other. See the note
on [Joh 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034.md).

Instead of αδελφοι, brethren, ABC, thirteen others, with both the
Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, Coptic, Sahidic, Armenian, Slavonic, and
Vulgate, with several of the fathers, have αγαπητοι, beloved. This is
without doubt the true reading.

[1 John 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 2:8</span></span>

Which thing is true in him and in you - It is true that Christ loved the
world so well as to lay down his life for it; and it was true in them,
in all his faithful followers at that time, who were ready to lay down
their lives for the testimony of Jesus. There is a saying in Synopsis
Sohar, p. 94, n. 51, that may cast some light on this passage: That way
in which the just have walked, although it be Old, yet may be said to be
New in the love of the righteous. The love that the righteous bear to
God and to each other is a renewal of the commandment.

The darkness is past - The total thick darkness of the heathen world,
and the comparative darkness of the Mosaic dispensation, are now passing
away; and the pure and superior light of Christianity is now diffusing
its beams everywhere. He does not say that the darkness was all gone by,
but παραγεται, it is passing away; he does not say that the fullness of
the light had appeared, but ηδη φαινει, it is now shining and will shine
more and more to the perfect day; for the darkness passes away in
proportion as the light shines and increases.

[1 John 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 2:9</span></span>

He that saith he is in the light - He that professes to be a convert to
Christianity, even in the lowest degree; and hateth his brother - not
only does not love him, but wills and does him evil, as the Jews did the
Gentiles; is in darkness - has received no saving knowledge of the
truth; and, whatever he may pretend, is in heathen ignorance, or even
worse than heathen ignorance, to the present time, notwithstanding the
clear shining of the light of the Gospel.

[1 John 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 2:10</span></span>

He that loveth his brother - That is, his neighbor, his fellow creature,
whether Jew or Gentile, so as to bear him continual good will, and to be
ready to do him every kind office; abideth in the light - not only gives
proof that he has received Christ Jesus the Lord, but that he walks in
him, that he retains the grace of his justification, and grows therein.

And there is none occasion of stumbling in him - Και σκανδαλον εν αυτῳ
ουκ εστιν· And there is no stumbling block in him; he neither gives nor
receives offense: love prevents him from giving any to his neighbor; and
love prevents him from receiving any from his neighbor, because it leads
him to put the best construction on every thing. Besides, as he walks in
the light, he sees the stumbling blocks that are in the way, and avoids
them; every part of his path being illuminated. Many fall into sin
because they do not see the snares that are in the way; and they do not
see the snares because they either have not received, or do not abide
in, the light.

[1 John 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 2:11</span></span>

But he that hateth his brother is in darkness - He is still in his
heathen or unconverted state; and walketh in darkness, his conduct being
a proof of that state; and knoweth not whither he goeth - having no
proper knowledge of God or eternal things; and cannot tell whether he is
going to heaven or hell, because that darkness has blinded his eyes -
darkened his whole soul, mind, and heart.

[1 John 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo1 2:12</span></span>

I write unto you, little children - Τεκνια· Beloved children, (see on
[Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001) (note).md), those who were
probably the apostle's own converts, and members of the Church over
which he presided. But it may be applied to young converts in general;
those who can call God Abba, Father, by the Holy Spirit: therefore he
says of them, that their sins were forgiven them for his name's sake:
i.e. on account of Jesus, the Savior, who had died for them, and was now
their Mediator at the right hand of God.

[1 John 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo1 2:13</span></span>

I write unto you, fathers - By fathers it is very likely that the
apostle means persons who had embraced Christianity on its first
promulgation in Judea and in the Lesser Asia, some of them had probably
seen Christ in the flesh; for this appears to be what is meant by, Ye
have known him from the beginning. These were the elders and eye
witnesses, who were of the longest standing in the Church, and well
established in the truths of the Gospel, and in Christian experience.
But τον απ' αρχης, him who is from the beginning, may mean Jesus Christ
in the eternity of his nature, see [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md), [Joh
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002.md); but the sense is the same.

I write unto you, young men - These were confirmed disciples of Christ;
persons who were well-grounded in the truth, had been thoroughly
exercised in the Christian warfare, were no longer agitated by doubts
and fears, but had arrived at the abiding testimony of the Spirit of God
in their consciences; hence they are said to have overcome the wicked
one, [Jo1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014.md). They were persons in
the prime of life, and in the zenith of their faith and love.

I write unto you, little children - Παιδια, a very different term from
that used in the 12th verse, τεκνια, which means beloved children, as we
have already seen. This is another class, and their state is differently
described: Ye have known the Father. If the apostle does not use these
two words indifferently, four states instead of three, are here
described: -

1\. Fathers, πατερες· those who had been converted at the very
commencement of Christianity, and had seen the eternal Word manifested
in the flesh.

2\. Young Men, νεανισκοι· youths in the prime of their spiritual life,
valiant soldiers, fighting under the banner of Christ, who had
confounded Satan in his wiles, and overcome him by the blood of the
Lamb.

3\. Little Children, παιδια· disciples of Christ, not of very long
standing in the Church, nor of much experience, but who had known the
Father; i.e. persons who had been made sons: God had sent the Spirit of
his Son into their hearts, whereby they cried Abba, Father!

4\. Beloved Children, τεκνια· the most recent converts, and particularly
those among young men and women who, from their youth, simplicity,
openheartedness, and affectionate attachment to God and his cause, were
peculiarly dear to this aged apostle of Jesus Christ. These are
represented as having their sins forgiven them on account of his name,
δια το ονομα αυτου, that is, for the sake of Jesus, or on account of his
merit or worthiness.

These four classes constituted the household or family of God; each
class, in ascending gradation, seems to have had more light, experience,
and holiness than the other.

1\. The τεκνια, beloved children, or infants, are those who are just
born into the heavenly family.

2\. The παιδια, little children, are those who are able to walk and
speak; they know their heavenly Father, and can call him by that name.

3\. The νεανισκοι, young men, are such as are grown up to man's estate;
these perform the most difficult part of the labor, and are called to
fight the battles of the Lord.

4\. The πατερες, fathers, are those who are at the foundation of the
spiritual family, and have known the whole economy of the work of God in
themselves and in others. These have the largest stock of spiritual
wisdom and religious experience.

All these answer to the component members of a perfect human family.

1\. There is the beloved infant dandled on the knees of its parents.

2\. There are the little children that can speak a little, run about,
answer to their own names, distinguish and call on their father and
mother, and are now put under instruction.

3\. There are the youths, those who are grown up to man's estate, are
strong to labor, retain the instructions they have received, act upon
them, and are occasionally called upon to defend their family, property,
and country, against spoilers and oppressors.

4\. There are the parents, the father and mother, from whom the family
sprang, and who are the governors and directors of the household. To
these four classes, in a perfect family, the apostle appears to allude;
and we see, considered in this light, with what delicacy and propriety
he uses these images.

[1 John 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 2:14</span></span>

The word of God abideth in you - Ye have not only thoroughly known and
digested the Divine doctrine, but your hearts are moulded into it; ye
know it to be the truth of God from the power and happiness with which
it inspires you, and from the constant abiding testimony of the Spirit
of that truth which lives and witnesses wherever that truth lives and
predominates.

[1 John 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jo1 2:15</span></span>

Love not the world - Though these several classes were so well
acquainted with Divine things, and had all tasted the powers of the
world to come: yet so apt are men to be drawn aside by sensible things,
that the Holy Spirit saw it necessary to caution these against the love
of the world, the inordinate desire of earthly things. Covetousness is
the predominant vice of old age: Ye fathers, love not the world. The
things which are in the world, its profits, pleasures, and honors, have
the strongest allurements for youth; therefore, ye young men, little
children, and babes, love not the things of this world. Let those hearts
abide faithful to God who have taken him for their portion.

The love of the Father is not in him - The love of God and the love of
earthly things are incompatible. If you give place to the love of the
world, the love of God cannot dwell in you; and if you have not his
love, you can have no peace, no holiness, no heaven.

[1 John 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 2:16</span></span>

For all that is in the world - All that it can boast of, all that it can
promise, is only sensual, transient gratification, and even this promise
it cannot fulfill; so that its warmest votaries can complain loudest of
their disappointment.

The lust of the flesh - Sensual and impure desires which seek their
gratification in women, strong drink, delicious viands, and the like.

Lust of the eyes - Inordinate desires after finery of every kind, gaudy
dress, splendid houses, superb furniture, expensive equipage, trappings,
and decorations of all sorts.

Pride of life - Hunting after honors, titles, and pedigrees; boasting of
ancestry, family connections, great offices, honorable acquaintance, and
the like.

Is not of the Father - Nothing of these inordinate attachments either
comes from or leads to God. They are of this world; here they begin,
flourish, and end. They deprave the mind, divert it from Divine
pursuits, and render it utterly incapable of spiritual enjoyments.

[1 John 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 2:17</span></span>

The world passeth away - All these things are continually fading and
perishing; and the very state in which they are possessed is changing
perpetually, and the earth and its works will be shortly burnt up.

And the lust thereof - The men of this world, their vain pursuits, and
delusive pleasures, are passing away in their successive generations,
and their very memory perishes; but he that doeth the will of God - that
seeks the pleasure, profit, and honor that comes from above, shall abide
for ever, always happy through time and eternity, because God, the
unchangeable source of felicity, is his portion.

[1 John 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 2:18</span></span>

Little children, it is the last time - This place is variously
understood. This is the last dispensation of grace and mercy to mankind;
the present age is the conclusion of the Jewish state, as the temple and
holy city are shortly to be destroyed. But as there are many who suppose
that this epistle was written after the destruction of Jerusalem,
consequently the words cannot, on that supposition, refer to this.
Others think that εσχατη ὡρα should be translated, a most difficult,
perilous, and wretched time; a time in which all kinds of vices,
heresies, and pollutions shall have their full reign; that time which
out Lord predicted, [Mat 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015.md), when he
said, Beware of false prophets. And [Mat
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011.md), [Mat
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012.md) : Many false prophets shall
arise, and shall deceive many; and because iniquity shall abound, the
love of many shall wax cold. And [Mat
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024.md) : There shall arise false
Christs and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders. And
[Mat 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#025.md) : Behold, I have told you
before. Now the apostle may allude to these predictions of our Lord; but
all these refer to a time antecedent to the destruction of Jerusalem. I
am therefore inclined to think, whatever may be here the precise meaning
of the last time, that the epistle before us was written while Jerusalem
yet stood. See what is said in the preface on this head.

Antichrist shall come - Who is this αντιχριστος antichrist? Is he the
Emperor Domitian, the Gnostics, Nicolaitans, Nazareans, Cerinthians,
Romish pontiffs, etc., etc.! Ans. Any person, thing, doctrine, system of
religion, polity, etc., which is opposed to Christ, and to the spirit
and spread of his Gospel, is antichrist. We need not look for this
imaginary being in any of the above exclusively. Even Protestantism may
have its antichrist as well as Popery. Every man who opposes the spirit
of the Gospel, and every teacher and writer who endeavors to lower the
Gospel standard to the spirit and taste of the world, is a genuine
antichrist, no matter where or among whom he is found. The heresies
which sprang up in the days of St. John were the antichrist of that
time. As there has been a succession of oppositions to Christianity in
its spirit and spread through every age since its promulgation in the
world, so there has been a succession of antichrists. We may bring this
matter much lower; every enemy of Christ, every one who opposes his
reign in the world, in others, or in himself, is an antichrist; and
consequently every wicked man is an antichrist. But the name has been
generally applied to whatever person or thing systematically opposes
Christ and his religion.

Many antichrists - Many false prophets, false Messiahs, heretics, and
corrupters of the truth.

Whereby we know that it is the last time - That time which our Lord has
predicted, and of which he has warned us.

[1 John 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 2:19</span></span>

They went out from us - These heretics had belonged to our Christian
assemblies, they professed Christianity, and do so still; but we
apostles did not commission them to preach to you, for they have
disgraced the Divine doctrine with the most pernicious opinions; they
have given up or explained away its most essential principles; they have
mingled the rest with heathenish rites and Jewish glosses. While,
therefore, we acknowledge that they once belonged to us, we assert that
they are not of us. They are not Christians; we abhor their conduct and
their creed. We never sent them to teach.

They were not of us - For a considerable time before they left our
assemblies they gave proofs that they had departed from the faith; for
if they had been of us - if they had been apostles, and continued in the
firm belief of the Christian doctrines, they would not have departed
from us to form a sect of themselves.

That they were not all of us - They were not expelled from the Christian
Church; they were not sent out by us; but they separated from it and us.
None of them had been inspired as we apostles were, though they
pretended to a very high teaching; but their separating from us
manifested that they were not taught, as we were, by the Spirit of God.
These false teachers probably drew many sincere souls away with them;
and to this it is probable the apostle alludes when he says, they were
not All of us. Some were; others were not.

[1 John 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 2:20</span></span>

But ye have an unction - The word χρισμα signifies not an unction, but
an ointment, the very thing itself by which anointing is effected; and
so it was properly rendered in our former translations. Probably this is
an allusion to the holy anointing oil of the law, and to [Psa
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007.md) : God hath anointed thee with the
oil of gladness - he hath given thee the plenitude of the Spirit, which
none of thy fellows - none of the prophets, ever received in such
abundance. By this it is evident that not only the gifts of the Spirit,
but the Holy Spirit himself, is intended. This Spirit dwelt at that time
in a peculiar manner in the Church, to teach apostles, teachers, and all
the primitive believers, every thing requisite for their salvation; and
to make them the instruments of handing down to posterity that glorious
system of truth which is contained in the New Testament. As oil was used
among the Asiatics for the inauguration of persons into important
offices, and this oil was acknowledged to be an emblem of the gifts and
graces of the Holy Spirit, without which the duties of those offices
could not be discharged; so it is put here for the Spirit himself, who
presided in the Church, and from which all gifts and graces flowed. The
χρισμα, chrism or ointment here mentioned is also an allusion to the
holy anointing ointment prescribed by God himself, [Exo
30:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023.md), which was composed of fine
myrrh, sweet cinnamon, sweet calamus, cassia lignea, and olive oil. This
was an emblem of the gifts and graces of the Divine Spirit. See the
notes on [Exo 30:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023) (note.md). And for
the reason of this anointing see the note on [Exo
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#007.md).

Ye know all things - Every truth Of God necessary to your salvation and
the salvation of man in general, and have no need of that knowledge of
which the Gnostics boast.

But although the above is the sense in which this verse is generally
understood, yet there is reason to doubt its accuracy. The adjective
παντα, which we translate all things, is most probably in the accusative
case singular, having ανθρωπον, man, or some such substantive,
understood. The verse therefore should be translated: Ye have an
ointment from the Holy One, and ye know or discern Every Man. This
interpretation appears to be confirmed by των πλανωντων in [Jo1
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#026.md), those who are deceiving or
misleading you; and in the same sense should παντων, [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md), be understood: But as the same
anointing teacheth you παντων, not of all things, but of All Men. It is
plain, from the whole tenor of the epistle, that St. John is guarding
the Christians against seducers and deceivers, who were even then
disturbing and striving to corrupt the Church. In consequence of this he
desires them to try the spirits whether they were of God, [Jo1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md). But how were they to try them?
Principally by that anointing - that spiritual light and discernment
which they had received from God; and also by comparing the doctrine of
these men with what they had heard from the beginning. The anointing
here mentioned seems to mean the spirit of illumination, or great
knowledge and discernment in spiritual things. By this they could
readily distinguish the false apostles from the true.

[1 John 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 2:21</span></span>

I have not written, etc. - It is not because ye are ignorant of these
things that I write to you, but because you know them, and can by these
judge of the doctrines of those false teachers, and clearly perceive
that they are liars; for they contradict the truth which ye have already
received, and consequently their doctrine is a lie, and no lie can be of
the truth, i.e. consistent with Christianity.

[1 John 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jo1 2:22</span></span>

Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ? - Here we
see some of the false doctrines which were then propagated in the world.
There were certain persons who, while they acknowledged Jesus to be a
Divine teacher, denied him to be the Christ, i.e. the Messiah.

He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son, - He is
antichrist who denies the supernatural and miraculous birth of Jesus
Christ, who denies Jesus to be the Son of God, and who denies God to be
the Father of the Lord Jesus; thus he denies the Father and the Son. The
Jews in general, and the Gnostics in particular, denied the miraculous
conception of Jesus; with both he was accounted no more than a common
man, the son of Joseph and Mary. But the Gnostics held that a Divine
person, Aeon, or angelical being, dwelt in him; but all things else
relative to his miraculous generation and Divinity they rejected. These
were antichrists, who denied Jesus to be the Christ.

[1 John 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jo1 2:23</span></span>

Whosoever denieth the Son - He who denies Jesus to be the Son of God,
and consequently the Christ or Messiah, he hath not the Father - he can
have no birth from above, he cannot be enrolled among the children of
God, because none can be a child of God but by faith in Christ Jesus.

He that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also - This clause is
printed by our translators in Italics to show it to be of doubtful
authority, as it was probably wanting in the chief of those MSS. which
they consulted, as it was in Coverdale's Bible, printed 1535; Tindall's
Text, printed 1548; and in all the early printed editions (which I have
seen) previously to 1566; the Bible of Richard Cardmarden, printed in
English at Rouen, where this clause is inserted in a different letter
between brackets. But that the clause is genuine, and should be restored
to the text without any mark of spuriousness, as I have done in the text
of this work, is evident from the authorities by which it is supported.
It is found in ABC, and in between twenty and thirty others of the best
authority; as also in both the Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, Coptic, Sahidic,
Armenian, and Vulgate. It is also quoted as a part of the text by
Origen, Meletius, Athanesius, both the Cyrils, Theophylact, Vigilius of
Tapsum, Pelagius, Cerealis, Cassian; and in substance by Euthalius,
Epiphanius, Cyprian, Hilary, Faustinus, Lucifer of Cagliari, Augustine,
and Bede. It is wanting in the Arabic, in the Polyglot, in a MSS. in the
Harleian library, and in some few others. It is doubtless genuine, and
Griesbach has with propriety restored it to the text, from which it
never should have been separated.

[1 John 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jo1 2:24</span></span>

Let that therefore abide in you - Continue in the doctrines concerning
the incarnation, passion, death, resurrection, ascension, and
intercession of the Lord Jesus, which you have heard preached from the
beginning by us his apostles.

Ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father - Ye who are
preachers shall not only be acknowledged as ministers of the Church of
Christ, but be genuine children of God, by faith in the Son of his love;
and ye all, thus continuing, shall have fellowship with the Father and
with the Son.

[1 John 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jo1 2:25</span></span>

This is the promise - God has promised eternal life to all who believe
on Christ Jesus. So they who receive his doctrine, and continue in
communion with the Father and the Son, shall have this eternal life.

[1 John 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jo1 2:26</span></span>

These things have I written - Either meaning the whole epistle, or what
is contained in the preceding verses, from the beginning of the 18th to
the end of the 25th.

Them that seduce you - Περι των πλανωντων ὑμας· That is, the deceivers
that were among them, and who were labouring to pervert the followers of
Christ.

[1 John 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jo1 2:27</span></span>

But the anointing which ye have received - That ointment, the gifts of
the Holy Spirit, mentioned [Jo1 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020.md)
(note).

Ye need not that any man teach you - The Gnostics, who pretended to the
highest illumination, could bring no proof that they were divinely
taught, nor had they any thing in their teaching worthy the acceptance
of the meanest Christian; therefore they had no need of that, nor of any
other teaching but that which the same anointing teacheth, the same
Spirit from whom they had already received the light of the glory of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ. Whatever that taught, they needed; and
whatever those taught whose teaching was according to this Spirit, they
needed. St. John does not say that those who had once received the
teaching of the Divine Spirit had no farther need of the ministry of the
Gospel; no, but he says they had no need of such teaching as their false
teachers proposed to them; nor of any other teaching that was different
from that anointing, i.e. the teaching of the Spirit of God. No man,
howsoever holy, wise, or pure, can ever be in such a state as to have no
need of the Gospel ministry: they who think so give the highest proof
that they have never yet learned of Christ or his Spirit.

And is truth - Because it is the Spirit of truth [Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013.md).

And is no lie - It has nothing like the fables of the Gnostics. It can
neither deceive, nor be deceived.

[1 John 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jo1 2:28</span></span>

And now, little children - Τεκνια, Beloved children, abide in him - in
Christ Jesus. Let his word and spirit continually abide in you, and have
communion with the Father and the Son.

That when he shall appear - To judge the world, we may have confidence,
παρῥησιαν, freedom of speech, liberty of access, boldness, from a
conviction that our cause is good, and that we have had proper ground
for exultation; and not be ashamed - confounded, when it appears that
those who were brought to Christ Jesus, have apostatized, and are no
longer found in the congregation of the saints, and consequently are not
our crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus. Abide in him, that
this may not be the case.

[1 John 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jo1 2:29</span></span>

If ye know that he is righteous - That God is a holy God, ye know also,
that every one who doeth righteousness - who lives a holy life,
following the commandments of God, is born of him, Begotten of him - is
made a partaker of the Divine nature, without which he could neither
have a holy heart, nor live a holy life.

This verse properly belongs to the following chapter, and should not be
separated from it. The subject is the same, and does not stand in any
strict relation to that with which the 28th verse concludes.

The titles bestowed on Christians in the New Testament have been
misunderstood by many. What belongs, strictly speaking, to the Pure and
Holy, is often applied to those who, though bound by their Profession to
be such, were very far from it. This has been strongly denied by writers
who should have known better. Dr. Taylor has handled this point well in
his Key to the Apostolic Writings, from which I have given a copious
extract in my preface to the Epistle to the Romans, from the conviction
that the subject had been most dangerously misapprehended; and that
several of the worst heresies which disgrace religion had sprung from
this misapprehension. With some, Dr. Taylor's being an Arian was
sufficient to invalidate any testimony he might offer; but it is no
discovery of Dr. Taylor; it is what every attentive, unprejudiced reader
finds on reading the Old Testament in connection with the New. Perhaps
the testimony of a judicious Calvinist may be better received, not that
this truth needs the testimony of either, because it everywhere speaks
for itself, but because those who have too little grace, sense, and
candour to search for themselves, may be pleased that Dr. Macknight
saves them the trouble.

After having remarked that the words born of him, εξ αυτου γεγεννηται,
should be translated hath been Begotten of him, which is the literal
signification of the word, from γενναω, genero, gigno, I beget, (Born of
God being nowhere found in the Scripture), he goes on to say: -

"To understand the import of the high titles which in the New Testament
are given to the disciples of Christ, viz.: the begotten of God, as
here; children of God, as in the next chapter; heirs of God, [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017.md); elect of God - adopted of God -
saints - a royal priesthood - a holy nation - a peculiar people, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md); the following observations may be
of use.

"1. These high titles were anciently given to the Israelites as a
nation, because they were separated from mankind to be God's visible
Church, for the purpose of preserving the knowledge and worship of him
in the world, as the only true God.

"This appears from God's own words, [Exo
19:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003.md), etc.: Tell the children of
Israel; Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bare you on
eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself. Now therefore, if ye will
obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
treasure unto me above all people. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of
priests, and a holy nation. [Deu
14:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001.md), etc.: Ye are the children of
the Lord your God - for thou art a holy people to the Lord thy God. In
particular, the title of God's Son, even his first-born, was given to
the whole Israelitish nation by God himself, [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022.md), chiefly because they were the
descendants of Isaac, who was supernaturally begotten by Abraham,
through the power which accompanied the promise, [Gen
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010.md) : Lo, Sarah shall have a son. So
St. Paul informs us, [Rom 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007.md) :
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children;
(namely of God); but in Isaac shall a seed be to thee - the children of
the flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of
promise are counted for the seed. The apostle's meaning is, that Ishmael
and his posterity, whom Abraham procreated by his own natural strength,
being children of the flesh, were not children of God; that is, they
were not made the visible Church and people of God. But Isaac and his
descendants, whom Abraham procreated through the strength which
accompanied the promise, being more properly procreated by God than by
Abraham, were the children of God, i.e. were made the visible Church and
people of God, because, by their supernatural generation and title to
inherit Canaan, they were a fit image to represent the catholic
invisible Church of God, consisting of believers of all ages and
nations, who, being regenerated by the Spirit of God, are the true
children of God, and heirs of the heavenly country of which Canaan was a
type.

"2. As the promise, Lo, Sarah shall have a son, which was given to
Abraham when he was a hundred years old, and Sarah was ninety, implied
that that son was to be supernaturally procreated; so the promise given
to Abraham, [Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005.md), A father of
many nations have I constituted thee, implied that the many nations of
believers who, by this promise, were given to Abraham for a seed, were
to be generated by the operation of the Spirit of God, producing in them
faith and obedience, similar to those for which Abraham was constituted
the father of all believers. This higher generation, by which believers
have the moral image of God communicated to them, is well described,
[Joh 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012.md) : As many as received him,
to them gave he power to be called the sons of God, even to them who
believe on his name; οἱ εγεννηθησαν, who were Begotten, not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. That
is: Men become the true sons of God, not by their being naturally
descended from this or that father, nor by their being called the sons
of God by men like themselves, but by God's bestowing on them that high
appellation on account of their faith and holiness," (which were
produced in them by their regeneration through the Spirit of God.)

"3. If the Israelites, of whom the ancient visible Church and people of
God were composed, were all called the sons of God because Isaac, from
whom they were descended, was supernaturally begotten by the power of
God; certainly the believers of all ages and nations, of whom the
visible Church is composed, may with much greater propriety be called
the sons of God, since they are begotten of God, and possess his moral
nature.

"4. Thus it appears that the high titles above mentioned, namely, the
sons of God, the children of God, the elect of God, the adoption of
sons, the election, saints, holy nation, royal priesthood, peculiar
people, were anciently given to the Israelites As a Nation, merely on
account of their being the visible Church and people of God, without any
regard to the personal character of the individuals of whom that nation
was composed. It appears, also, that under the Gospel the same high
titles were bestowed on whole Churches, merely on account of their
profession of Christianity, without any regard to the personal character
of the individuals who composed these Churches. But these high titles,
with some others of greater importance, such as the begotten of God, the
heirs of God, the adoption, were given in an appropriated sense to
individuals likewise, on account of their faith and holiness. When given
to whole Churches, these titles imported nothing more than that the
society to which they were given was a Church of Christ, (i.e. professed
Christianity), and that the individuals of which that society was
composed were entitled to all the privileges belonging to the visible
Church of God. But when appropriated to individuals, these titles
implied that the persons to whom they were given were really partakers
of the nature of God; and that they were the objects of his paternal
love, and heirs of his glory.

"Wherefore, in reading the Scriptures, by attending to the different
foundations of these titles, and by considering whether they are applied
to Churches or individuals, we shall easily understand their true
import. Thus, when St. Paul, writing to the Thessalonians, says, [Th1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004.md), Knowing, brethren, beloved of
God, your election, he could not mean their election to eternal life,
since many of them were living disorderly, [Th2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#011.md), but their election to be the
visible Church of God under the Gospel; whereas, when John, in the verse
before us, says, Every one who doeth righteousness hath been begotten of
God, by restricting the title to a specific character he teaches us that
the persons of whom he speaks are the sons of God in the highest sense,
and heirs of eternal glory." How forcible are right words! See also the
introduction to the Epistle to the Romans.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 3](jo1003.md)

</div>
