<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 John Index](jo1)  
  [Previous](jo1000)  [Next](jo1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

The testimony of the apostle concerning the reality of the person and
doctrine of Christ; and the end for which he bears this testimony, [Jo1
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001). God is light, and none can have
fellowship with him who do not walk in the light; those who walk in the
light are cleansed from all unrighteousness by the blood of Christ, [Jo1
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005). No man can say that he has not
sinned; but God is faithful and just to cleanse from all unrighteousness
them who confess their sins, [Jo1
1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008).

[1 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 1:1</span></span>

That which was from the beginning - That glorious personage, Jesus
Christ the Lord, Who was from eternity; him, being manifested in the
flesh, we have heard proclaim the doctrine of eternal life; with our own
eyes have we seen him, not transiently, for we have looked upon him
frequently; and our hands have handled - frequently touched, his person;
and we have had every proof of the identity and reality of this glorious
being that our senses of hearing, ὁ ακηκοαμεν, seeing, ὁ ἑωρακαμεν τοις
οφθαλμοις ἡμων, and feeling, και αἱ χειρες ἡμων εψηλαφησαν could
possibly require.

[1 John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 1:2</span></span>

For the Life was manifested - The Lord Jesus, who is the creator of all
things, and the fountain of life to all sentient and intellectual
beings, and from whom eternal life and happiness come, was manifested in
the flesh, and we have seen him, and in consequence bear witness to him
as the fountain and author of eternal life; for he who was from eternity
with the Father was manifested unto us his apostles, and to the whole of
the Jewish nation, and preached that doctrine of eternal life which I
have before delivered to the world in my gospel, and which I now farther
confirm by this epistle.

[1 John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 1:3</span></span>

That which we have seen and heard - We deliver nothing by hearsay,
nothing by tradition, nothing from conjecture; we have had the fullest
certainty of all that we write and preach.

That ye also may have fellowship with us - That ye may be preserved from
all false doctrine, and have a real participation with us apostles of
the grace, peace, love, and life of God, which communion we have with
God the Father, who hath loved us, and given his Son Jesus Christ to
redeem us; and with his Son Jesus Christ, who laid down his life for the
life of the world and through whom, being God manifested in the flesh,
we have union with God, are made partakers of the Divine nature and
dwell in God, and God in us.

[1 John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 1:4</span></span>

That your joy may be full - Ye have already tasted that the Lord is
good; but I am now going to show you the height of your Christian
calling, that your happiness may be complete, being thoroughly cleansed
from all sin, and filled with the fullness of God.

[1 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 1:5</span></span>

This then is the message - This is the grand principle on which all
depends, which we have heard of απ' αυτου, From him; for neither Moses
nor the prophets ever gave that full instruction concerning God and
communion with him which Jesus Christ has given, for the only-begotten
Son, who was in the bosom of the Father, has alone declared the fullness
of the truth, and the extent of the blessings, which believers on him
are to receive. See [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018).

God is light - The source of wisdom, knowledge, holiness, and happiness;
and in him is no darkness at all - no ignorance, no imperfection, no
sinfulness, no misery. And from him wisdom, knowledge, holiness, and
happiness are received by every believing soul. This is the grand
message of the Gospel, the great principle on which the happiness of man
depends. Light implies every essential excellence, especially wisdom,
holiness, and happiness. Darkness implies all imperfection, and
principally ignorance, sinfulness, and misery. Light is the purest, the
most subtile, the most useful, and the most diffusive of all God's
creatures; it is, therefore, a very proper emblem of the purity,
perfection, and goodness of the Divine nature. God is to human soul,
what the light is to the world; without the latter all would be dismal
and uncomfortable, and terror and death would universally prevail: and
without an indwelling God what is religion? Without his all-penetrating
and diffusive light, what is the soul of man? Religion would be an empty
science, a dead letter, a system unauthoritated and uninfluencing, and
the soul a trackless wilderness, a howling waste, full of evil, of
terror and dismay, and ever racked with realizing anticipations of
future, successive, permanent, substantial, and endless misery. No
wonder the apostle lays this down as a first and grand principle,
stating it to be the essential message which he had received from Christ
to deliver to the world.

[1 John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 1:6</span></span>

If we say that we have fellowship - Having fellowship, κοινωνια,
communion, with God, necessarily implies a partaking of the Divine
nature. Now if a man profess to have such communion, and walk in
darkness - live an irreligious and sinful life, he lies, in the
profession which he makes, and does not the truth - does not walk
according to the directions of the Gospel, on the grace of which he
holds his relation to God, and his communion with him.

The Gnostics, against whose errors it is supposed this epistle was
written, were great pretenders to knowledge, to the highest degrees of
the Divine illumination, and the nearest communion with the fountain of
holiness, while their manners were excessively corrupt.

[1 John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 1:7</span></span>

But if we walk in the light - If, having received the principle of
holiness from him, we live a holy and righteous life, deriving continual
light, power, and life from him, then we have fellowship one with
another; that is, we have communion with God, and God condescends to
hold communion with us. This appears to be the intention of the apostle;
and so he was understood by some versions and MSS., which, instead of
μετ' αλληλων, with each other, have μετ' αυτον, with him. Those who are
deeply experienced in Divine things converse with God, and God with
them. What John says is no figure; God and a holy heart are in continual
correspondence.

The blood of Jesus Christ - The meritorious efficacy of his passion and
death has purged our consciences from dead works, and cleanseth us,
καθαριζει ἡμας, continues to cleanse us, i.e., to keep clean what it has
made clean, (for it requires the same merit and energy to preserve
holiness in the soul of man, as to produce it), or, as several MSS. and
some versions read, καθαριει and καθαρισει, will cleanse; speaking of
those who are already justified, and are expecting full redemption in
his blood.

And being cleansed from all sin is what every believer should look for,
what he has a right to expect, and what he must have in this life, in
order to be prepared to meet his God. Christ is not a partial Savior, he
saves to the uttermost, and he cleanses from All sin.

[1 John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 1:8</span></span>

If we say that we have no sin - This is tantamount to [Jo1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010) : If we say that we have not
sinned. All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; and
therefore every man needs a Savior, such as Christ is. It is very likely
that the heretics, against whose evil doctrines the apostle writes,
denied that they had any sin, or needed any Savior. In deed, the
Gnostics even denied that Christ suffered: the Aeon, or Divine Being
that dwelt in the man Christ Jesus, according to them, left him when he
was taken by the Jews; and he, being but a common man, his sufferings
and death had neither merit nor efficacy.

We deceive ourselves - By supposing that we have no guilt, no
sinfulness, and consequently have no need of the blood of Christ as an
atoning sacrifice: this is the most dreadful of all deceptions, as it
leaves the soul under all the guilt and pollution of sin, exposed to
hell, and utterly unfit for heaven.

The truth is not in us - We have no knowledge of the Gospel of Jesus,
the whole of which is founded on this most awful truth - all have
sinned, all are guilty, all are unholy; and none can redeem himself.
Hence it is as necessary that Jesus Christ should become incarnated, and
suffer and die to bring men to God.

[1 John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 1:9</span></span>

If we confess our sins - If, from a deep sense of our guilt, impurity,
and helplessness, we humble ourselves before God, acknowledging our
iniquity, his holiness, and our own utter helplessness, and implore
mercy for his sake who has died for us; he is faithful, because to such
he has promised mercy, [Psa 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005); [Pro
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013); and just, for Christ has died
for us, and thus made an atonement to the Divine justice; so that God
can now be just, and yet the justifier of him who believeth in Jesus.

And to cleanse us from all unrighteousness - Not only to forgive the
sin, but to purify the heart.

Observe here,

1\. Sin exists in the soul after two modes or forms:

(1.) In guilt, which requires forgiveness or pardon.

(2.) In pollution, which requires cleansing.

2\. Guilt, to be forgiven, must be confessed; and pollution, to be
cleansed, must be also confessed. In order to find mercy, a man must
know and feel himself to be a sinner, that he may fervently apply to God
for pardon; in order to get a clean heart, a man must know and feel its
depravity, acknowledge and deplore it before God, in order to be fully
sanctified.

3\. Few are pardoned, because they do not feel and confess their sins;
and few are sanctified or cleansed from all sin, because they do not
feel and confess their own sore, and the plague of their hearts.

4\. As the blood of Jesus Christ, the merit of his passion and death,
applied by faith, purges the conscience from all dead works, so the same
cleanses the heart from all unrighteousness.

5\. As all unrighteousness is sin, so he that is cleansed from all
unrighteousness is cleansed from all sin. To attempt to evade this, and
plead for the continuance of sin in the heart through life, is
ungrateful, wicked, and even blasphemous; for as he who says he has not
sinned, [Jo1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010), makes God a liar,
who has declared the contrary through every part of his revelation; so
he that says the blood of Christ either cannot or will not cleanse us
from all sin in this life, gives also the lie to his Maker, who has
declared the contrary, and thus shows that the word - the doctrine of
God is not in him.

Reader, it is the birthright of every child of God to be cleansed from
all sin, to keep himself unspotted from the world, and so to live as
never more to offend his Maker. All things are possible to him that
believeth; because all things are possible to the infinitely meritorious
blood and energetic Spirit of the Lord Jesus. See the notes on the
parallel passages in the margin; and particularly in St. John's gospel,
John 1 note.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 2](jo1002)

</div>
