<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job010)  [Next](job012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 11:0</span></span>

Zophar answers Job, and reproves him severely for his attempts to
justify himself; charges him with secret iniquity, and contends that God
inflicts less punishment on him than his iniquities deserve, [Job
11:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#001). Shows the knowledge and
perfections of God to be unsearchable, and that none can resist his
power, [Job 11:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007). Warns him against
vanity of mind, and exhorts him to repentance on the ground that his
acceptance with God is still a possible case, and that his latter days
may yet become happy and prosperous, [Job
11:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012).

[Job 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 11:1</span></span>

Zophar the Naamathite - Of this man and his friends, see [Job
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011). He is the most inveterate of
Job's accusers, and generally speaks without feeling or pity. In sour
godliness he excelled all the rest. This chapter and the twentieth
comprehends all that he said. He was too crooked to speak much in
measured verse.

[Job 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 11:2</span></span>

Should not the multitude of words be answered? - Some translate, "To
multiply words profiteth nothing."

And should a man full of talk be justified - איש שפתים ish sephathayim,
"a man of lips," a proper appellation for a great talker: he is "a man
of lips," i.e., his lips are the only active parts of his system.

[Job 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 11:3</span></span>

Should thy lies make men hold their peace? - This is a very severe
reproof, and not justified by the occasion.

And when thou mockest - As thou despisest others, shall no man put thee
to scorn? Zophar could never think that the solemn and awful manner in
which Job spoke could be called bubbling, as some would translate the
term לעג laag. He might consider Job's speech as sarcastic and severe,
but he could not consider it as nonsense.

[Job 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 11:4</span></span>

My doctrine is pure - לקחי likchi, "my assumptions." What I assume or
take as right, and just, and true, are so; the precepts which I have
formed, and the practice which I have founded on them, are all correct
and perfect. Job had not exactly said, My doctrine and way of life are
pure, and I am clean in thine eyes; but he had vindicated himself from
their charges of secret sins and hypocrisy, and appealed to God for his
general uprightness and sincerity: but Zophar here begs the question, in
order that he may have something to say, and room to give vent to his
invective.

[Job 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 11:5</span></span>

But O that God would speak - How little feeling, humanity, and charity
is there in this prayer!

[Job 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 11:6</span></span>

The secrets of wisdom - All the depths of his own counsels; the heights,
lengths, and breadths, of holiness. That they are double to that which
is, תושיה tushiyah, which we translate that which is, is a word frequent
in Job and in the Book of Proverbs, and is one of the evidences brought
in favor of Solomon as the author of this book. It signifies substance
or essence, and is translated by a great variety of terms; enterprise,
completeness, substance, the whole constitution, wisdom, law, sound
wisdom, solid complete happiness, solidity of reason and truth, the
complete total sum, etc., etc. See Taylor's Hebrew and English Concord.,
under ישה. In this place the versions are various. Coverdale, following
the Vulgate, translates: That he might shewe the (out of his secrite
wissdome) how manyfolde his lawe is. The Septuagint, ὁτι διπλους εσται
των κατα σε, that it is double to what it is with thee. Mr. Good
translates, "For they are intricacies to Iniquity." This is a meaning
never before given to תושיה tushiyah, and a meaning which even his own
learned note will not make generally prevalent. Perhaps Zophar is here,
in mind, comparing the wisdom which has been revealed with the wisdom
not revealed. The perfection and excellence of the Divine nature and the
purity of his law, are, in substance and essence, double or manifold to
the revelation already made.

Less than thine iniquity deserveth - Mr. Good translates, And the
knowledge hath withdrawn from thee because of thy sins; and represents
Zophar as praying that God would reveal to him the secrets of wisdom,
and the knowledge which he had withdrawn from him because of his
transgressions. That Zophar intends to insinuate that God afflicted Job
because of his iniquities, is evident; and that he thought that God had
inflicted less chastisement upon him than his sins deserved, is not less
so; and that, therefore, Job's complaining of harsh treatment was not at
all well founded.

[Job 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 11:7</span></span>

Canst thou by searching find out God? - What is God? A Being
self-existent, eternal, infinite, immense, without bounds,
incomprehensible either by mind, or time, or space. Who then can find
this Being out? Who can fathom his depths, ascend to his heights, extend
to his breadths, and comprehend the infinitude of his perfections?

[Job 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 11:8</span></span>

It is as high as heaven - High as the heavens, what canst thou work?
Deep below sheol, (the invisible world), what canst thou know? Long
beyond the earth, and broad beyond the sea, is its measure. These are
instances in the immensity of created things, and all out of the reach
of human power and knowledge; and if these things are so, how
incomprehensible must he be, who designed, created, preserves, and
governs the whole!

We find the same thought in Milton: -

"These are thy glorious works, Parent of good!

Almighty! Thine this universal frame:

How wondrous fair! Thyself how wondrous then!"

[Job 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 11:10</span></span>

If he cut off - As he is unlimited and almighty, he cannot be
controlled. He will do whatsoever he pleases; and he is pleased with
nothing but what is right. Who then will dare to find fault? Perhaps
Zophar may refer to Job's former state, his losses and afflictions. If
he cut off, as he has done, thy children; if he shut up, as he has done,
thyself by this sore disease; or gather together hostile bands to invade
thy territories and carry away thy property; who can hinder him? He is
sovereign, and has a right to dispose of his own property as he pleases.

[Job 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 11:11</span></span>

He knoweth vain men - מתי שוא methey shau, "men of falsehood."

He seeth wickedness - He sees as well what is in man, as what man does;
and of his actions and propensities he cannot be an indifferent
spectator.

[Job 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 11:12</span></span>

For vain man would be wise - The original is difficult and uncertain,
ואיש נבוב ילבב veish nabub yillabeb, "And shall the hollow man assume
courage," or "pride himself?" Or, as Mr. Good rather paraphrases it,
Will he then accept the hollow-hearted person? The Chaldee gives two
renderings: An eloquent man shall become wiser in his heart, and the
colt of the wild ass is born as the son of man. Or, The wise man shall
ponder it; and the refractory youth, who at last becomes prudent, shall
make a great man. Coverdale - A vayne body exalteth him self; and the
son of man is like a wylde asse's foale. Houbigant translates thus: - A
man who hath understanding will become prudent; but he who is as the
wild ass hath no heart, i.e., sense. According to this critic, the
meaning is this: - A man of sense, should he at any time transgress,
will learn wisdom from it; but a man of a brutish mind, uncultivated and
unreflecting, will plunge yet deeper into iniquity.

Though man be born like a wild ass's colt - Is translated by Mr. Good,
Or shall the wild ass colt assume the man? This is making a sense, but
such as I fear the original will never allow. There is no end to the
translations of this verse, and conjectures relative to its meaning. I
shall conclude with the Vulgate - Vir vanus in superbiam erigitur, et
tanquam pullum onagri se liberum natum putat, "Vain man is puffed up
with pride; and he supposes himself to be born free like the wild ass's
colt." Man is full of self-conceit; and imagines himself born to act as
he pleases, to roam at large, to be under no control, and to be
accountable to none for his actions.

[Job 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 11:13</span></span>

If thou prepare thine heart - Make use of the powers which God has given
thee, and be determined to seek him with all thy soul.

And stretch out thine hands toward him - Making fervent prayer and
supplication, putting away iniquity out of thy hand, and not permitting
wickedness to dwell in thy tabernacle; then thou shalt lift up thy face
without a blush, thou wilt become established, and have nothing to fear,
[Job 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#014), [Job
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#015).

There is a sentiment in [Pro 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001),
very similar to that in the [Job
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013), which we translate very
improperly: -

לאדם מערכי לב leadam maarchey leb.

To man are the preparations of the heart:

ומהוה מענה לשון umeyehovah maaneh lashon.

But from Jehovah is the answer to the tongue.

It is man's duty to pray; it is God's prerogative to answer. Zophar,
like all the rest, is true to his principle. Job must be a wicked man,
else he had not been afflicted. There must be some iniquity in his hand,
and some wickedness tolerated in his family. So they all supposed.

[Job 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 11:16</span></span>

Because thou shalt forget thy misery - Thou shalt have such long and
complete rest, that thou shalt scarcely remember thy labor.

As waters that pass away - Like as the mountain floods, which sweep
every thing before them, houses, tents, cattle, and the produce of the
field, and are speedily absorbed by the sandy plains over which they
run, so shalt thou remember thy sufferings: they were wasting and
ruinous for the time, but were soon over and gone.

[Job 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 11:17</span></span>

Thine age shall be clearer than the noonday - The rest of thy life shall
be unclouded prosperity.

Thou shalt shine forth - Thou shalt be in this unclouded state, as the
sun in the firmament of heaven, giving light and heat to all around
thee.

Thou shalt be as the morning - Thus the sun of thy prosperity shall
arise, and shine more and more unto the perfect day. This is the image
which the sacred writer employs, and it is correct and elegant.

[Job 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 11:18</span></span>

And thou shalt be secure - Thou shalt not fear any farther evils to
disturb thy prosperity, for thou shalt have a well-grounded hope and
confidence that thou shalt no more be visited by adversity.

Yea, thou shalt dig - I believe this neither refers to digging his
grave, nor to curiously investigating surrounding circumstances; but to
the custom of digging for water in the places where they pitched their
tents. It was a matter of high importance in Asiatic countries to find
good wells of wholesome water; and they were frequently causes of
contention among neighboring chiefs, who sometimes stopped them up, and
at other times seized them as their own. Through envy of Isaac's
prosperity the Philistines stopped up all the wells which Abraham had
digged, [Gen 26:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#012). And we find the
herdsmen of Gerar contending with Isaac's servants about the wells which
the latter had digged; so that they were obliged to abandon two of the
chief of them, and remove to a distance in order to dig and find quiet
possession. See [Gen 31:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#017). Zophar,
in reference to all these sorts of contentions and petty wars about
wells and springs, tells Job that in the state of prosperity to which he
shall be brought by the good providence of God, he shall dig - find
wells of living water; none shall contend with him; and he shall rest in
safety, all the neighboring chieftains cultivating friendship with him;
see on [Job 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023) (note), [Job
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024) (note); and that this is the
meaning of the passage the following verse shows: Thou shalt lie down,
and none shall make thee afraid; yea, many shall make suit unto thee.
Thou shalt be in perfect security; no enemy shall molest thee, and many
shall seek thy friendship.

[Job 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 11:20</span></span>

The eyes of the wicked shall fail - They shall be continually looking
out for help and deliverance; but their expectation shall be cut off.

And they shall not escape - They shall receive the punishment due to
their deserts; for God has his eye continually upon them. מנהם ומנוס אבד
umanos abad minnehem, literally, "And escape perishes from them." Flight
from impending destruction is impossible.

And their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost - ותקותם מפח נפש
vethikratham mappach naphesh, "And their hope an exhalation of breath,"
or a mere wish of the mind. They retain their hope to the last; and the
last breath they breathe is the final and eternal termination of their
hope. They give up their hope and their ghost together; for a vain hope
cannot enter into that place where shadow and representation exist not;
all being substance and reality. And thus endeth Zophar the Naamathite;
whose premises were in general good, his conclusions legitimate, but his
application of them to Job's case totally erroneous; because he still
proceeded on the ground that Job was a wicked man, if not ostensibly,
yet secretly; and that the sufferings he was undergoing were the means
by which God was unmasking him to the view of men. But, allowing that
Job had been a bad man, the exhortations of Zophar were well calculated
to enforce repentance and excite confidence in the Divine mercy. Zophar
seems to have had a full conviction of the all-governing providence of
God; and that those who served him with an honest and upright heart
would be ever distinguished in the distribution of temporal good. He
seems however to think that rewards and punishments were distributed in
this life, and does not refer, at least very evidently, to a future
state. Probably his information on subjects of divinity did not extend
much beyond the grave; and we have much cause to thank God for a clearer
dispensation. Deus nobis haec otia fecit. God grant that we may make a
good use of it!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 12](job012)

</div>
