<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job034)  [Next](job036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 35:0</span></span>

Elihu accuses Job of impious speeches, [Job
35:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001). No man can affect God by his
iniquity, nor profit him by his righteousness, [Job
35:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#005). Many are afflicted and
oppressed, but few cry to God for help; and, for want of faith, they
continue in affliction, [Job 35:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#009).

[Job 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 35:2</span></span>

My righteousness is more than God's? - This would indeed be a
blasphemous saying; but Job never said so, neither directly nor
constructively: it would be much better to translate the words צדקי מאל
tsidki meel, I am righteous Before God. And Job's meaning most certainly
was, "Whatever I am in your sight, I know that in the sight of God I am
a righteous man;" and he had a right to assume this character, because
God himself had given it to him.

[Job 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 35:3</span></span>

What advantage will it be unto thee? - As if he had said to God, "My
righteousness cannot profit thee, nor do I find that it is of any
benefit to myself." Or perhaps Elihu makes here a general assertion,
which he afterwards endeavors to exemplify: Thou hast been reasoning how
it may profit thee, and thou hast said, "What profit shall I have in
righteousness more than in sin?"

[Job 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 35:4</span></span>

I will answer thee - I will show thee the evil of a sinful way, and the
benefit of righteousness; and supply what thy friends have omitted in
their discourses with thee.

[Job 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 35:5</span></span>

Look unto the heavens - These heavens, and their host, God has created:
the bare sight of them is sufficient to show thee that God is infinitely
beyond thee in wisdom and excellence.

Behold the clouds - שחקים shechakim, the ethers, (Vulgate, aethera),
from שחק shachak, to contend, fight together: the agitated or
conflicting air and light; the strong agitation of these producing both
light and heat. Look upon these, consider them deeply, and see and
acknowledge the perfections of the Maker.

[Job 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 35:6</span></span>

If thou sinnest - God is not benefited by thy righteousness, nor injured
by thy iniquity, howsoever multiplied it may be.

[Job 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 35:8</span></span>

Thy wickedness may hurt - It is better to translate this literally:

To a man like thyself is thy wickedness:

And to the son of man, thy righteousness:

That is: -

Thou mayest injure thyself and others by thy wickedness,

And thou mayest benefit both by thy righteousness;

But God thou canst neither hurt nor profit.

[Job 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 35:9</span></span>

By reason of the multitude - Or rather, "From among the multitude" the
oppressed clamor, יזעיקו yaziku: they shout, ישועו yeshavveu, because of
the mighty. The wicked rich oppress the wicked poor; these cry aloud
because of their oppressors; but they have no relief, because they call
not upon God.

[Job 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 35:10</span></span>

Where is God my Maker - They have no just apprehension of his being;
they do not consider themselves his creatures, or that he who created
them still preserves them, and would make them happy if they would pray
unto him.

Who giveth songs in the night - This is variously translated.

"Before whom the high angels give praise in the night." - Chaldee.

"Who sets the night-watches." - Septuagint.

"Gives meditations in the night." - Syriac and Arabic.

"And that shyneth upon us that we might prayse him in the night." -
Coverdale.

A holy soul has continual communion with God: night and day its
happiness is great; and God, from whom it comes, is the continual
subject of its songs of praise.

[Job 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 35:11</span></span>

Who teacheth us more than the beasts - "The ox knoweth his owner, and
the ass his master's crib; but Israel doth not know me, my people do not
consider;" [Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003). Beasts, bards,
fowls, and in many cases pond-fishes, know and seem thankful to the hand
that feeds them; while man, made much more noble than they, gifted with
the greatest powers, privileged with the most important benefits,
considers not the Lord, nor discerns the operation of his hand.
Quadrupeds, reptiles, and fowls, have more gratitude to their masters
than man has to his God.

[Job 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 35:12</span></span>

There they cry - They bewail their calamities, but sorrow not for the
cause of them; they cry against their oppressors, but they call not upon
God.

Because of the pride of evil men - Or מפני mippeney, from the face,
presence, or influence, of the pride of wicked men. They cry for
deliverance from the pride of wicked men; but they are not heard,
because they cry not to God.

[Job 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 35:13</span></span>

Surely God will not hear vanity - He will not attend to such vain cries;
they cry from their oppressions, but they cry not to God.

[Job 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 35:14</span></span>

Thou sayest thou shalt not see Him - Several MSS. have "Thou shalt not
see me," and the Septuagint, and one other, "Thou shalt not see us," but
without the points, תשורנו, the original may be read see Him or see Us,
the third person singular, or the first person plural.

Yet judgment is before him - Rest assured that God has not forgotten
either to punish or to save; therefore trust in him; choose to be a
monument of his mercy, rather than of his justice.

[Job 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 35:15</span></span>

But - because it is not so - Rather, "But now, because he visiteth not
in his anger." This is more literal than the versions generally
proposed; and the sense of the place appears to be this: Because
vengeance is not speedily executed on an evil work, therefore are the
hearts of the children of men set in them to do iniquity. This is, in
effect, the charge which Elihu brings against Job.

[Job 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 35:16</span></span>

Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain - God will execute vengeance
when it may best serve the ends of his justice, providence, and mercy.
The delay of judgment is not proof that it shall not be executed; nor is
the deferring of mercy any proof that God has forgotten to be gracious.

He multiplieth words without knowledge - However this may apply to Job,
it most certainly applies very strongly and generally to the words, not
only of Job's three friends, but to those also of Elihu himself. The
contest is frequently a strife of words.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 36](job036)

</div>
