<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job004)  [Next](job006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 5:0</span></span>

Eliphaz proceeds to show that the wicked are always punished by the
justice of God, though they may appear to flourish for a time, [Job
5:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001); extols the providence of God,
by which the counsels of the wicked are brought to naught, and the poor
fed and supported, [Job 5:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009); shows
the blessedness of being corrected by God, in the excellent fruits that
result from it; and exhorts Job to patience and submission, with the
promise of all secular prosperity, and a happy death in a mature and
comfortable old age, [Job 5:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017).

[Job 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 5:1</span></span>

Call now, if there be any - This appears to be a strong irony. From whom
among those whose foundations are in the dust, and who are crushed
before the moth, canst thou expect succor?

To which of the saints wilt thou turn? - To whom among the holy ones,
(קדשים kedoshim), or among those who are equally dependent on Divine
support with thyself, and can do no good but as influenced and directed
by God, canst thou turn for help? Neither angel nor saint can help any
man unless sent especially from God; and all prayers to them must be
foolish and absurd, not to say impious. Can the channel afford me water,
if the fountain cease to emit it?

[Job 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 5:2</span></span>

For wrath killeth the foolish man - Foolish, silly, and simple, are
epithets given by Solomon to sinners and transgressors of all kinds.
Such parallelisms have afforded a presumptive argument that Solomon was
the author of this book. See the preface. The words of Eliphaz may be
considered as a sort of maxim, which the wisdom and experience of ages
had served to establish; viz., The wrath of God is manifested only
against the wicked and impious; and if thou wert not such, God would not
thus contend with thee.

[Job 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 5:3</span></span>

I have seen the foolish taking root - I have seen wicked men for a time
in prosperity, and becoming established in the earth; but I well knew,
from God's manner of dealing with men, that they must soon be blasted. I
even ventured to pronounce their doom; for I knew that, in the order of
God's providence, that was inevitable. I cursed his habitation.

[Job 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 5:4</span></span>

His children are far from safety - His posterity shall not continue in
prosperity. Ill gotten, ill spent; whatever is got by wrong must have
God's curse on it.

They are crushed in the gate - The Targum says, They shall be bruised in
the gate of hell, in the day of the great judgment. There is reference
here to a custom which I have often had occasion to notice: viz., that
in the Eastern countries the court-house, or tribunal of justice, was at
the Gate of the city; here the magistrates attended, and hither the
plaintiff and defendant came for justice.

[Job 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 5:5</span></span>

Whose harvest - Their possessions, because acquired by unjust means,
shall not be under the protection of God's providence; he shall abandon
them to be pillaged and destroyed by the wandering half-starved hordes
of the desert banditti. They shall carry it suddenly off; even the
thorns - grain, weeds, thistles, and all, shall they carry off in their
rapacious hurry.

The robber swalloweth us - Or, more properly, the thirsty, צמים tsammim,
as is plain from their swallowing up or gulping down; opposed to the
hungry or half-starved, mentioned in the preceding clause. The hungry
shall eat up their grain, and the thirsty shall drink down their wine
and oil, here termed חילם cheylam, their strength or power, for the most
obvious reasons.

There seem to be two allusions in this verse: 1. To the hordes of
wandering predatory banditti, or half-starved Arabs of the desert, who
have their scanty maintenance by the plunder of others. These
descendants of Ishmael have ever had their hands against all men, and
live to this day in the same predatory manner in which they have lived
for several thousands of years. M. Volney's account of them is striking:
"These men are smaller, leaner, and blacker, than any of the Bedouins
yet discovered. Their wasted legs had only tendons without calves. Their
belly was shrunk to their back. They are in general small, lean, and
swarthy, and more so in the bosom of the desert than on the borders of
the more cultivated country. They are ordinarily about five feet or five
feet two inches high; they seldom have more than about six ounces of
food for the whole day. Six or seven dates, soaked in melted butter, a
little milk, or curd, serve a man for twenty-four hours; and he seems
happy when he can add a small portion of coarse flour, or a little ball
of rice. Their camels also, which are their only support, are remarkably
meagre, living on the meanest and most scanty provision. Nature has
given it a small head without ears, at the end of a long neck without
flesh. She has taken from its legs and thighs every muscle not
immediately requisite for motion; and in short has bestowed on its
withered body only the vessels and tendons necessary to connect its
frame together. She has furnished it with a strong jaw, that it may
grind the hardest aliments; and, lest it should consume too much, she
has straitened its stomach, and obliged it to chew the cud." Such is the
description given of the Bedouin and his camel, by M. Volney, who, while
he denies the true God, finds out a deity which he calls Nature, whose
works evince the highest providence, wisdom, and design! And where does
this most wonderful and intelligent goddess dwell? Nowhere but in the
creed of the infidel; while the genuine believer knows that nature is
only the agent created and employed by the great and wise God to
accomplish, under his direction, the greatest and most stupendous
beneficial effects. The second allusion in the verse I suppose to be to
the loss Job had sustained of his cattle by the predatory Sabeans; and
all this Eliphaz introduces for the support of his grand argument, to
convict Job of hidden crimes, on which account his enemies were
permitted to destroy his property; that property, because of this
wickedness, being placed out of the protection of God's providence.

[Job 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 5:6</span></span>

Affliction cometh not forth of the dust - If there were not an adequate
cause, thou couldst not be so grievously afflicted.

Spring out of the ground - It is not from mere natural causes that
affliction and trouble come; God's justice inflicts them upon offending
man.

[Job 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 5:7</span></span>

Yet man is born unto trouble - לעמל leamal, to labor. He must toil and
be careful; and if in the course of his labor he meet with trials and
difficulties, he should rise superior to them, and not sink as thou
dost.

As the sparks By upward - ובני רשף יגביהי עוף ubeney resheph yagbihu
uph; And the sons of the coal lift up their flight, or dart upwards. And
who are the sons of the coal? Are they not bold, intrepid, ardent,
fearless men, who rise superior to all their trials; combat what are
termed chance and occurrence; succumb under no difficulties; and rise
superior to time, tide, fate, and fortune? I prefer this to all the
various meanings of the place with which I have met. Coverdale
translates, It is man that is borne unto mysery, like as the byrde for
to fle. Most of the ancient versions give a similar sense.

[Job 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 5:8</span></span>

I would seek unto God - Were I in your place, instead of wasting my
time, and irritating my soul with useless complaints, I would apply to
my Maker, and, if conscious of my innocence, would confidently commit my
cause to him.

[Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 5:9</span></span>

Which doeth great things - No work, however complicated, is too deep for
his counsel to plan; none, however stupendous, is too great for his
power to execute. He who is upright is always safe in referring his
cause to God, and trusting in him.

[Job 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 5:10</span></span>

Who giveth rain upon the earth - The Chaldee gives this verse a fine
turn: "Who gives rain on the face of the land of Israel, and sends
waters on the face of the provinces of the people." Similar to our
Lord's saying, which is expressed in the half of the compass: Your
Father which is in heaven - Sendeth Rain on the Just and on the Unjust;
[Mat 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045).

Sendeth waters upon the fields - The term חצות chutsoth, which we
translate fields, and generally signifies streets, may here mean those
plantations which are laid out in ridges or plats, in an orderly,
regular manner. God does not only send rain upon the earth in a general
manner, but, by an especial providence, waters the cultivated ground, so
that not one ridge is destitute of its due proportion of fructifying
moisture.

[Job 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 5:11</span></span>

To set up on high those that be low - He so distributes his providential
blessings without partiality, that the land of the poor man is as well
sunned and watered as that of the rich; so that he is thus set upon a
level with the lords of the soil.

[Job 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 5:12</span></span>

He disappointeth the devices of the crafty - All these sayings refer to
God's particular providence, by which he is ever working for the good,
and counterworking the plots of the wicked. And as various as are the
contingent, capricious, and malevolent acts of men, so varied are his
providential interferences; disappointing the devices, snares, and plots
of the crafty, so that their plans being confounded, and their machinery
broken in pieces, their hands cannot perform their enterprises.

[Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 5:13</span></span>

He taketh the wise in their own craftiness - So counterworks them as to
cause their feet to be taken in their own snares, and their evil
dealings to fall on their own pate. Such frequent proofs has God given
of his especial interference in behalf of the innocent, who have been
the objects of the plots and evil designs of the wicked, by turning
those evil devices against their framers, that he who digs a pit for his
neighbor shall fall into it himself has become a universal adage, and
has passed, either in so many words or in sense, into all the languages
of all the people of the earth. Lucretius expresses it strongly:

Circumretit enim vis atque injuria quemque,

Atque, unde exorta est, ad eum plerumque revortit.

Lucret. lib. v., ver. 1151.

"For force and wrong entangle the man that uses them;

And, for the most part, recoil on the head of the contriver."

[Job 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 5:14</span></span>

They meet with darkness in the daytime - God confounds them and their
measures; and, with all their cunning and dexterity, they are outwitted,
and often act on their own projects, planned with care and skill, as if
they had been the crudest conceptions of the most disordered minds. They
act in noonday as if the sun were extinct, and their eyes put out. Thus
does God "abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound their
devices."

[Job 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 5:15</span></span>

He saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth - This is rather a
harsh construction. To avoid this, some have proposed to render מחרב
mechereb, which we translate from the sword, the persecuted, but, I am
afraid, on very slender authority. Instead of מחרב מפיהם mechereb
mippihem, "from the sword, from their mouth," eleven of Kennicott and De
Rossi's MSS. read מחרב פיהם mechereb pihem, from the sword of their
mouth; and with these MSS. the Chaldee, Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic
agree. The verse, therefore, may be translated thus: -

He saveth from the sword of their mouth;

The poor from the hand of the mighty.

Or thus: -

He saveth from the sword of their mouth;

And with a strong hand the impoverished.

[Job 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 5:16</span></span>

So the poor - דל dal, he who is made thin, who is wasted, extenuated;
hath hope - he sees what God is accustomed to do, and he expects a
repetition of gracious dealings in his own behalf; and because God deals
thus with those who trust in him, therefore the mouth of impiety is
stopped. Religion is kept alive in the earth, because of God's signal
interventions in behalf of the bodies and souls of his followers.

[Job 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 5:17</span></span>

Behold, happy is the man - הנח hinneh, behold, is wanting in five of
Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., and also in the Syriac, Vulgate, and
Arabic. We have had fathers of our flesh, who corrected us for their
pleasure, or according to their caprices, and we were subject to them:
how much more should we be subject to the Father of spirits, and live?
for he corrects that we may be partakers of his holiness, in order that
we may be rendered fit for his glory. See [Heb
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#005); [Jam
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012); and [Pro
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012).

[Job 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 5:18</span></span>

For he maketh sore, and bindeth up - Thus nervously rendered by
Coverdale, For though he make a wounde, he giveth a medicyne agayne;
though he smyte, his honde maketh whole agayne.

[Job 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 5:19</span></span>

He shall deliver thee in six troubles - The numbers six and seven are
put here for many. Though a number of troubles should come upon thee all
at once, and there should be no hope, humanly speaking, yet God would
rid thee out of them all; for he saves as well from many as from few. We
may also understand the words, He who hath been thy deliverer in past
troubles, will not deny his help in those which are to come.

[Job 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 5:20</span></span>

In famine he shall redeem thee - The Chaldee, which understands this
chapter as speaking of the troubles and deliverances of the Israelites
in Egypt and the wilderness, renders this verse as follows:

"In the famine of Egypt he redeemed thee from death; and in the war of
Amalek, from the slaying of the sword."

[Job 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 5:21</span></span>

Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue - The Targum refers
this to the incantations of Balaam: "From injury by the tongue of Balaam
thou shalt be hidden in the clouds; and thou shalt not fear from the
blasting of the Midianites, when it shall come." Perhaps no evil is more
dreadful than the scourge of the tongue: evil-speaking, detraction,
backbiting, calumny, slander, tale-bearing, whispering, and
scandalizing, are some of the terms which we use when endeavoring to
express the baleful influence and effects of that member, which is a
world of fire, kindled from the nethermost hell. The Scripture abounds
with invectives and execrations against it. See [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020); [Psa
52:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002); [Pro
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#018); [Pro
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#003); [Jam
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#001).

Neither shalt thou be afraid - "Thou shouldst have such strong
confidence in God, that even in the presence of destruction thou
shouldst not fear death," the God of life and power being with thee.

[Job 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 5:22</span></span>

At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh - This most forcibly
expresses the strongest security, and confidence in that security.

"In the desolation of Sihon, and in the famine of the desert, thou shalt
laugh; and of the camps of Og, who is compared to a wild beast of the
earth, thou shalt not be afraid." - Targum.

[Job 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 5:23</span></span>

Thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field - Instead of אבני
abney, stones, Mr. Good reads בני beney, sons, or produce; but this
reading is not supported by any ancient version, nor, as far as I know,
by any MS. yet collated. We must, therefore, take up the text as we find
it, and make the best we can of the present reading. The Chaldee gives a
plausible sense: Thou needest not to fear, "because thy covenant is on
tables of stone, which are publicly erected in the field; and the
Canaanites, which are compared to the beasts of the field, have made
peace with thee." Perhaps the reference is to those rocks or strong
holds, where banditti secured themselves and their prey, or where the
emirs or neighboring chiefs had their ordinary residence. Eliphaz may be
understood as saying: Instead, then, of taking advantage of thee, as the
Sabeans have done, the circumjacent chieftains will be confederate with
thee; and the very beasts of the field will not be permitted to harm thy
flocks.

Coverdale seems to have had an idea of this kind, as we find he
translates the verse thus: -

But the castels in the londe shall be confederate with the,

And the beastes of the felde shall give the peace.

I believe the above to be the meaning of the place. See the next verse,
[Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024) (note).

[Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 5:24</span></span>

Thou shalt know - Thou shalt be so fully satisfied of the friendly
disposition of all thy neighbors, that thou shalt rest secure in thy
bed, and not be afraid of any danger, though sleeping in thy tent in the
field; and when thou returnest from thy country excursions, thou shalt
find that thy habitation has been preserved in peace and prosperity, and
that thou hast made no mistake in thy trust, in thy confidence, or in
thy confederates. The word אהלך oholecha, "thy tabernacle," means simply
a tent, or moveable dwelling, composed of poles, pins, and cloth, or
skin, to be pitched any where in a few moments, and struck again with
the same ease. The word נוך navecha, which we properly translate thy
habitation, signifies a solid, permanent dwelling-place. See [Jos
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#004), [Jos
22:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#006); [Sa2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#017); [Sa2
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#008); [Kg1
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#016); [Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007); [Psa
91:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#010); [Psa
132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003); [Lam
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#004); [Mal
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012); and with these passages compare
the place in the text. As to תחטא techeta, which we translate thou shalt
not Sin, it comes from חטא chata, to err, to mistake, to miss the mark:
hence to sin, transgress God's laws, seeking for happiness in forbidden
and unlawful things, and therefore missing the mark, because in them
happiness is not to be found: and it is very likely, from the connection
above, that to mistake or err is its meaning in this place. I need not
add, that the Arab chiefs, who had their castles or strong holds,
frequently in their country excursions lodged in tents in the open
fields; and that on such occasions a hostile neighbor sometimes took
advantage of their absence, attacked and pillaged their houses, and
carried off their families and household. See at the end of this
chapter, [Job 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#027) (note).

[Job 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 5:25</span></span>

Thine offspring as the grass - Thou shalt have a numerous and permanent
issue.

[Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 5:26</span></span>

Thou shalt come to thy grave - Thou shalt not die before thy time; thou
shalt depart from life like a full-fed guest; happy in what thou hast
known, and in what thou hast enjoyed.

Like as a shock of corn - Thou shalt completely run through the round of
the spring, summer, autumn, and winter of life; and thou shalt be buried
like a wholesome seed in the earth; from which thou shalt again rise up
into an eternal spring!

[Job 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 5:27</span></span>

Lo this, we have searched it - What I have told thee is the sum of our
wisdom and experience on these important points. These are established
maxims, which universal experience supports.

Know - understand, and reduce them to practice for thy good. Thus ends
Eliphaz, the Temanite, "full of wise saws and ancient instances;" but he
miserably perverted them in his application of them to Job's case and
character. They contain, however, many wholesome truths, of which the
wise in heart may make a very advantageous practical use.

The predatory excursions referred to in [Job
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#023) were not unfrequent among our own
barbarous ancestors. An affecting picture of this kind is drawn by
Shakespeare, from Holinshed's Chronicles, of the case of Macduff, whose
castle was attacked in his absence by Macbeth and his wife and all his
children murdered. A similar incident was the ground of the old heroic
ballad of Hardicanute. When the veteran heard that a host of Norwegians
had landed to pillage the country, he armed, and posted to the field to
meet the invading foe. He slew the chief in battle, and routed his
pillaging banditti. While this was taking place, another party took the
advantage of his absence, attacked his castle, and carried off or
murdered his lovely wife and family; which, being perceived on his
return by the war and age-worn chief, is thus affectingly described by
the unknown poet: -

Loud and chill blew the westlin wind,Sair beat the heavy shower,

Mirk grew the nicht eir HardyknuteWan neir his stately tower:

His tower that us'd with torches bleiseTo shine sae far at night,

Seim'd now as black as mourning weid,Nae marvel, sair he sich'd.

"Thair's nae light in my lady's bowir,Thair's nae light in my hall;

Nae blink shynes round my Fairly fair,Nor ward stands on my wall.

"What bodes it, Thomas! Robert! say?"Nae answer - speaks their dreid;

"Stand back, my sons, I'll be your gyde;"But bye they pass'd with speid.

"As fast I haif sped owr Scotland's foes"There ceis'd his brag of weir.

Sair schamt to mind ocht but his dame,And maiden Fairly fair.

Black feir he felt; but what to feirHe wist not yet with dreid;

Sair schook his body, sair his limbs,And all the warrior fled.

The ending of this poem is lost; but we here see that the castle of
Hardicanute was surprised, and his family destroyed, or carried off,
while he and his sons had been employed in defeating the invading
Norwegians. Thank God! civilization, the offspring of the spread of
Christianity, has put an end to these barbarous practices among us; but
in the East, where Christianity is not, they flourish still. Britons!
send out your Bible and your missionaries to tame these barbarians; for
whom heathenism has done nothing, and the Koran next to nothing.
Civilization itself, without the Bible, will do as little; for the
civilized Greeks and Romans were barbarians, fell and murderous; living
in envy and malice, hateful, hating one another, and offering hundreds
at a time of human victims to their ruthless deities. Nothing but
Christianity ever did, or even can, cure these evils.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 6](job006)

</div>
