<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job026)  [Next](job028.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 27:0</span></span>

Job strongly asserts his innocence; determines to maintain it, and to
avoid every evil way, [Job 27:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#001.md).
Shows his abhorrence of the hypocrite by describing his infamous
character, accumulated miseries, and wretched end, vv. 8-23.

[Job 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 27:1</span></span>

Continued his parable - After having delivered the preceding discourse,
Job appears to have paused to see if any of his friends chose to make
any reply; but finding them all silent, he resumed his discourse, which
is here called משלו meshalo, his parable, his authoritative weighty
discourse; from משל mashal, to exercise rule, authority, dominion, or
power - Parkhurst. And it must be granted that in this speech he assumes
great boldness, exhibits his own unsullied character, and treats his
friends with little ceremony.

[Job 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 27:2</span></span>

Who hath taken away my judgment - Who has turned aside my cause, and has
not permitted it to come to a hearing, where I might have justice done
to me, but has abandoned me to the harsh and uncharitable judgment of my
enemies? There appears to be a great want of reverence in these words of
Job; he speaks with a degree of irritation, if not bitterness, which
cannot be justified. No man should speak thus of his Maker.

[Job 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 27:3</span></span>

All the while my breath is in me - As Job appears to allude to the
creation of Adam, whom God made out of the dust of the earth, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, so that he became a
living soul, the whole of Job's assertion may be no more than a
periphrasis for As long as I live and have my understanding. Indeed
נשמתי nishmathi may be rendered my mind or understanding, and רוח אלוה
ruach Eloah, the breath of God, the principle of animal life, the same
that he breathed into Adam; for it is there said, [Gen
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007.md), He breathed into his nostrils,
נשמת חיים nismath chaiyim, the breath of lives, or that principle from
which animal and spiritual life proceeds; in consequence of which he
became לנפש חיה lenephesh chaiyah, an intelligent or rational animal.

[Job 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 27:4</span></span>

My lips shall not speak wickedness - As I have hitherto lived in all
good conscience before God, as he knoweth, so will I continue to live.

[Job 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 27:5</span></span>

God forbid - חלילה לי - di chalilah lli, far be it from me, that I
should justify you - that I should now, by any kind of acknowledgment of
wickedness or hypocrisy justify your harsh judgment. You say that God
afflicts me for my crimes; I say, and God knows it is truth, that I have
not sinned so as to draw down any such judgment upon me. Your judgment,
therefore, is pronounced at your own risk.

[Job 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 27:6</span></span>

My righteousness I hold fast - I stand firmly on this ground; I have
endeavored to live an upright life, and my afflictions are not the
consequence of my sins.

My heart shall not reproach me - I shall take care so to live that I
shall have a conscience void of offense before God and man. "Beloved, if
our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God;" [Jo1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#021.md). This seems to be Job's meaning.

[Job 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 27:7</span></span>

Let mine enemy be as the wicked - Let my accuser be proved a lying and
perjured man, because he has laid to my charge things which he cannot
prove, and which are utterly false.

[Job 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 27:8</span></span>

What is the hope of the hypocrite - The word חנף chaneph, which we
translate, most improperly, hypocrite, means a wicked fellow, a defiled,
polluted wretch, a rascal, a knave, a man who sticks at nothing in order
to gain his ends. In this verse it means a dishonest man, a rogue, who
by overreaching, cheating, etc., has amassed a fortune.

When God taketh away his soul? - Could he have had any well grounded
hope of eternal blessedness when he was acquiring earthly property by
guilt and deceit? And of what avail will this property be when his soul
is summoned before the judgment-seat? A righteous man yields up his soul
to God; the wicked does not, because he is afraid of God, of death, and
of eternity. God therefore takes the soul away - forces it out of the
body. Mr. Blair gives us an affecting picture of the death of a wicked
man. Though well known, I shall insert it as a striking comment on this
passage: -

"How shocking must thy summons be, O death!

To him that is at ease in his possessions;

Who, counting on long years of pleasures here;

Is quite unfurnished for that world to come!

In that dread moment how the frantic soul

Raves round the walls of her clay tenement;

Runs to each avenue, and shrieks for help,

But shrieks in vain! How wishfully she looks

On all she's leaving, now no longer hers!

A little longer, yet a little longer,

O, might she stay, to wash away her stains,

And fit her for her passage! Mournful sight!

Her very eyes weep blood; and every groan

She heaves is big with horror. But the foe,

Like a stanch murderer, steady to his purpose,

Pursues her close, through every lane of life,

Nor misses once the track, but presses on;

Till, forced at last to the tremendous verge,

At once she sinks to everlasting ruin."

The Grave.

The Chaldee has, What can the detractor expect who has gathered together
(ממון דשקר mamon dishkar, the mammon of unrighteousness) when God plucks
out his soul? The Septuagint: Τις γαρ εστιν ετι ελπις ασεβει, ὁτι
επεχει; Μη πεποιθως επι Κυριον ει αρα σωθησεται; "For what is the hope
of the ungodly that he should wait for? shall he, by hoping in the Lord,
be therefore saved?" Mr. Good translates differently from all the
versions: -

"Yet what is the hope of the wicked that he should prosper,

That God should keep his soul in quiet?"

I believe our version gives as true a sense as any; and the words appear
to have been in the eye of our Lord, when he said, "For what is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" [Mat
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#026.md).

[Job 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 27:11</span></span>

I will teach you by the hand of God - Relying on Divine assistance, and
not speaking out of my own head, or quoting what others have said I will
teach you what the mind of the Almighty is, and I will conceal nothing.
Job felt that the good hand of his God was upon him, and that therefore
he should make no mistake in his doctrines. In this way the Chaldee
understood the words, ביד אל beyad El, by the hand of God, which it
translates בנבואת אלהא binbuath Elaha, by the prophecy of God. Those who
reject the literal meaning, which conveys a very good sense, may adopt
the translation of Mr. Good, which has much to recommend it: "I will
teach you concerning the dealings of God."

[Job 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 27:12</span></span>

Ye yourselves have seen it - Your own experience and observation have
shown you that the righteous are frequently in affliction, and the
wicked in affluence.

Why then are ye thus altogether vain? - The original is very emphatical:
הבל תהבלו hebel tehbalu, and well expressed by Mr. Good: "Why then
should ye thus babble babblings!" It our language would allow it, we
might say vanitize vanity.

[Job 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 27:13</span></span>

This is the portion of a wicked man - Job now commences his promised
teaching; and what follows is a description of the lot or portion of the
wicked man and of tyrants. And this remuneration shall they have with
God in general, though the hand of man be not laid upon them. Though he
does not at all times show his displeasure against the wicked, by
reducing them to a state of poverty and affliction, yet he often does it
so that men may see it; and at other times he seems to pass them by,
reserving their judgment for another world, that men may not forget that
there is a day of judgment and perdition for ungodly men, and a future
recompense for the righteous.

[Job 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 27:14</span></span>

If his children be multiplied - As numerous families were supposed to be
a proof of the benediction of the Almighty, Job shows that this is not
always the case; for the offspring of the wicked shall be partly cut off
by violent deaths, and partly reduced to great poverty.

[Job 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 27:15</span></span>

Those that remain of him - שרידיו seridaiv, his remains, whether meaning
himself personally, or his family.

Shall be buried in death - Shall come to utter and remediless
destruction. Death shall have his full conquest over them, and the grave
its complete victory. These are no common dead. All the sting, all the
wound, and all the poison of sin, remains: and so evident are God's
judgments in his and their removal, that even widows shall not weep for
them; the public shall not bewail them; for when the wicked perish there
is shouting. Mr. Good, following the Chaldee, translates: Entombed in
corruption, or in the pestilence. But I see no reason why we should
desert the literal reading. Entombed in corruption gives no nervous
sense in my judgment; for in corruption are the high and the low, the
wicked and the good, entombed: but buried in death is at once nervous
and expressive. Death itself is the place where he shall lie; he shall
have no redemption, no resurrection to life; death shall ever have
dominion over him. The expression is very similar to that in [Luk
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022) (note.md), as found in several
versions and MSS.: The rich man died, and was buried in hell; and,
lifting up his eyes, being in torment, he saw, etc. See my note there.

[Job 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 27:16</span></span>

Though he heap up silver - Though he amass riches in the greatest
abundance, he shall not enjoy them. Unsanctified wealth is a curse to
its possessor. Money, of all earthly possessions, is the most dangerous,
as it is the readiest agent to do good or evil. He that perverts it is
doubly cursed, because it affords him the most immediate means of sinful
gratification; and he can sin more in an hour through this, than he can
in a day or week by any other kind of property. On the other hand, they
who use it aright have it in their power to do the most prompt and
immediate good. Almost every kind of want may be speedily relieved by
it. Hence, he who uses it as he ought is doubly blessed; while he who
abuses it is doubly cursed.

[Job 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 27:17</span></span>

The just shall put it on - Money is God's property. "The silver is mine,
and the gold is mine, saith the Lord;" and though it may be abused for a
time by unrighteous hands, God, in the course of his providence, brings
it back to its proper use; and often the righteous possess the
inheritance of the wicked.

[Job 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 27:18</span></span>

He buildeth his house as a moth - With great skill, great pains, and
great industry; but the structure, however skillful, shall be dissolved;
and the materials, however costly, shall be brought to corruption. To
its owner it shall be only a temporary habitation, like that which the
moth makes in its larve or caterpillar state, during its change from a
chrysalis to a winged insect.

As a booth that the keeper maketh - A shed which the watchman or keeper
of a vineyard erects to cover him from the scorching sun, while watching
the ripening grapes, that they may be preserved from depredation.
Travellers in the East have observed that such booths or sheds are made
of the lightest and most worthless materials; and after the harvest or
vintage is in, they are quite neglected, and by the winter rains, etc.,
are soon dissolved and destroyed.

[Job 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 27:19</span></span>

The rich man shall lie down - In the grave. But he shall not be gathered
- Neither have a respectable burial among men, nor be gathered with the
righteous in the kingdom of God. It may be that Job alludes here to an
opinion relative to the state of certain persons after death, prevalent
in all nations in ancient times, viz., that those whose funeral rites
had not been duly performed, wander about as ghosts, and find no rest.

He openeth his eyes - In the morning of the resurrection.

And he is not - He is utterly lost and undone for ever. This seems to be
the plain sense of the passage; and so all the versions appear to have
understood it; but Reiske and some others, by making יאסף yeaseph an
Arabic word, signifying, not the idea of gathering, but care, anxiety,
etc., have quite altered this sense of the passage; and Mr. Good, who
copies them, translates thus: Let the rich man lie down, and care not. I
see no manner of occasion to resort to this interpretation, which, in my
judgment, gives a sense inferior to that given above, or to the
following: The rich man shall lie down - go to his rest, fully persuaded
that his property is in perfect safety; but he shall not be gathered, or
he shall not gather - make any farther addition to his stores: he
openeth his eyes in the morning, when he is not - marauders in the night
have stripped him of all his property, as in the case of Job himself; a
case quite probable, and not unfrequent in Arabia, when a hostile tribe
makes a sudden incursion, and carries off an immense booty. But I prefer
the first meaning, as it is obtained without crucifying the text.
Coverdale translates: When the rich man dyeth, he carieth nothinge with
him: he is gone in the twincklinge of an eye.

[Job 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 27:20</span></span>

Terrors take hold on him as waters - They come upon him as an
irresistible flood; and he is overwhelmed as by a tempest in the night,
when darkness partly hides his danger, and deprives him of discerning
the way to escape.

[Job 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 27:21</span></span>

The east wind carrieth him away - Such as is called by Mr. Good, a
levanter, the euroclydon, the eastern storm of [Act
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#014.md).

[Job 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 27:22</span></span>

God shall cast upon him - Or, rather, the storm mentioned above shall
incessantly pelt him, and give him no respite; nor can he by any means
escape from its fury.

[Job 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 27:23</span></span>

Men shall clap their hands at him - These two verses refer to the storm,
which is to sweep away the ungodly; therefore the word God, in [Job
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#022.md), and men in this verse, should
be omitted.

[Job 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#022.md) : "For it shall fall upon
him, and not spare: flying from its power he shall continue to fly.

[Job 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#023.md). It shall clap its hands
against him, and hiss, וישרק veyishrok, shriek, him out of his place."

Here the storm is personified and the wicked actor is hissed and driven
by it from off the stage. It seems it was an ancient method to clap the
hands against and hiss a man from any public office, who had acted
improperly in it. The populace, in European countries, express their
disapprobation of public characters who have not pleased them in the
same manner to the present day, by hisses, groans, and the like.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 28](job028.md)

</div>
