<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job023)  [Next](job025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 24:0</span></span>

Job asserts that there are various transgressors whose wickedness is not
visited on them in this life; and particularizes the adjust and
oppressive, [Job 24:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001.md); those who are
cruel to the poor, [Job 24:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007.md); the
murderer, [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014.md); the adulterer,
[Job 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015.md); thieves and plunderers,
[Job 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016.md), [Job
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017.md). Nevertheless they have an
accursed portion, and shall die, and their memory perish, [Job
24:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018.md). He speaks of the abuse of
power, and of the punishment of oppressors, [Job
24:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021.md); and asserts that what he has
said on these subjects cannot be contradicted, [Job
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#025.md).

[Job 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 24:1</span></span>

Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty - Mr. Good
translates: "Wherefore are not doomsdays kept by the Almighty, so that
his offenders may eye their periods?" Doomsdays are here used in the
same sense as term times; and the wish is, that God would appoint such
times that the falsely accused might look forward to them with comfort;
knowing that, on their arrival, they should have a fair hearing, and
their innocence be publicly declared; and their detractors, and the
unjust in general, meet with their deserts. But God reserves the
knowledge of these things to himself. "The holy patriarch," says Mr.
Good, "has uniformly admitted that in the aggregate scale of Providence
the just are rewarded and the wicked punished for their respective
deeds, in some period or other of their lives. But he has contended in
various places, and especially in [Job
21:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007.md), that the exceptions to this
general rule are numerous: so numerous, as to be sufficient to render
the whole scheme of providential interposition perfectly mysterious and
incomprehensible, [Job 23:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008.md); so in
the passage before us: if the retribution ye speak of be universal, and
which I am ready to admit to a certain extent to be true and
unquestionable, I not only ask, Why do the just ever suffer in the midst
of their righteousness? but, Why do not the wicked see such retribution
displayed before their eyes by stated judgments, so that they may at one
and the same time know and tremble?"

[Job 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 24:2</span></span>

Some remove the landmarks - Stones or posts were originally set up to
ascertain the bounds of particular estates: and this was necessary in
open countries, before hedges and fences were formed. Wicked and
covetous men often removed the landmarks or termini, and set them in on
their neighbors' ground, that, by contracting their boundaries, they
might enlarge their own. The law of Moses denounces curses on those who
remove their neighbors' landmarks. See [Deu
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014.md); [Deu
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017.md), and the note on the former
place, where the subject is considered at large.

They violently take away flocks, and feed thereof - Mr. Good translates
ירעו yiru, they destroy, deriving the word, not from רעה raah, to feed,
but from רע ra, to rend, to destroy. The Septuagint had read רעה roch, a
shepherd; and therefore have translated ποιμνιον συν ποιμενι ἁρπασαντες,
"violently carrying off both the flock and the shepherd."

[Job 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 24:4</span></span>

They turn the needy out of the way - They will not permit them to go by
the accustomed paths; they oblige them to take circuitous routes. When
the Marquis of H. was made ranger of Richmond Park, he thought it his
duty to shut up a pathway which had existed for a long time; and those
who presumed, after this shutting up, to break the fence, and take that
path as formerly, were prosecuted. A cobbler near the place entered an
action against the marquis: the cause was tried, the marquis cast, and
the path ordered to be opened, on the ground that it had, time out of
mind, been a public undisputed path. When one asked the cobbler, "How he
could have the boldness to go to law with the Marquis of H.?" he
answered, "Because I did not like to leave the world worse than I found
it." All tolerated oppression and voluntary forfeiture of ancient
rights, are injurious to society at large, and they who wink at them
leave the world worse than they found it.

[Job 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 24:5</span></span>

Rising betimes for a prey - The general sense here seems plain enough.
There are some who live a lawless roaming life: make a predatory life
their employment; for this purpose, frequent the wilderness, where they
seize on and appropriate whatsoever they find, and by this method they
and their families are supported. Mr. Good says: "The sense has never
yet been understood by any commentator;" and hence he proposes a
different division of the words, placing ערבה arabah, the desert or
wilderness, in the first hemistich, thus: -

"Rising early for the pillage of the wilderness;

The bread of themselves and of their children."

Others think that the words are spoken solely of the poor under the hand
of oppression, who are driven away from their homes, and obliged to seek
such support as the wilderness can afford. Such was originally the state
of the Bedouins, and of the wandering Arab hordes in general: the
oppression of the tyrannous governors obliged them to seek refuge in the
deserts, where they still live in a roaming predatory life.

[Job 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 24:6</span></span>

They reap every one his corn in the field - This is perfectly
characteristic. These wandering hordes often make sudden irruptions, and
carry off the harvest of grain, olives, vines, etc., and plunge with it
into the wilderness, where none can follow them. The Chaldee gives the
same sense: "They reap in a field that is not their own, and cut off the
vineyard of the wicked."

[Job 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 24:7</span></span>

They cause the naked to lodge without clothing - Or rather, They spend
the night naked, without clothing; and without a covering from the cold:
another characteristic of the wandering Arabs. They are ill-fed,
ill-clothed. and often miserable off, even for tents. They can have
little household stuff: as they are plunderers, they are often obliged
to fly for their lives, and cannot encumber themselves with what is not
absolutely needful.

[Job 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 24:8</span></span>

They are wet with the showers of the mountains - Mr. Good thinks that
torrents, not showers, is the proper translation of the original זרם
zerem; but I think showers of the mountain strictly proper. I have seen
many of these in mountainous countries, where the tails of water-spouts
have been intercepted and broken, and the outpouring of them would be
incredible to those who have never witnessed similar phenomena. The rain
fell in torrents, and produced torrents on the land, carrying away earth
and stones and every thing before them, scooping out great gullies in
the sides of the mountains. Mountain torrents are not produced but by
such extraordinary outpourings of rain, formed either by water-spouts,
or by vast masses of clouds intercepted and broken to pieces by the
mountain tops.

And embrace the rock for want of a shelter - In such cases as that
related above, the firm rock is the only shelter which can be found, or
safely trusted.

[Job 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 24:9</span></span>

They pluck the fatherless from the breast - They forcibly take young
children in order that they may bring them up in a state of slavery.
This verse is the commencement of a new paragraph, and points out the
arbitrary dealings of oppressors, under despotic governors.

Take a pledge of the poor - Oppressive landlords who let out their
grounds at an exorbitant rent, which the poor laborers, though using the
utmost diligence, are unable at all times to pay; and then the unfeeling
wretch sells then up, as the phrase here is, or takes their cow, their
horse, their cart, or their bed, in pledge, that the money shall be paid
in such a time. This is one of the crying sins of some countries of
Europe.

[Job 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 24:10</span></span>

They cause him to go naked - These cruel, hard-hearted oppressors seize
the cloth made for the family wear, or the wool and flax out of which
such clothes should be made.

And they take away the sheaf - Seize the grain as soon as it is reaped,
that they may pay themselves the exorbitant rent at which they have
leased out their land: and thus the sheaf - the thraves and ricks, by
which they should have been supported, are taken away from the hungry.

[Job 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 24:11</span></span>

Make oil within their walls - Thus stripped of all that on which they
depended for clothing and food, they are obliged to become vassals to
their lord, labor in the fields on scanty fare, or tread their
wine-presses, from the produce of which they are not permitted to quench
their thirst.

[Job 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 24:12</span></span>

Men groan from out of the city - This is a new paragraph. After having
shown the oppressions carried on in the country, he takes a view of
those carried on in the town. Here the miseries are too numerous to be
detailed. The poor in such places are often in the most wretched state;
they are not only badly fed, and miserably clothed, but also most
unwholesomely lodged. I was once appointed with a benevolent gentleman,
J. S., Esq., to visit a district in St. Giles's London, to know the real
state of the poor. We took the district in House Row, and found each
dwelling full of people, dirt, and wretchedness. Neither old nor young
had the appearance of health: some were sick, and others lying dead, in
the same place! Several beds, if they might be called such, on the floor
in the same apartment; and, in one single house, sixty souls! These were
groaning under various evils; and the soul of the wounded, wounded in
spirit, and afflicted in body, cried out to God and man for help! It
would have required no subtle investigation to have traced all these
miseries to the doors, the hands, the lips, and the hearts, of ruthless
landlords; or to oppressive systems of public expenditure in the support
of ruinous wars, and the stagnation of trade and destruction of commerce
occasioned by them: to which must be added the enormous taxation to meet
this expenditure.

Yet God layeth not folly to them - He does not impute their calamities
to their own folly. Or, according to the Vulgate, Et Deus inultum abire
non patitur; "And God will not leave (these disorders) unpunished." But
the Hebrew may be translated And God doth not attend to their prayers.
Job's object was to show, in opposition to the mistaken doctrine of his
friends, that God did not hastily punish every evil work, nor reward
every good one. That vice often went long unpunished, and virtue
unrewarded; and that we must not judge of a man's state either by his
prosperity or adversity. Therefore, there might be cases in which the
innocent oppressed poor were crying to God for a redress of their
grievances, and were not immediately heard; and in which their
oppressors were faring sumptuously every day, without any apparent mark
of the Divine displeasure. These sentiments occur frequently.

[Job 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 24:13</span></span>

They - rebel against the light - Speaking of wicked men. They rebel
against the light of God in their consciences, and his light in his
word. They are tyrants in grain, and care neither for God nor the poor.
They know not the ways thereof - they will not learn their duty to God
or man. Nor abide in the paths thereof - if brought at any time to a
better mind, they speedily relapse; and are steady only in cruelty and
mischief. This is the character of the oppressors of suffering humanity,
and of sinners audacious and hardened. This whole verse Mr. Good
translates in the following manner: -

They are indignant of the light;

They respect not its progress;

And will not return to its paths.

They hate good; they regard not its operation; they go out of the way of
righteousness, and refuse to return.

[Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 24:14</span></span>

The murderer rising with the light - Perhaps the words should be read as
Mr. Good has done: -

With the daylight ariseth the murderer;

Poor and needy, he sheddeth blood.

This description is suitable to a highwayman; one who robs in daylight,
and who has been impelled by poverty and distress to use this most
unlawful and perilous mode to get bread; and for fear of being
discovered or taken, commits murder, and thus adds crime to crime.

In the night is as a thief - Having been a highwayman in the daytime, he
turns footpad or housebreaker by night; and thus goes on from sin to
sin. There have been several instances like the case above, where
poverty and distress have induced a man to go to the highway and rob, to
repair the ruin of himself and family. I shall introduce an authentic
story of this kind, which the reader may find at the end of this
chapter.

[Job 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 24:15</span></span>

The eye also of the adulterer - This is another sin particularly of the
city. The adulterer has made his assignation; he has marked the house of
her into whose good graces he has insinuated himself, called digging
through the house; he waits impatiently for the dusk; and then goes
forth, having muffled or disguised his face, and spends a criminal night
with the faithless wife of another man. The morning dawns: but it is to
him as the shadow of death, lest he should be detected before he can
reach his own home. And if one know him - if he happen to be recognized
in coming out of the forbidden house; the terrors of death seize upon
him, being afraid that the thing shall be brought to light, or that he
shall be called to account, a sanguinary account, by the injured
husband. This seems to be the general sense of the very natural picture
which Job draws in the [Job 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015.md),
[Job 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016.md), and [Job
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017.md).

[Job 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 24:16</span></span>

In the dark they dig through houses - Thieves in Bengal very frequently
dig through the mud wall and under the clay floors of houses, and,
entering unperceived, plunder them while the inhabitants are asleep. Mr.
Good's version of this paragraph I shall lay before the reader: -

[Job 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015.md) For the dark too watcheth
the eye of the adulterer;Exclaiming, No eye shall behold me.Then putteth
he the muffler on his face;

[Job 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016.md) He wormeth into houses
amidst the darkness.In the daytime they seal themselves up,They know not
the light:

[Job 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#017.md) For, the dawn they reckon
to themselves as the death-shade;The horrors of the death-shade as it
returneth.

[Job 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 24:18</span></span>

He is swift as the waters - Literally, Light is he on the face of the
waters: and cursed shall be their portion on the earth, which Mr. Good
translates: -

Miserable is this man on the waters:

Deeply miserable the lot of those on dry land.

He beholdeth not the way of the vineyards - These no longer flourish or
bring forth fruit. The labor of the vintage fails.

[Job 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 24:19</span></span>

Drought and heat consume the snow-waters - The public cisterns or large
tanks which had been filled with water by the melting of the snow on the
mountains, and which water was stored for the irrigation of their lands,
had been entirely exhausted by the intensity of the heat, and the long
continuance of drought.

So doth the grave those which have sinned - For this whole paragraph we
have only two words in the original; viz., שאול חטאו sheol chatau, "the
pit, they have sinned;" which Mr. Good translates: - "They fall to their
lowest depth." I believe the meaning to be, - even the deepest tanks,
which held most water, and retained it longest, had become exhausted; so
that expectation and succor were cut off from this as well as from every
other quarter. I have elsewhere shown that שאול sheol signifies, not
only hell and the grave, but any deep pit; and, also, that חטא chata
signifies to miss the mark. Mr. Good, properly aware of these
acceptations of the original words, has translated as above; and it is
the only ground on which any consistent meaning can be given to the
original.

[Job 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 24:20</span></span>

The womb shall forget him - The mother that bare him shall have no
affection for him, nor be afflicted at his death. But the word רחם
rechem signifies compassion, mercy. Mercy shall be unmindful of him. How
dreadful such a state! When mercy itself forgets the sinner, his
perdition slumbereth not. The worm shall feed sweetly on him - The
Chaldee has, "The cruel, who have neglected to commiserate the poor,
shall be sweet to the worms." He shall be brought into a state of the
greatest degradation, and shall be no more remembered.

And wickedness shall be broken as a tree - He shall be as a rotten or
decayed tree, easily broken to pieces. If it were clear that עולה avlah,
here rendered wickedness, has the same sense as עלה aleh, a leaf,
sucker, or shoot, then we might translate according to the ingenious
version of Mr. Good; viz., But the shoot shall be broken off as a tree;
which might, in this case, be supposed to refer to illicit commerce, the
fruit of the womb becoming abortive.

[Job 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 24:21</span></span>

He evil entreateth the barren - I believe the original word ולה should
be translated he feedeth, and so the Vulgate understood the word: Pavit
enim sterilem. He has been kind to the barren woman; but he has done no
good to the widow. He has shown no mercy to large families; he has been
an enemy to the procreation of children. Though he may, for particular
reasons, have provided for a barren woman; yet the widow he has not
comforted, she being old or infirm, or such as might not suit his
purpose.

[Job 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 24:22</span></span>

He draweth also the mighty - Calmet gives the following version of the
original: "He draws with him guards for his defense; he raises himself
up, and does not feel assured of his life." In the midst even of his
guards he is afraid; and dares not put confidence in any person. This is
an admirable delineation of the inquietudes and terrors of a tyrant.

[Job 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 24:23</span></span>

Though it be given him to be in safety - The Vulgate gives this verse a
singular turn: Dedit ei Deus locum paenitentiae, et ille abutitur eo in
superbiam, "God gave him space for repentance, but he has abused it
through pride." This is by no means conformable to the original. I think
the words should be translated thus: "He gives them (i.e., the guards)
to him for security, and he leans upon them; yet his eyes are upon their
ways." Though he have taken the guards, mentioned in the preceding
verse, for his personal defense, and for this purpose he uses them; yet
he is full of diffidence, and he is continually watching them lest they
should be plotting his destruction. The true picture of an Eastern
tyrant. Without are fightings; within are fears.

[Job 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 24:24</span></span>

They are exalted for a little while - Such tyrants are exalted for a
time, for God putteth down one and raiseth up another; but he turns his
hand against them, and they are gone. They are removed by his justice as
all of the same character have been and shall be; time and judgment
shall mow them down as the grass, and crop them off as the ears of ripe
corn. They may flourish for a time, and continue their oppressions; but
they shall at last come to an untimely end. Few tyrants ever visit the
eternal world sicca morte, but by a violent death. All Eastern history
is full of this great fact.

[Job 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 24:25</span></span>

And if it be not so now - Job has proved by examples that the righteous
are often oppressed; that the wicked often triumph over the just, that
the impious are always wretched even in the midst of their greatest
prosperity; and he defies his friends to show one flaw in his argument,
or an error in his illustration of it; and that existing facts are
farther proofs of what he has advanced.

In the preceding chapters we find Job's friends having continual
recourse to this assertion, which it is the grand object of all their
discourses to prove, viz., The righteous are so distinguished in the
approbation of God, that they live always in prosperity, and die in
peace. On the other hand, Job contends that the dispensations of
Providence are by no means thus equal in this life; that experience
shows that the righteous are often in adversity, and the wicked in power
and prosperity. Job's friends had also endeavored to prove that if a
reported good man fell into adversity, it was a proof that his character
had been mistaken, that he was an internal sinner and hypocrite; and
that God, by these manifest proofs of his disapprobation, unmasked him.
Hence they charged Job with hypocrisy and secret sins, because he was
now suffering adversity, and that his sins must be of the most heinous
nature, because his afflictions were uncommonly great. This Job repels
by appeals to numerous facts where there was nothing equivocal in the
character; where the bad was demonstrably bad, and yet in prosperity;
and the good demonstrably good, and yet in adversity. It is strange that
none of these could hit on a middle way: viz., The wicked may be in
prosperity, but he is ever miserable in his soul: the righteous may be
in adversity, but he is ever happy in his God. In these respects, God's
ways are always equal. On [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014.md),
I have referred to the case of unfortunate men who, falling into
adversity, madly have recourse to plunder to restore their ruined
circumstances. The following anecdote is told of the justly celebrated
Dr. Sharp, archbishop of York, the grandfather of that highly
benevolent, useful, learned, and eminent man, Granville Sharp, Esq.,
with whom I had for several years the honor of a personal acquaintance.
"Never was any man, as well by the tenderness of his nature as by the
impulse of religion, better disposed to succor the distressed, and
relieve the necessities of the poor; to which merciful offices he had so
strong an inclination that no reasonable solicitations were ever in
danger of meeting with a repulse. Nay, he was more prone to seek out
proper objects of his bounty, than to reject them when recommended; and
so far was his charity from any suspicion of being extorted by
importunity, that it appeared rather a delight than uneasiness to him to
extend his liberality upon all proper occasions." For the same reason, a
singular anecdote of the archbishop, related in the London Chronicle of
Aug. 13, 1785, and always credited by his family, may be thought worth
preserving. "It was his lordship's custom to have a saddle-horse attend
his carriage, that in case of fatigue from sitting, he might take the
refreshment of a ride. As he was thus going to his episcopal residence,
and was got a mile or two before his carriage, a decent, well-looking
young man came up with him; and, with a trembling hand and a faltering
tongue presented a pistol to his lordship's breast, and demanded his
money. The archbishop, with great composure, turned about; and, looking
steadfastly at him, desired he would remove that dangerous weapon, and
tell him fairly his condition. 'Sir! sir!' with great agitation, cried
the youth; 'no words, 'tis not a time; your money instantly.' 'Hear me,
young man,' said the archbishop; 'you see I am an old man, and my life
is of very little consequence: yours seems far otherwise. I am named
Sharp, and am archbishop of York; my carriage and servants are behind.
Tell me what money you want, and who you are, and I will not injure you,
but prove a friend. Here, take this; and now ingenuously tell me how
much you want to make you independent of so destructive a business as
you are now engaged in.' 'O sir,' replied the man, 'I detest the
business as much as you. I am-but-but-at home there are creditors who
will not stay - fifty pounds, my lord, indeed would do what no tongue
besides my own can tell.' 'Well, sir, I take it on your word; and, upon
my honor, if you will, in a day or two, call on me at - , what I have
now given you shall be made up that sum.' The highwayman looked at him,
was silent, and went off; and, at the time appointed, actually waited on
the archbishop, and assured his lordship his words had left impressions
which nothing could ever destroy. "Nothing more transpired for a year
and a half or more; when one morning a person knocked at his grace's
gate, and with peculiar earnestness desired to see him. The archbishop
ordered the stranger to be brought in. He entered the room where his
lordship was, but had scarce advanced a few steps before his countenance
changed, his knees tottered, and he sank almost breathless on the floor.
On recovering, he requested an audience in private. The apartment being
cleared, 'My lord,' said he, 'you cannot have forgotten the
circumstances at such a time and place; gratitude will never suffer them
to be obliterated from my mind. In me, my lord, you now behold that once
most wretched of mankind; but now, by your inexpressible humanity,
rendered equal, perhaps superior, in happiness to millions. O, my lord!'
tears for a while preventing his utterance, ''tis you, 'tis you that
have saved me, body and soul; 'tis you that have saved a dear and
much-loved wife, and a little brood of children, whom I tendered dearer
than my life. Here are the fifty pounds; but never shall I find language
to testify what I feel. Your God is your witness; your deed itself is
your glory; and may heaven and all its blessings be your present and
everlasting reward! I was the younger son of a wealthy man; your
lordship knows him; his name was - My marriage alienated his affection;
and my brother withdrew his love, and left me to sorrow and penury. A
month since my brother died a bachelor and intestate. What was his, is
become mine; and by your astonishing goodness, I am now at once the most
penitent, the most grateful, and happiest of my species.'" See Prince
Hoar's life of Granville Sharp, Esq., page 13. I have no doubt there
have been several cases of a similar kind, when the first step in
delinquency was urged by necessity; but few of such wretched adventurers
have met with an Archhishop Sharp. An early and pious education is the
only means under God to prevent such dangerous steps, which generally
lead to the most fearful catastrophe. Teach a child, that whom God
loveth he chasteneth. Teach him, that God suffers men to hunger, and be
in want, that he may try them if they will be faithful, and do them good
in their latter end. Teach him, that he who patiently and meekly bears
providential afflictions, shall be relieved and exalted in due time.
Teach him, that it is no sin to die in the most abject poverty and
affliction, brought on in the course of Divine providence, but that any
attempts to alter his condition by robbery, knavery, cozening, and
fraud, will be distinguished with heavy curses from the Almighty, and
necessarily end in perdition and ruin. A child thus educated is not
likely to abandon himself to unlawful courses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 25](job025.md)

</div>
