<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job024)  [Next](job026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 25:0</span></span>

Bildad, the Shuhite, in an irregular speech, shows that God's dominion
is supreme, his armies innumerable, and his providence extended over
all, [Job 25:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#001.md); that man cannot be
justified before God; that even the heavenly bodies cannot be reputed
pure in his sight; much less man, who is naturally weak and sinful, [Job
25:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#004.md).

[Job 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 25:1</span></span>

Bildad the Shuhite - This is the last attack on Job; the others felt
themselves foiled, though they had not humility enough to acknowledge
it, but would not again return to the attack. Bildad has little to say,
and that little is very little to the point. He makes a few assertions,
particularly in reference to what Job had said in the commencement of
the preceding chapter, of his desire to appear before God, and have his
case tried by him, as he had the utmost confidence that his innocence
should be fully proved. For this Bildad reprehends Job with arguments
which had been brought forth often in this controversy, and as
repeatedly confuted, [Job 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018.md); [Job
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#014.md).

[Job 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 25:2</span></span>

Dominion and fear are with him - God is an absolute sovereign; his fear
is on all the hosts of heaven; and by his sovereignty he establishes and
preserves order in the heavens, and among all the inhabitants of the
eternal world: how canst thou, therefore, dare to appeal to him, or
desire to appear before him?

[Job 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 25:3</span></span>

Is there any number of his armies? - He has troops innumerable; he can
serve himself of all his creatures; every thing may be a means of help
or destruction, according to his Divine will. When he purposes to save,
none can destroy; and when he is determined to destroy, none can save.
It is vain to trust in his creatures against himself.

Upon whom doth not his light arise? - That is, his providence rules over
all; he is universal Lord; he causes his sun to arise on the evil and
the good, and sends his rain on the just and unjust.

[Job 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 25:4</span></span>

How then can man be justified? - Or, ונה umah, With what, shall a man be
justified with God? Though this is no conclusion from Bildad's premises,
yet the question is of the highest importance to man. Neither Bildad nor
any of his fellows could answer it; the doctrine of redemption through
the blood of the cross was then known only through types and shadows. We
who live in the Gospel dispensation, can readily answer the question,
With what shall miserable man (אנוש enosh) be justified with God? - Ans.
By bringing forward, by faith, to the throne of the Divine justice, the
sacrificial offering of the Lord Jesus Christ; and confiding absolutely
in it, as being a full, sufficient, and complete atonement and sacrifice
for his sins, and for the salvation of a lost world. How, or with what
(ומה umah) shall he be clean that is born of a woman? - Ans. By
receiving that grace or heavenly influence communicated by the power and
energy of the eternal Spirit applying to the heart the efficacy of that
blood which cleanses from all unrighteousness. This, and this only, is
the way in which a sinner, when truly penitent, can be justified before
God: and in which a believer, convinced of indwelling sin, can be
sanctified and cleansed from all unrighteousness. This is the only means
of justification and sanctification, without which there can be no
glorification. And these two great works, which constitute the whole of
salvation, have been procured for a lost world by the incarnation,
passion, death, and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, who was
delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our justification; to
whom be glory and dominion now and for evermore, Amen!

[Job 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 25:5</span></span>

Behold even to the moon, and it shineth not - It is continually changing
its appearance. It never appears twice in its whole revolution with the
same face: it is ever waxing or waning; and its face is variegated with
opaque spots. Its changeableness can never be compared with the
unchangeable nature of God.

Yea, the stars are not pure in his sight - Whatever their excellence may
be as stars, it is nothing in comparison with him from whom they have
derived their being and splendor. See the notes on [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018.md); [Job
15:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#014.md). The Targum reads: "Behold,
the moon is as yet spotted in her eastern part; the sun shines not; and
the stars are not pure in his sight." Some think that by stars are meant
those angels who kept not their first estate: this may be so, but I
cannot see it in the text. It may, however, mean the heavenly host, as
it is supposed to do, [Job 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#007.md); but I
still must hesitate on the propriety of such applications. It is
probable this speech of Bildad was delivered in the night-season, when
clouds interrupted the bright shining of the moon. The third verse seems
to refer immediately to the stars, which to the naked eye are
innumerable. The sun is not mentioned, because of his absence. This
speech of Bildad is both confused and inconclusive. His reasoning is
absurd, and he draws false conclusions from his premises. In the third
verse, he says, "Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom does
not his light arise?" But how absurd is the conclusion which he draws
from his questions: - "How then can a man be justified with God, or he
be clean who is born of a woman?" This has no relation to the premises;
still to us the question is not difficult, and has already been answered
in the notes: "A man can be justified with God," through the blood of
Christ; and "he can be clean who is born of a woman." through the
sanctification of the Spirit.

[Job 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 25:6</span></span>

How much less man, that is a worm? - Or as the Targum - "How much more
man, who in his life is a reptile; and the son of man, who in his death
is a worm." Almost all the versions read, "Truly man is corruption, and
the son of man a worm." The original is degradingly expressive: "Even
because אנוש enosh, miserable man, is רמה rimmah, a crawling worm; and
the son of Adam, who is תולעה toleah, a worm, or rather maggot, from its
eating into and dividing certain substances." - Parkhurst. Thus endeth
Bildad the Shuhite, who endeavored to speak on a subject which he did
not understand; and, having got on bad ground, was soon confounded in
his own mind, spoke incoherently, argued inconclusively, and came
abruptly and suddenly to an end. Thus, his three friends being
confounded, Job was left to pursue his own way; they trouble him no
more; and he proceeds in triumph to the end of the thirty-first chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 26](job026.md)

</div>
