<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job016)  [Next](job018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 17:0</span></span>

Job complains of the injustice of his friends, and compares his present
state of want and wo with his former honor and affluence, [Job
17:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001). God's dealings with him will
ever astonish upright men; yet the righteous shall not be discouraged,
but hold on his way, [Job 17:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007).
Asserts that there is not a wise man among his friends, and that he has
no expectation but of a speedy death, [Job
17:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010).

[Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 17:1</span></span>

My breath is corrupt - Rather, My spirit is oppressed, רוחי חבלה ruchi
chubbalah: My days are extinct, and the sepulchral cells are ready for
me - Parkhurst. There is probably a reference here to cemeteries, where
were several niches, in Each of which a corpse was deposited. See on
[Job 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016) (note). For חבלה chubbalah,
corrupted or oppressed, some MSS. have חלה chalah, is made weak; and one
has גבלה is worn down, consumed: this is agreeable to the Vulgate,
Spiritus meus attenuebatur; "My spirit is exhausted."

[Job 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 17:2</span></span>

Are there not mockers with me? - This has been variously translated. The
Vulgate: "I have not sinned, and yet my eye dwells upon afflictions."
Septuagint: "I conjure you, laboring under afflictions, what evil have I
done? Yet strangers have robbed me of my substance." Mr. Good: "But are
not revilers before me? Alas, mine eye penetrateth their rebukes."
Calmet thinks the Hebrew might be translated thus: "If I have not been
united in friendship with the wicked, why are my eyes in bitterness?"
Coverdale translates both verses thus: My breth fayleth, my dayes are
shortened, I am harde at deathes dore. I have disceaved no man, yet must
myne eye continue in hevynesse. Mr. Heath "Were it not so, I have
sarcasms enow in store; and I could spend the whole night unmoved at
their aggravations." The general meaning is sufficiently plain, and the
reader has got translations enough.

[Job 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 17:3</span></span>

Lay down now - Deposit a pledge; stake your conduct against mine, and
your life and soul on the issue; let the cause come before God, let him
try it; and see whether any of you shall be justified by him, while I am
condemned.

[Job 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 17:4</span></span>

For thou hast hid their heart - This address is to God; and here he is
represented as doing that which in the course of his providence he only
permits to be done.

Shalt thou not exalt them - This was exactly fulfilled: not one of Job's
friends was exalted; on the contrary, God condemned the whole; and they
were not received into the Divine favor till Job sacrificed, and made
intercession for them.

[Job 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 17:5</span></span>

He that speaketh flattery - There is a great variety of meaning given to
the terms in this verse. The general sense is, The man who expects much
from his friends will be disappointed: while depending on them his
children's eyes may fail in looking for bread.

[Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 17:6</span></span>

He hath made me also a by-word - My afflictions and calamities have
become a subject of general conversation, so that my poverty and
affliction are proverbial. As poor as Job, As afflicted as Job, are
proverbs that have even reached our times and are still in use.

Aforetime I was as a tabret - This is not the translation of the Hebrew
ותפת לפנים אהיה vethopheth lephanim eheyeh. Instead of לפנים lephanim, I
would read לפניהם liphneghem, and then the clause might be translated
thus: I shall be as a furnace, or consuming fire (Topheth) before them.
They shall have little reason to mock when they see the end of the
Lord's dealings with me; my example will be a consuming fire to them,
and my false friends will be confounded. Coverdale translates thus: He
hath made me as it were a byworde of the comon people. I am his gestinge
stocke amonge them.

[Job 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 17:7</span></span>

Mine eye also is dim - Continual weeping impairs the sight; and indeed
any affliction that debilitates the frame generally weakens the sight in
the same proportion.

All my members are as a shadow - Nothing is left but skin and bone. I am
but the shadow of my former self.

[Job 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 17:8</span></span>

Upright men shall be astonied - In several of these verses Job is
supposed to speak prophetically of his future restoration, and of the
good which religious society should derive from the history of his
original affluence, consequent poverty and affliction, and final
restoration to health, peace, and prosperity. The upright will receive
the account with astonishment, and wonder at the dispensations of the
Almighty; while hypocrites, false professors and the sour-headed, godly,
shall be unmasked, and innocent men, whether in affliction or affluence,
shall be known to be favourites of the Almighty.

[Job 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 17:9</span></span>

The righteous also shall hold on his way - There shall be no doubt
concerning the dispensations of the Divine providence. My case shall
illustrate all seemingly intricate displays of God's government. None
shall be stumbled at seeing a godly man under oppression, knowing that
God never permits any thing of the kind but for the good of the subject,
and the manifestation of his own mercy, wisdom, and love. Therefore
whatever occurs to the righteous man, he will take it for granted that
all is well and justly managed, and that the end will be glorious.

Shall be stronger and stronger - He shall take encouragement from my
case, stay himself on the Lord, and thus gain strength by every blast of
adversity. This is one grand use of the book of Job. It casts much light
on seemingly partial displays of Divine providence: and has ever been
the great text-book of godly men in a state of persecution and
affliction. This is what Job seems prophetically to declare.

[Job 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 17:10</span></span>

But as for you all - Ye are too proud, and too full of self-importance,
to profit by what ye see. Return - enter into yourselves, consider your
ways, go again to school, get back to your own houses, and endeavor to
acquire humility and knowledge; for there is not one wise man among you.

[Job 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 17:11</span></span>

My days are past - Job seems to relapse here into his former state of
gloom. These transitions are very frequent in this poem; and they
strongly mark the struggle of piety and resignation with continued
affliction, violent temptation, and gloomy providences.

The thoughts of my heart - All my purposes are interrupted; and all my
schemes and plans, in relation to myself and family, are torn asunder,
destroyed, and dissipated.

[Job 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 17:12</span></span>

They change the night into day - These purposes and thoughts are so very
gloomy, that they change day into night.

The light is short because of darkness - אור קרוב מפני חשך or karob
mippeney choshek, "The light is near from the face of darkness." I have
scarcely any light: what is called light is so near akin to darkness,
that it is scarcely severed from it. There is either no light, or merely
such as is sufficient to render darkness visible. A fine picture of the
state of his mind - he was generally in darkness; but had occasional
gleams of hope.

[Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 17:13</span></span>

The grave is mine house - Let my life be long or short, the grave at
last will be my home. I expect soon to lie down in darkness - there is
my end: I cannot reasonably hope for any thing else.

[Job 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 17:14</span></span>

I have said to corruption - I came from a corrupted stock, and I must go
to corruption again. The Hebrew might be thus rendered: To the ditch I
have called, Thou art my father. To the worm, Thou art my mother and my
sister. I am in the nearest state of affinity to dissolution and
corruption: I may well call them my nearest relations, as I shall soon
be blended with them.

[Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 17:15</span></span>

And where is now my hope? - In the circumstances in which I am found, of
what use can hope be? Were I to form the expectation of future good, who
could ever see it realized? Is it then any wonder that I should complain
and bemoan my wretched lot?

[Job 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 17:16</span></span>

They shall go down to the bars of the pit - All that I have must descend
into the depths of the grave. Thither are we all going; and there alone
can I rest. בדי baddey, which we translate bars, signifies also
branches, distended limbs, or claws, and may here refer either to a
personification of the grave, a monster who seizes on human bodies, and
keeps them fast in his deadly gripe; or to the different
branching-off-alleys in subterranean cemeteries, or catacombs, in which
niches are made for the reception of different bodies.

When our rest together is in the dust - That is, according to some
critics, My hope and myself shall descend together into the grave. It
shall never be realized, for the time of my departure is at hand.

In those times what deep shades hung on the state of man after death,
and on every thing pertaining to the eternal world! Perplexity and
uncertainty were the consequences; and a corresponding gloom often dwelt
on the minds of even the best of the Old Testament believers. Job's
friends, though learned in all the wisdom of the Arabians, connected
with the advantages derivable from the Mosaic writings, and perhaps
those of the earlier prophets, had little clear or distinct in their
minds relative to all subjects post mortem, or of the invisible world.
Job himself, though sometimes strongly confident, is often harassed with
doubts and fears upon the subject, insomuch that his sayings and
experience often appear contradictory. Perhaps it could not be
otherwise; the true light was not then come: Jesus alone brought life
and immortality to light by his Gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 18](job018)

</div>
