<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](est010)  [Next](job001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Book of Job

This is the most singular book in the whole of the Sacred Code: though
written by the same inspiration, and in reference to the same end, the
salvation of men, it is so different from every other book of the Bible,
that it seems to possess nothing in common with them, for even the
language, in its construction, is dissimilar from that in the Law, the
Prophets, and the historical books. But on all hands it is accounted a
work that contains "the purest morality, the sublimest philosophy, the
simplest ritual, and the most majestic creed." Except the two first
chapters and the ten last verses, which are merely prose, all the rest
of the book is poetic; and is every where reducible to the hemistich
form, in which all the other poetic books of the Bible are written: it
is therefore properly called a Poem; but whether it belongs to the
dramatic or epic species has not been decided by learned men. To try it
by those rules which have been derived from Aristotle, and are still
applied to ascertain compositions in these departments of poetry, is, in
my opinion, as absurd as it is ridiculous. Who ever made a poem on these
rules? And is there a poem in the universe worth reading that is
strictly conformable to these rules? Not one. The rules, it is true,
were deduced from compositions of this description: - and although they
may be very useful, in assisting poets to methodize their compositions,
and to keep the different parts distinct; yet they have often acted as a
species of critical trammels, and have cramped genius. Genuine poetry is
like a mountain flood: it pours down, resistless, bursts all bounds,
scoops out its own channel, carries woods and rocks before it, and
spreads itself abroad, both deep and wide, over all the plain. Such,
indeed, is the poetry which the reader will meet with in this singular
and astonishing book. As to Aristotle himself, although he was a
keen-eyed plodder of nature, and a prodigy for his time; yet if we may
judge from his poetics, he had a soul as incapable of feeling the true
genie createur, as Racine terms the spirit of poetry, as he was, by his
physics, metaphysics, and analogies, of discovering the true system of
the universe.

As to the book of Job, it is most evidently a poem, and a poem of the
highest order; dealing in subjects the most grand and sublime; using
imagery the most chaste and appropriate; described by language the most
happy and energetic; conveying instruction, both in Divine and human
things, the most ennobling and useful; abounding in precepts the most
pure and exalted, which are enforced by arguments the most strong and
conclusive, and illustrated by examples the most natural and striking.

All these points will appear in the strongest light to every attentive
reader of the book; and to such its great end will be answered: they
will learn from it, that God has way every where: that the wicked,
though bearing rule for a time, can never be ultimately prosperous and
happy; and that the righteous, though oppressed with sufferings and
calamities, can never be forgotten by Him in whose hands are his saints,
and with whom their lives are precious; that in this world neither are
the wicked ultimately punished, nor the righteous ultimately rewarded;
that God's judgments are a great deep, and his ways past finding out;
but the issues of all are to the glory of his wisdom and grace, and to
the eternal happiness of those who trust in him. This is the grand
design of the book, and this design will be strikingly evident to the
simplest and most unlettered reader, whose heart is right with God, and
who is seeking instruction, in order that he may glorify his Maker, by
receiving and by doing good.

Notwithstanding all this, there is not a book in Scripture on the
subject of which more difficulties have been started. None, says Calmet,
has furnished more subjects of doubt and embarrassment; and none has
afforded less information for the solution of those doubts. On this
subject the great questions which have been agitated refer, principally,

1\. To the person of Job.

2\. To his existence.

3\. To the time in which he lived.

4\. To his country.

5\. To his stock or kindred.

6\. To his religion.

7\. To the author of the book.

8\. To its truth.

9\. To its authenticity; and,

10\. To the time and occasion on which it was written.

With respect to the first and second, several writers of eminent note
have denied the personality of Job; according to them, no such person
ever existed; he is merely fabulous, and is like the Il penseroso, or
sorrowful man of Milton; sorrow, distress, affliction, and persecution
personified, as the name imports. According to them, he is a mere ideal
being, created by the genius of the poet; clothed with such attributes,
and placed in such circumstances, as gave the poet scope and materials
for his work.

Thirdly, as to the time in which those place him who receive this as a
true history, there is great variety. According to some, he flourished
in the patriarchal age; some make him contemporary with Moses; that he
was in the captivity in Egypt, and that he lived at the time of the
exodus. Some place him in the time of the Israelitish judges; others in
the days of David; others, in those of Solomon; and others, in the time
of the Babylonish captivity, having been teacher of a school at Tiberias
in Palestine, and, with the rest of his countrymen, carried away into
Babylon; and that he lived under Ahasuerus and Esther. Fourthly, as to
his country: some make him an Arab; others, an Egyptian; others, a
Syrian; some an Israelite; and some, an Idumean. Fifthly, as to his
origin: some derive him from Nachor, and others from Esau, and make him
the fifth in descent from Abraham. Sixthly, as to his religion: some
suppose it to have been Sabaeism; others, that it was patriarchal; and
others, that he was bred up in the Jewish faith. Seventhly, as to the
author of the work, learned men are greatly divided: some suppose the
author to have been Elihu; others, Job; others, Job and his friends;
others, Moses; some, Solomon; others, Isaiah; and others, Ezra, or some
unknown Jew, posterior to the captivity. Eighthly, as to the book: some
maintain that it is a history of fact, given by one best qualified to
record it; and others, that it is an instructive fiction-facts, persons,
dialogues and all, being supposititious; given, however, by the
inspiration of God, in a sort of parabolic form, like those employed in
the Gospel; and similar to that of the rich man and Lazarus. Ninthly, as
to its authenticity: while some, and those not well qualified to judge,
have asserted it to be a mere human production, of no Divine authority;
others have clearly shown that the book itself, whatever questions may
arise concerning the person, author, time, place, etc., was ever
received by the Jewish Church and people as authentic, genuine, and
divinely inspired; and incorporated, with the highest propriety, among
the most instructive, sublime, and excellent portions of Divine
revelation. Tenthly, as to the occasion on which it was written, there
are considerable differences of opinion: some will have it to be written
for the consolation of the Hebrews in their peregrinations through the
wilderness; and others, for the comfort and encouragement of the
Israelites in the Babylonish captivity: these state that Job represents
Nehemiah, and that his three professed friends, but real enemies,
Eliphaz the Temanite, Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite,
represent Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the Ammonite, and Geshem the
Arabian! and that the whole book should be understood and interpreted on
this ground; and that, with a little allowance for poetic colouring, all
its parts perfectly harmonize, thus understood; showing, in a word, that
into whatsoever troubles or persecutions God may permit his people to be
brought, yet he will sustain them in the fire, bring them safely through
it, and discomfit all their enemies: and that whatsoever is true on this
great scale, is true also on that which is more contracted; as he will
equally support, defend, and finally render conqueror, every individual
that trusts in him.

I shall not trouble my readers with the arguments which have been used
by learned men, pro and con, relative to the particulars already
mentioned: were I to do this, I must transcribe a vast mass of matter,
which, though it might display great learning in the authors, would most
certainly afford little edification to the great bulk of my readers. My
own opinion on those points they may naturally wish to know; and to that
opinion they have a right: it is such as I dare avow, and such as I feel
no disposition to conceal. I believe Job to have been a real person, and
his history to be a statement of facts.

As the preface to this book (I mean the first chapter) states him to
have lived in the land of Uz, or Uts, I believe, with Mr. Good and
several other learned men, this place to have been "situated in Arabia
Petraea, on the south-western coast of the lake Asphaltites, in a line
between Egypt and Philistia, surrounded with Kedar, Teman, and Midian;
all of which were districts of Arabia Petraea; situated in Idumea, the
land of Edom or Esau; and comprising so large a part of it, that Idumea
and Ausitis, or the land of Uz, and the land of Edom, were convertible
terms, and equally employed to import the same region: thus, [Lam
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021.md) : 'Rejoice and be glad, O
daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the land of Uz."' See Mr. Good's
Introductory Dissertation; who proceeds to observe: "Nothing is clearer
than that all the persons introduced into this poem were Idumeans,
dwelling in Idumea; or, in other words, Edomite Arabs. These characters
are, Job himself, dwelling in the land of Uz; Eliphaz of Teman, a
district of as much repute as Uz, and (upon the joint testimony of [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007.md), [Jer
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#020.md); [Eze
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#013.md); [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011.md), [Amo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012.md), and [Oba
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008.md), [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009).md) a part, and a principal part, of
Idumea; Bildad of Shuah, always mentioned in conjunction with Sheba and
Dedan, all of them being uniformly placed in the vicinity of Idumea;
Zophar of Naamah, a city whose name imports pleasantness, which is also
stated, in [Jos 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021.md), [Jos
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#041.md), to have been situated in
Idumea, and to have lain in a southern direction towards its coast, or
the shores of the Red Sea; and Elihu of Buz, which as the name of a
place occurs but once in sacred writ, but is there ([Jer
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#022.md), [Jer
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023).md) mentioned in conjunction with
Teman and Dedan; and hence necessarily, like themselves, a border city
upon Ausitis, Uz, or Idumea. It had a number of names: it was at first
called Horitis, from the Horim or Horites, who appear to have first
settled there. Among the descendants of these, the most distinguished
was Seir; and from him the land was known by the name of the Land of
Seir. This chief had a numerous family, and among the most signalized of
his grandsons was Uz, or Uts; and from him, and not from Uz the son of
Nahor, it seems to have been called Ausitis, or the Land of Uz. The
family of Hor, Seir, or Uz, were at length dispossessed of the entire
region by Esau, or Edom; who strengthened himself by his marriage with
one of the daughters of Ishmael; and the conquered territory was
denominated Idumea, or the land of Edom." I think this is conclusive as
to the country of Job and his friends. See Mr. Good as above.

The man and his country being thus ascertained, the time in which he
lived is the point next to be considered.

I feel all the difficulties of the various chronologies of learned men:
all that has been offered on the subject is only opinion or probable
conjecture; and, while I differ from many respectable authors, I dare
not say that I have more to strengthen my opinion than they have to
support theirs.

I do not believe that he lived under the patriarchal dispensation; nor
in any time previous to the giving of the Law, or to the death of Moses.
I have examined the opposite arguments, and they have brought no
conviction to my mind. That he lived after the giving of the Law appears
to me very probable, from what I consider frequent references to the
Mosaic institutions occurring in the book, and which I shall notice in
their respective places. I know it has been asserted there are no such
references; and I am astonished at the assertion: the reader will judge
whether a plain case is made out where the supposed references occur. An
obstinate adherence to a preconceived system is like prejudice; it has
neither eyes nor ears.

With this question, that relative to the author of the book is nearly
connected. Were we to suppose that Job himself, or Elihu, or Job and his
friends, wrote the work, the question would at once be answered that
regards the time; but all positive evidence on this point is wanting:
and while other suppositions have certain arguments to support them, the
above claimants who are supported only by critical conjecture, must
stand where they are for want of evidence. The opinions that appear the
most probable, and have plausible arguments to support them, are the
following:

1\. Moses was the author of this book, as many portions of it harmonize
with his acknowledged writings.

2\. Solomon is the most likely author, as many of the sentiments
contained in it are precisely the same with those in the Proverbs; and
they are delivered often in nearly the same words.

3\. The book was written by some Jew, in or soon after the time of the
Babylonish captivity.

1\. That Moses was the author has been the opinion of most learned men;
and none has set the arguments in support of this opinion in so strong a
light as Mr. Mason Good, in his Introductory Dissertation to his
translation and notes on this book. Mr. G. is a gentleman of great
knowledge, great learning, and correct thinking; and whatever he says or
writes is entitled to respect. If he have data, his deductions are most
generally consecutive and solid. He contends, "that the writer of this
poem must in his style have been equally master of the simple and of the
sublime; that he must have been minutely and elaborately acquainted with
Astronomy, Natural History, and the general science of his age; that he
must have been a Hebrew by birth and native language, and an Arabian by
long residence and local study; and, finally, that he must have
flourished and composed the work before the exodus." And he thinks that
"every one of these features is consummated in Moses, and in Moses
alone; and that the whole of them give us his complete lineaments and
portraiture. Instructed in all the learning of Egypt, it appears little
doubtful that he composed it during some part of his forty years'
residence with the hospitable Jethro, in that district of Idumea which
was named Midian." In addition to these external proofs of identity, Mr.
Good thinks, "a little attention will disclose to us an internal proof,
of peculiar force, in the close and striking similarity of diction and
idiom which exists between the book of Job and those pieces of poetry
which Moses is usually admitted to have composed. This point he proceeds
to examine; and thinks that the following examples may make some
progress toward settling the question, by exhibiting a very singular
proof of general parallelism.

"The order of creation, as detailed in the first chapter of Genesis, is
precisely similar to that described in Job 38:1-20, the general
arrangement that occupied the first day; - the formation of the clouds,
which employed the second; - the separation of the sea, which took up a
part of the third; - and the establishment of the luminaries in the
skies, which characterized the fourth.

"In this general description, as given in Genesis, the vapor in the
clouds, and the fluid in the sea, are equally denominated waters: thus,
[Gen 1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005.md), 'And God said, Let there
be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters
from the waters. And God made the firmament, and divided the waters
which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the
firmament.'

"Let us compare this passage with [Job
26:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#008.md) : -

He driveth together the waters into His thick clouds;

And the cloud is not rent under them -

He setteth a bow on the face of the waters,

Till the consummation of light and of darkness.

"These are, perhaps, the only instances in the Bible in which the cloudy
vapors are denominated waters, before they become concentrated into
rain; and they offer an identity of thought, which strongly suggests an
identity of person. The following is another very striking peculiarity
of the same kind, occurring in the same description, and is perhaps
still more in point. The combined simplicity and sublimity of [Gen
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md), 'And God said, Be light! and
light was,' has been felt and praised by critics of every age, Pagan and
Mohammedan, as well as Jewish and Christian; and has by all of them been
regarded as a characteristic feature in the Mosaic style. In the poem
before us we have the following proof of identity of manner, [Job
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#006.md) : -

Behold! He saith to the snow, Be!

On earth then falleth it.

To the rain - and it falleth; -

The rains of his might.

"This can hardly be regarded as an allusion, but as an instance of
identity of manner. In the psalmist we have an allusion: and it occurs
thus, [Psa 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009.md), הוא אמר ויהי hu amar
vaiyehi, 'He spake, and it existed;' and I copy it that the reader may
see the difference. The eulogy of Longinus upon the passage in Genesis
is a eulogy also upon that in Job; and the Koran, in verbally copying
the psalmist, has bestowed an equal panegyric upon all of them: -

Dixit, 'Esto;' et fuit. - He said, Be Thou; and it Was.

"With reference to the description of the creation, in the book of
Genesis, I shall only farther observe, that the same simplicity of
style, adapted to so lofty a subject, characteristically distinguishes
the writer of the book of Job, who commonly employs a diction peculiarly
magnificent, as though trusting to the subject to support itself,
without the feeble aid of rhetorical ornaments. Of this the description
of the tribunal of the Almighty, given in the first and second chapters
of the ensuing poem, is a striking example, as indeed I have already
remarked; and that of the midnight apparition in the fourth chapter is
no less so.

"The following instances are of a more general nature, and lead, upon a
broader principle, to the same conclusion: -

Job Exodus [Job 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#024.md)

[Job 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#009.md)

[Job 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#024.md)

[Job 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#026.md)

Wherefore accountest thou me thine enemy?

Wouldst thou hunt down the parched stubble?

By the blast of God they perish;

And by the breath of His nostrils they are consumed.

Distress and anguish dismay him;

They overwhelm him as a king ready for battle.

Terrors shall be upon him -

Every horror treasured up in reserve for him.

A fire unblown shall consume him. [Exo
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#007.md)

[Exo 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008.md)

[Exo 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010.md)

[Exo 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016.md) Thou sentest forth thy
wrath,

Consuming them as stubble.

And with the blast of thy nostrils

The waters were gathered together.

Thou didst blow with thy wind:

The sea covered them.

Terror and dread shall fall upon them:

By the might of thine arm they shall be still as a stone. Job
Deuteronomy [Job 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#027.md)

[Job 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#015.md)

[Job 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#016.md)

[Job 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017.md)

18:24

7:25

[Job 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#017.md)

[Job 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#018.md)

[Job 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#019.md) The heavens shall disclose
his iniquity,

And the earth shall rise up against him.

Brimstone shall be rained down upon his dwelling.

Below shall his root be burnt up,

And above shall his branch be cut off.

Counsellors he leadeth captive,

And judges he maketh distracted.

He bewildereth the judgment of the leaders of the people of the land,

And causeth them to wander in a pathless dessert:

They grope about in darkness, even without a glimpse;

Yea, he maketh them to reel like the drunkard.

His roots shall be entangled in a rock;

With a bed of stones shall he grapple;

Utterly shall it drink him up from his place;

Yea, it shall renounce him, and say, "I never knew thee."

Behold the Eternal exulting in his course;

Even over his dust shall rise up another. [Deu
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022.md)

[Deu 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023.md)

[Deu 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#024.md)

[Deu 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028.md)

[Deu 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029.md)

[Deu 28:63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#063.md) And Jehovah shall mite thee
with a consumption;

And with a fever, and with an inflammation,

And with an extreme burning.

And the heaven over thy head shall be brass;

And the earth under thee, iron.

And Jehovah shall make the rain of they land powder and dust;

From heaven shall it come down upon thee,

Until thou be destroyed.

Jehovah shall smite thee with destruction,

And blindness, and astonishment of heart.

And thou shalt grope at noonday,

As the blind gropeth in darkness:

And thou shalt not prosper in thy ways:

And thou shalt only be oppressed.

And consumed continually.

And it shall come to pass,

As Jehovah exulted over you,

To do you good, and to multiply you,

To destroy you, and reduce you to naught. "In this specimen of
comparison it is peculiarly worthy of remark, that not only the same
train of ideas is found to recur, but in many instances the same words,
where others might have been employed, and perhaps have answered as
well; the whole obviously resulting from the habit of thinking upon
subjects in the same manner, and by means of the same terms which is
common to every one, and which distinguishes original identity from
intentional imitation. I will only advert to one instance: the use of
the very powerful, but not very common verb שש sis, 'to exult,' exulto,
glorior, γαυριαω, which occurs in the last verse of both the above
passages, and is in each instance equally appropriate: ישיש יהוה yasis
Yehovah - הוא משוש hu mesos.

"The same term is again employed, [Job
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#021.md), to express the spirited
prancing of the high mettled war-horse.

"The above passage from [Job 8:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#001.md) has
not been generally understood, and has been given erroneously in the
translations." Mr. Good, in his notes, p. 101-103, enters at large into
a defense of his version of this passage.

Job Deuteronomy [Job 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008.md)

[Job 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#010.md)

[Job 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017.md)

[Job 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006.md)

[Job 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027.md)

[Job 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004.md)

[Job 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#013.md) For examine, I beseech
thee, the past age;

Yea, gird thyself to the study of its forefathers;

Shall not they instruct thee, counsel thee,

And swell forth the sayings of their wisdom?

He shall not behold the branches of the river,

Brooks of honey and butter -

When my path flowed with butter,

And the rock poured out for me rivers of oil.

Though his face be enveloped with fatness,

And heaped up with fatness on his loins.

The arrows of the Almighty are within me;

Their poison drinketh up my spirit:

The terrors of God set themselves in array against me;

His arrows fly around me;

He pierceth my reins without mercy. [Deu
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007.md)

[Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013.md)

[Deu 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014.md)

[Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015.md)

[Deu 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#023.md)

[Deu 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042.md) Reflect on the days of old;
Contemplate the times of ages beyond ages;

Inquire of thy father, and he will show thee;

Thine elders, and the will instruct thee.

He gave him to suck honey out of the rock

And oil out of the flinty rock,

Butter of kine, and milk of sheep.

But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked:

Thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick;

Thou art enveloped with fatness.

I will heap mischiefs upon them,

I will spend my arrows upon them.

I will make mine arrows drunk with blood. "The fine pathetic elegy of
the ninetieth psalm has been usually ascribed to Moses; and Dath
imagines it was written by him a little before his death.

"Kennicott and Geddes have some doubt upon this point, chiefly because
the ultimate period assigned in it to the life of man is fourscore
years; while Moses was at his death a hundred and twenty years old, yet
'his eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated;' [Deu
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007.md).

"The following comparison will, perhaps, have a tendency to confirm the
general opinion, by rendering it probable that its author and the author
of the Book of Job were the same person.

Job Psalm [Job 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#002.md)

[Job 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#003.md)

[Job 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#016.md)

[Job 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#018.md)

[Job 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#019.md)

[Job 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021.md)

[Job 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#014.md)

[Job 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#016.md)

[Job 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#017.md) He springeth up as a
flower, and is cut down;

Yea, he fleeth as a shadow, and endureth not.

And dost thou cast thine eyes upon such a one?

And wouldst thou bring me into judgment with thyself?

Yet now art thou numbering my steps;

Thou overlookest nothing of my sins: -

And for ever, as the crumbling mountain dissolveth,

And the rock mouldereth away from his place,

So consumest thou the hope of man,

Thou harassest him continually till he perish.

Why wilt thou not turn away from my transgression,

And let my calamity pass by?

If the iniquity of thy hand thou put away evil,

And let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles,

Lo! then shalt thou forget affliction;

As waters passed by shalt thou remember it:

And brighter shall the time be than noontide;

Thou shalt shine forth, thou shalt grow vigorous, like the day-spring.
[Psa 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005.md)

[Psa 90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006.md)

[Psa 90:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007.md)

[Psa 90:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#008.md)

[Psa 90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009.md)

[Psa 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010.md)

[Psa 90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012.md)

[Psa 90:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014.md)

[Psa 90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015.md)

[Psa 90:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#016.md)

[Psa 90:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017.md) They are like the passing
grass of the morning;

In the morning it springeth up and groweth:

In the evening it is cut down and withereth.

For we are consumed by thine anger,

And by thy wrath are we troubled.

Thou hast set our iniquities before thee:

Our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.

Behold, all our days are passed away in thy wrath,

We spend our years as a tale that is told.

Their strength is labor and sorrow;

It is soon cut off, and we flee away.

So teach us to number our days

That we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

O satisfy us early with thy mercy,

That we may rejoice and be glad all our days,

Make us glad according to the days of our affliction,

To the years we have seen

Let thy wonders be shown unto thy servants

And thy glory unto their children;

And let the beauty of Jehovah, our God, be upon us,

And establish thou the work of our hands. "The strictly and decidedly
acknowledged productions of Moses are but few; and in the above examples
I have taken a specimen from by far the greater number. It is, indeed,
not a little astonishing that, being so few, they should offer a
resemblance in so many points.

"There may at times be some difficulty in determining between the
similarity of style and diction resulting from established habit, and
that produced by intentional imitation; yet, in the former case, it will
commonly, if I mistake not, be found looser, but more general; in the
latter, stricter, but more confined to particular words or idioms; the
whole of the features not having been equally caught, while those which
have been laid hold of are given more minutely than in the case of
habit. The manner runs carelessly through every part, and is perpetually
striking us unawares; the copy walks after it with measured but unequal
pace, and is restless in courting our attention. The specimens of
resemblance now produced are obviously of the former kind: both sides
have an equal claim to originality, and seem very powerfully to
establish a unity of authorship."

Thus far Mr. Good; who has, on his own side of the question, most
certainly exhausted the subject. The case he has made out is a strong
one: we shall next examine whether a stronger cannot be made out in
behalf of Solomon, as the second candidate for the authorship of this
most excellent book.

2\. That this book was the work of Solomon was the opinion of some early
Christian writers, among whom was Gregory Nazianzen; and of several
moderns, among whom were Spanheim and Hardouin. The latter has gone so
far as to place the death of Job in the thirty-fifth year of the reign
of David; and he supposes that Solomon wrote the work in question, about
the second or third year of his reign. On this last opinion no stress
whatever should be placed.

As the argument for Moses has been supported by supposed parallelisms
between his acknowledged works and the Book of Job, so has that which
attributes the latter to Solomon. That Solomon, from his vast learning
and wisdom, was capable of such a work, none can deny. His knowledge in
astronomy, natural history, politics, theology, languages, and the
general science of his age, must have given him at least equal
qualifications to those possessed by Moses. And if he was the author of
the Song of Solomon, which most men believe, he had certainly a poetic
mind, equal, if not superior, to all the writers who had existed
previously to his time. The Book of Proverbs and that of Ecclesiastes
are almost universally attributed to him: now, in the Book of Job, there
are a multitude of sentiments, sentences, terms, and modes of speech,
which are almost peculiar to Solomon, as will appear from the whole
books.

In both we find the most exalted eulogium of wisdom. See [Job
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#012.md); [Pro
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#011.md), etc. Job says, "The fear of the
Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is understanding;"
[Job 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028.md). Solomon says, "The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, but fools despise wisdom and
instruction;" [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007.md).

Job speaks of the state of the dead nearly in the same terms as Solomon:
compare [Job 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033.md); [Job
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#022.md); [Job
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#005.md), with [Pro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018.md).

Job says, [Job 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#006.md), "Hell is naked
before him, and destruction hath no covering." Solomon says, [Pro
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#011.md), "Hell and destruction are
before the Lord; how much more the hearts of the children of men?" Job
says, "Man drinketh iniquity like water;" [Job
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016.md). And Elihu charges him with
"drinking up scorning like water;" [Job
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#007.md). The same image occurs in
Solomon, [Pro 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#006.md) : "He that sendeth
a message by the hand of a fool drinketh damage."

In [Job 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034.md) it is said, "Fire shall
consume the tabernacle of bribery." The same turn of thought occurs [Pro
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#027.md) : "He that is greedy of gain
troubleth his own house; but he that hateth gifts shall live."

Both speak of weighing the spirits or winds. See [Job
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#025.md); [Pro
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#002.md) But to me the parallelism in
these cases is not evident, as both the reason of the saying, and some
of the terms in the original, are different. Job tells his friends, "If
they would hold their peace, it would be their wisdom;" [Job
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#005.md). Solomon has the same sentiment
in nearly the same words, [Pro 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#028.md) :
"Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise; and he that
shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding."

Solomon represents the rephaim or giants as in hell, or the great deep;
[Pro 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#018.md); [Pro
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#018.md); [Pro
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#027.md). The like sentiment is in [Job
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#005.md). See the Hebrew.

In [Job 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#016.md), [Job
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#017.md), it is said that "If the wicked
heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay; the just
shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver." The like
sentiment is found, [Pro 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#008.md) : "He
that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he shall gather
for him that will pity the poor." Solomon says, [Pro
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018.md) : "Pride goeth before
destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall:" and, "Before
destruction the heart of man is haughty; and before honor is humility;"
[Pro 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#012.md) : and, "A man's pride shall
bring him low; but honor shall uphold the humble in spirit." The same
sentiment is expressed in [Job 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#029.md) :
"When men are cast down, then thou shalt say, There is a lifting up; and
he shall save the humble person."

Both speak nearly in the same way concerning the creation of the earth
and the sea. "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?
- Who shut up the sea with doors, when it brake forth as if it had
issued from the womb?" [Job 38:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004.md).
This seems a reference to the flood. In [Pro
8:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md) Wisdom says: "The Lord
possessed me in the beginning of his way - when as yet he had not made
the earth - when he gave to the sea his decree that the waters should
not pass his commandment: when he appointed the foundations of the
earth." These are precisely the same kind of conceptions, and nearly the
same phraseology.

In [Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007.md) it is said, "The wicked
shall perish for ever, like his own Dung." And in [Pro
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007.md) it is said, "The name of the
wicked shall Rot."

It would not be difficult to enlarge this list of correspondences by a
collation of passages in Job and in Proverbs; but most of them will
occur to the attentive reader. There is, however, another class of
evidence that appears still more forcible, viz.: There are several term
used frequently in the Book of Job and in the books of Solomon which are
almost peculiar to those books, and which argue an identity of
authorship. The noun תשיה tushiyah, which may signify essence,
substance, reality, completeness, occurs in Job and Proverbs. See [Job
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012.md); [Job
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013.md); [Job
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006.md); [Job
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#016.md); [Job
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#003.md), and [Job
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022.md); [Pro
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007.md); [Pro
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#021.md); [Pro
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#014.md), and [Pro
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001.md). And it occurs only twice, as far
as I can recollect, in all the Bible besides; viz., [Isa
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029.md), and [Mic
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009.md). The word הוה havvah, used in the
sense of misfortune, ruinous downfall, calamity, occurs [Job
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#002.md), [Job
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#030.md); [Job
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#013.md), and in [Pro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003.md); [Pro
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#006.md); [Pro
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#004.md); [Pro
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#013.md). It occurs nowhere else, except
once in [Eze 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#026.md), once in [Mic
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#003.md), and a few times in the Psalms,
[Psa 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009.md); [Psa
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002.md), [Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007.md); [Psa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012.md); [Psa
91:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003.md); [Psa
94:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020.md); [Psa
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#012.md); [Psa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003.md).

The word תחבלות tachbuloth, wise counsels, occurs only in [Job
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#012.md), and in [Pro
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005.md); [Pro
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014.md); [Pro
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#005.md); [Pro
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#018.md); [Pro
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#006.md); and nowhere else in the Bible in
this form. And פתה potheh, the silly one, simpleton, fool, is used
precisely in the same sense in [Job
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002.md); [Pro
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#007.md), and in various other parts of
the same book. The word אבדון, abaddon, destruction, [Job
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#006.md); [Job
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#022.md); [Job
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#012.md), connected sometimes with שאול
sheol, hell, or the grave; and מות maveth, death, occurs as above, and
in [Pro 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#011.md); [Pro
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020.md).

Calmet, who refers to several of the above places, adds: It would be
easy to collect a great number of similar parallel passages; but it must
make a forcible impression in favor of this opinion when we observe in
Job and Proverbs the same principles, the same sentiments, the same
terms, and some that are found only in Job and Solomon. We may add
farther, the beauty of the style, the sublimity of the thoughts, the
dignity of the matter, the form and order in which the materials of this
writer are laid down, the vast erudition and astonishing fecundity of
genius, all of which perfectly characterize Solomon.

Besides the above, we find many forms of expression in this book which
prove that its author had a knowledge of the law of God, and many which
show that he was acquainted with the Psalms of David, and a few very
like what we find in the writings of the prophets. I shall insert a few
more: -

Job Psalm [Job 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#027.md) Because he
covereth his face with fatness [Psa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010.md)[Psa
73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007.md) They are inclosed in their own
fat.Their eyes stand out with fatness. [Job
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#014.md) If he set his heart upon man, he
shall gather unto himself his spirit and his breath. [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029.md) Thou hidest thy face, and they
are troubled: thou takest away their breath; they die, and return to
their dust. [Job 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009.md) Their houses are
not in safe from fear; neither is the rod of God upon them. [Psa
73:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#005.md) They are trouble as other men;
neither are they plagued like other men. [Job
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#010.md) Their bull gendereth, and
faileth not; their cow calveth, casteth not her calf. [Psa
144:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013.md), [Psa
144:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#014.md) Let our sheep bring forth
thousands; and our oxen be strong to labor. [Job
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#018) They (the wicked.md) are as stubble
before the wind; and as chaff that the storm carrieth away. [Psa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004.md) The ungodly are like the chaff
which the wind driveth away. [Job
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#019.md) The righteous see it, and are
glad; and the innocent laugh them to scorn. [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010.md) The righteous shall rejoice when
he seeth the vengeance he shall wash his feet in the blood of the
wicked. [Job 38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041.md) Who provideth for
the raven his food? when his young ones cry unto God. [Psa
147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009.md) He giveth to the beast his food;
and to the young ravens which cry. [Job
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#021.md) He poureth contempt upon
princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty. [Psa
107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040.md) He poureth contempt upon
princes, and causeth them to wander in the wilderness. Job Jeremiah [Job
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003.md) Let the day perish in which I was
born; and the night in which it was said, There is a man-child
conceived.. See also [Job 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#018.md) [Jer
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010.md)[Jer
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#014.md), [Jer
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#015.md) Wo is me, my mother, that thou
hast borne me, a man of strifeCursed be the day wherein I was also born
- let not the day wherein my mother bare me be blessed. [Job
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007.md) Wherefore do the wicked live,
become old, and mighty in power? [Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001.md), [Jer
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002.md) Wherefore doth the way of the
wicked prosper? they grow; yea, they bring forth fruit. Job Collate
these verses with [Job 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#012.md)[Job
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#013.md) But where shall wisdom be found,
and where is the place of understanding?Man knoweth not the price
thereof; neither is it found in the land of the living. Baruch 3:14, 15,
29,and see[Pro 1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020.md); [Pro
2:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002.md);[Pro
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013.md); [Pro
4:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005.md);Proverbs 8:10-35.

The remarkable sentiment that "God, as Sovereign of the world, does
treat the righteous and the wicked, independently of their respective
merits, with a similar lot in this life, and that like events often
happen to both," is maintained in the Book of Job and the Ecclesiastes
of Solomon. [Job 9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#022.md) : "He
destroyeth the perfect and the wicked. If the scourge slay suddenly, he
will laugh at the trial of the innocent. The earth is given into the
hand of the wicked; he covereth the faces of the judges thereof; if not,
where and who is he?" [Job 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015.md) : "If
I be wicked, wo unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I not lift up
my head." [Job 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#015.md) : "Whom, though I
were righteous, yet would I not answer; I would make supplication to my
Judge." [Job 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006.md) : "The tabernacles
of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are secure; into whose
hand God bringeth abundantly." [Job
21:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007.md) : "Wherefore do the wicked
live, become old, yea are mighty in power? Their seed is established in
their sight, and their offspring before their eyes. Their houses are
safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them."

Similar sentiments, with a great similarity of expression, are found in
the following passages from Solomon. [Ecc
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#008.md) : "For what hath the wise more
than the fool?" [Ecc 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014.md) : "There be
just men to whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked.
Again, there be wicked men to whom it happeneth according to the work of
the righteous." [Ecc 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#002.md) : "All things
come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that
sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not. As is the good, so is the
sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath." [Ecc
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#015.md) : "There is a just man that
perisheth in his righteousness; and there is a wicked man that
prolongeth his life in his wickedness."

I may conclude this with the words of a learned translator of the book
of Job, and apply in reference to Solomon what he applies to Moses: "The
specimens of resemblance now produced have an equal claim to
originality, and seem very powerfully to establish a unity of
authorship." I think the argument much stronger in favor of Solomon as
its author than of Moses: and while even here I hesitate, I must enter
my protest against the conclusions drawn by others; and especially those
who profess to show where David, Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
etc., have copied and borrowed from Job! Some of them, in all
probability, never saw the book; and those who did had an inspiration,
dignity, manner, and power of their own, that rendered it quite
unnecessary to borrow from him. Such plagiarism would appear, in common
cases, neither requisite nor graceful. I have a high opinion of the book
of Job, but God forbid that I should ever bring it on a level with the
compositions of the sweet singer of Israel, the inimitable threnodies of
Jeremiah, or the ultra-sublime effusions of the evangelical prophet. Let
each keep his place, and let God be acknowledged as the inspirer of all.

Thus, by exactly the same process, we come to different conclusions; for
the evidence is now as strong that Job lived posterior to the days of
Moses; that he was acquainted with the Law and the Prophets; that either
he took much from the Psalms and Proverbs, or that David and Solomon
borrowed much from him; or that Solomon, the son of David, wrote the
history; as it is that he lived in the days of Moses.

For my own part, I think the later date by far the most probable; and
although I think the arguments that go to prove Solomon to be the author
are weightier than those so skilfully brought forth by learned men in
behalf of Moses, yet I think if possible that it was the work of
neither, but rather of some learned Idumean, well acquainted with the
Jewish religion and writers; and I still hold the opinion which I formed
more than thirty years ago, when I read over this book in the
Septuagint, and afterwards in the Hebrew, that it is most probable the
work was originally composed in Arabic, and afterwards translated into
Hebrew by a person who either had not the same command of the Hebrew as
he had of the Arabic, or else purposely affected the Arabic idiom,
retaining many Arabic words and Arabisms; either because he could not
find appropriate expressions in the Hebrew, or because he wished to
adorn and enrich the one language by borrowing copiously from the other.
The Hebrew of the book of Job differs as much from the pure Hebrew of
Moses and the early prophets, as the Persian of Ferdoosy differs from
that of Saady. Both these were Persian poets; the former wrote in the
simplicity and purity of his elegant native language, adopting very few
Arabic words; while the latter labors to introduce them at every turn,
and has thus produced a language neither Persian nor Arabic. And so
prevalent is this custom become with all Persian writers, both in prose
and verse, that the pure Persian becomes daily more and more corrupted,
insomuch that there is reason to fear that in process of time it will be
swallowed up in the language of the conquerors of that country, in which
it was formerly esteemed the most polished language of Asia. Such
influence has the language of a conqueror on the country he has subdued;
witness our own, where a paltry French phraseology, the remnant of one
of the evils brought upon us by our Norman conqueror and tyrant, has
greatly weakened the strong current of our mother tongue; so that,
however amalgamated, filed, and polished by eminent authors, we only
speak a very tolerable jargon, enriched, as we foolishly term it, by the
spoils of other tongues. The best specimen of our ancient language
exists in the Lord's prayer, which is pure English, or what is called
Anglo-Saxon, with the exception of three frenchified words, trespasses,
temptation, and deliver.

But to return to the book of Job. The collections of Mr. Good, Dr.
Magee, and others, if they do not prove that Moses was the author of the
book, prove that the author was well acquainted with the Mosaic
writings; and prove that he was also acquainted with the ninetieth
Psalm; and this last circumstance will go far to prove that he lived
after the days of David, for we have no evidence whatever that the
ninetieth Psalm was published previously to the collection and
publication of the Psalms now generally termed the Psalms of David,
though many of them were written by other hands, and not a few even
after the Babylonish captivity. And, as to the inscription to this
Psalm, תפלה משה איש האלהים tephillah Mosheh ish haelohim, "A prayer of
Moses, the man of God;"

1\. We know not that Moses the Jewish lawgiver is meant: it might be
another person of the same name.

2\. And even in that case it does not positively state that this Moses
was the author of it.

3\. The inscriptions to the Psalms are of dubious, and many of them of
no authority: some of them evidently misplaced; and others either
bearing no relation to the matter of the Psalms to which they are
prefixed, or evidently contradictory to that matter.

Hence our translators have considered these inscriptions as of no
authority; and have not admitted them, in any case, into the body of
their respective Psalms. The parallelism, therefore, drawn from this
Psalm, will not help much to prove that Moses was the author of the book
of Job; but it will go far to prove, as will be seen in other cases,
that the author of this book was acquainted with the book of Psalms, as
several of the preceding collections testify; and that there is a
probability that he had read the prophets that lived and wrote in the
time, and after the time, of the Babylonish captivity, which appears to
me the only thing that shakes the argument in favor of Solomon; unless
we take the converse of the question, and say that Moses, David,
Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Micah, all knew and borrowed from the
book of Job. But this supposition will, in its turn, be shaken by the
consideration that there are several things in the book of Job which
evidently refer to the law as already given, and to some of the
principal occurrences in the Israelitish history, if such references can
be made out. These considerations have led me to think it probable that
the book was written after the captivity by some unknown but highly
eminent and inspired man. We may wonder, indeed, that the author of such
an eminent work has not been handed down to posterity; and that the
question should be left at the discretion of the whole limbus of
conjecture; but we find, not only several books in the Bible, but also
other works of minor importance and a later date, similarly
circumstanced. We have no certain evidence of the author of the books of
Judges, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah, or Esther; we
can, in reference to them, make probable conjectures, but this is all.
Even in the New Testament the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews is
still unknown; though a pretty general tradition, and strong internal
evidence, give it to St. Paul; yet this point is not so proved as to
exclude all doubt.

The finest poems of heathen antiquity, the Iliad and Odyssey, cannot be
certainly traced to their author. Of the person called Homer, to whom
they have been attributed, no one knows any thing. He is still, for
aught we know, a fabulous person; and the relations concerning him are
entitled to little more credit than is due to the Life of Aesop by
Planudes. Seven different cities have claimed the honor of being his
birth-place. They are expressed in the following distich: -

Ἑπτα πολεις διεριζουσι περι ριζας Ὁμηρου,

Σμυρνα, Ῥοδος, Κολαφον, Σαλαμις, Χιος, Αργος, Αθηναι.

Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae, Orbis de
Patria certat, Homere, tua.

Nor have these claims ever been adjusted. Some have gone so far as to
attribute the work to Solomon, king of Israel, composed after his
defection from the true religion to idolatry! that the word Homer,
Ὁμηρος Homeros, is merely Hebrew, אמרים omerim, with a Greek
termination, signifying the sayings or discourses, from אמר amar, he
spoke; the whole work being little more than the dialogues or
conversations of the eminent characters of which it is composed. Even
the battles of Homer are full of parleys; and the principal information
conveyed by the poem is through the conversation of the respective
chiefs.

The Makamaton, or assemblies, of the celebrated Arabic author Hariri,
show us how conversations were anciently carried on among the Arabs, and
even in the same country in which the plan of the poem of Job is laid;
and were we closely to compare the sex concessus of that author,
published by Schultens, we might find many analogies between them and
the turn of conversation in the book of Job. But the uncertainty
relative to the author detracts nothing from the merit and excellency of
the poem. As it is the most singular, so it is the best, as a whole, in
the Hebrew canon. It exhibits a full view of the opinions of the eastern
sages on the most important points; not only their religion and system
of morals are frequently introduced, but also their philosophy,
astronomy, natural history, mineralogy, and arts and sciences in
general; as well those that were ornamental, as those which ministered
to the comforts and necessities of life. And on a careful examination,
we shall probably find that several arts, which are supposed to be the
discoveries of the moderns, were not unknown to those who lived in a
very remote antiquity, and whom it is fashionable to consider as
unlettered and uncultivated barbarians.

As the person, family, time, and descendants of Job are so very
uncertain, I shall not trouble my readers with the many genealogical
tables which have been constructed by chronologists and commentators;
yet it might be considered a defect were I not to notice what is
inserted at the end of the Greek and Arabic Versions relative to this
point; to which I shall add Dr. Kennicott's Tables, and the substance of
a letter which contains some curious particulars.

"And he (Job) dwelt in the land of Ausitis, in the confines of Idumea
and Arabia; and his former name was Jobab. And he took to wife Arabissa,
and begat a son whose name was Ennon. And his (Jobab's) father's name
was Zarith, one of the sons of the children of Esau; and his mother's
name was Bosora; and thus he was the fifth from Abraham."

"And these are the kings who reigned in Edom; which region he also
governed; the first was Balak, the son of Beor, the name of whose city
was Dennaba. And after Balak reigned Jobab, who is also called Job. And
after him Assom, the governor of the country of the Temanites. After him
Adad, the son of Basad, who cut off Madian in the plain of Moab; and the
name of his city was Gethaim."

"The friends who came to visit him were Eliphaz, son of Sophan, of the
children of Esau, king of the Temanites. Baldad, the son of Amnon, of
Chobar, tyrant of the Sauchites. Sophar, king of the Minaites. Thaiman,
son of Eliphaz, governor of the Idumeans."

"This is translated from the Syriac copy. He dwelt in the land of
Ausitis, on the borders of the Euphrates; and his former name was Jobab;
and his father was Zareth, who came from the east." This is verbatim
from the Codex Alexandrinus.

The Arabic is not so circumstantial, but is the same in substance. "And
Job dwelt in the land of Auz, between the boundaries of Edom and Arabia;
and he was at first called Jobab. And he married a strange woman, and to
her was born a son called Anun. But Job was the son of Zara, a
descendant of the children of Esau; his mother's name was Basra, and he
was the sixth from Abraham. Of the kings who reigned in Edom, the first
who reigned over that land was Balak, the son of Beor, and the name of
his city was Danaba. And after him Jobab, the same who is called Job.
And after Job, he (Assom) who was prince of the land of Teman. And after
him (Adad) the son of Barak, he who slew and put to flight Madian, in
the plains of Moab; and the name of his city was Jatham. And of the
friends of Job who visited him was Eliphaz, the son of Esau, king of the
Temanites."

Dr. Kennicott says, When Job lived seems deducible from his being
contemporary with Eliphaz, the Temanite, thus: -

Abraham 1 Isaac 1 2 Esau. Jacob. 2 3 Eliphaz. Levi 3 4 Teman. Kohath. 4
5 Eliphaz the Temanite. Amram - Job. 5 Moses. The late Miss Mary Freeman
Shepherd, well known for her strong masculine genius, and knowledge of
various languages, sent me the following genealogy and remarks, which
she thought would clearly ascertain the time of Job. I faithfully
transcribe them from her letter to me, a short time before her death.

"Shem, two years after the flood, begat Arphaxad and Uz, and also Aram 2
Arphaxad begat Salah at 35 Salah begat Eber at 30 Eber begat Peleg at 34
Peleg, in whose time the earth was divided, begat Reu at 30 Reu begat
Serug at 32 Serug begat Nahor at 30 Nahor begat Terah at 29 Terah begat
Abraham at 70 Abraham begat Ishmael at eighty-six, Israel at 100 Isaac
married at forty, soon after, probably at forty-three, Esau and Jacob
born 43 Jacob married at forty, had Reuben his first-born, and Levi born
of Leah, by the time he was forty-four 44 Levi begat Kohath, suppose at
40 Kohath begat Amram, suppose at 40 Amram begat Moses, suppose at 40
After the deluge 599 "Shem was the father of Aram, who gave his name to
the Aramites, i.e., the Syrians; and he was the father of Uz, who gave
his name to the land of Uz, in which Job dwelt, not was born, for the
text says, There was a man in the land of Uz, called Job.

"In [Gen 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#013.md), one of the sons of
Issachar is named Job. In the genealogies of [Num
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#024.md), and in [Ch1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#001.md), he is called Jashub. It is
remarkable that there is no mention in Chronicles of the sons of Jashub,
or of any of the sons of Issachar, among the thousands of Israel, sons
of Tola, where, might not Job be called Jashub? Mitzraim, i.e., Egypt,
was a son of Ham; Uz and Aram, sons of Shem; Ishmael by Hagar, and
Midian by Keturah, both sons to Abram. How well does this account for
the nearness of the languages of these people, being scions from the
same mother tongue!

"Ishmael, the father of the tribes of Arabia; Arabic was, therefore, not
their mother tongue. The roots of these languages germinated from the
Hebrew roots, and so a new language sprang up, afterwards formed
according to grammatic rules, and enriched as arts and sciences, and
cultivated genius, added new inventions. Things new and unknown before
gave rise to new words or names. Nouns, and the action, operation, and
effects of arts and sciences, produced verbs or roots. Thus the Arabic
become so copious and rich, and has roots not in the pure original
Hebrew. All this considered, might not Moses have written the book of
Job, as parts of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel were written, after the
captivity, in a mixed language, in order that it might be the better
understood by those for whom it was written; those of the people who,
being left in Jerusalem, had retained their native Hebrew; and those who
had, by long residence in Babylon, corrupted and mingled it with the
Chaldaic, which is a dialect of the Hebrew, like the modern language of
Italy when compared with that of ancient Rome, or our modern Latin when
compared with that of the Augustan age.

"By the influence of climate upon the organs of speech, the different
avocations, usages, diet, turn of mind, and genius of men, the dialects
which all streamed from one language, and pronounced in one and the same
speech, confounded, (not annihilated, troubled, but not dried up), no
new language then created, yet so confounded in utterance that they
understood not one another's speech. The operation was upon the ear of
the heart, as in the day of pentecost: one man spoke, and all, though of
different tongues, understood; the ear suggested the various sounds to
the tongue, and from thence the varied pronunciations of one and the
same language often makes it misunderstood.

"Shem, who lived five hundred and two years after the deluge, being
still alive, and in the three hundred and ninety-third year of his life,
when Abram was born, therefore the Jewish tradition that Shem was the
Melchisedek, (my righteous king of Salem), an epithet, or title of honor
and respect, not a proper name, and, as the head and father of his race,
Abraham paid tithes to him; this seems to me well founded, and the idea
confirmed by these remarkable words, [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md), Jehovah hath sworn, and will
not repent, אתה כהן לעולם על דברתי מלכי-צדק atah cohen leolam al
dibrathi malki-tsedek. As if he had said, Thou, my only-begotten Son,
first-born of many brethren; not according to the substituted priesthood
of the sons of Levi, who, after the sin of the golden calf, stood up in
lieu of all the first-born of Israel, invested with their forfeited
rights of primogeniture of king and priest; the Lord hath sworn, and
will not repent, (change), Thou art a priest for ever after the (my
order of Melchisedek, my own original primitive) order of primogeniture;
even as Shem the man of name, the Shem that stands the first and
foremost of the sons of Noah. The righteous prince and priest of the
most high God meets his descendant Abraham after the slaughter of the
kings, with refreshments; blessed him as the head and father of his
race, and as such, he receives from Abraham the tithe of all the spoil.

"How beautifully does Paul of Tarsus, writing to the Hebrews, point
through Melchisedek, - Shem, the head and father of their race, invested
in all the original rights of primogeniture, priest of the most high
God, blessing Abraham as such, as Levi even had existence, and as such
receiving tithe from Abraham, and in him from Levi yet in the loins of
his forefathers, when Moses on this great and solemn occasion records
simply this: Melchisedek, king of Salem, priest of the most high God,
sine genealogia; his pedigree not mentioned, but standing, as Adam in
St. Luke's genealogy, without father and without mother, Adam of God,
[Luk 3:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#038.md); - how beautifully, I say,
doth St. Paul point through Melchisedek to Jehoshua our great High
Priest and King, whose eternal generation who shall declare!
Hammashiach, the Lord's Anointed, Priest, and King, after the order of
Melchisedek, only begotten first-born Son! The Levitical priesthood that
arose from the sin of the golden calf and the forfeited rights of the
first-born, in whose stead stood the sons of Levi, (the reward of their
zeal for God, on that sad occasion). This right of primogeniture, as the
streams of Jordan at the presence of God, conversus est retrorsum, to
its fountain head; and Judah was his sanctuary, [Psa
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md). Reuben forfeited by incest his
excellence; Simeon and Levi, the right in priority of birth, theirs; and
Judah, he to whom his brethren should bow down as their head. From the
time of Abraham, who married a sister of Haran, prince of the tribe of
Judah, to the time of Jesus, the tribes of Levi and Judah intermarried:
thus was incorporated the source and streams in one. And the very names
of all the sons of the tribes of Israel lost in one, that of Jehudah,
from which they call themselves Jehudim.

"The shebit, tribe, not scepter, the rod or ensign of the chief of a
tribe. 'The tribe, genealogy, shall not recede from Jehudah until Shiloh
come;' for whose genealogy they subsist. Ten, by the schism of Jeroboam,
may be carried away beyond the river, and heard of no more; but Jehudah,
Levi, and Benjamin, shall be tribes; and their registers shall be clear
and unbroken until the temple and city and all the registers of
genealogy are destroyed. The people are one; one people worshipping one
God. 'I have prayed,' said Jehoshua Mashiach, 'that ye might be one in
me, as I and my Father are one.'

"Ham, the son of Noah, begat Cush, and Cush begat Nimrod, and Saba, and
others. Nimrod began a monarchy, and founded Babel. Out of that land
went forth Asshur, and builded Nineveh. Nimrod was therefore
contemporary with Peleg. Compare [Gen
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#008.md), [Gen
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009.md), with Genesis 9:10-25.

"Thus, in about two hundred and ten or twenty years after the deluge, by
the confusion of tongues, was the earth divided; as its inhabitants,
dispersing no doubt in families together formed themselves into nations,
people, and tribes and kindreds, and from thence into tongues.

"From the knowledge I have of the Hebrew, I have caught a glance of the
genius, spirit, and tone of the general march of the oriental tongues,
and even of the expression of their character. To me the book of Job
seems to have much of the Chaldee, both in words and idiom, and much of
the sublimity and spirit of the writings of Moses. His grand
descriptions of the Most High, his wondrous works, his power, wisdom,
justice, and truth, all speak the historian of Genesis, the legislator
of Israel, the unconsumed fire of the burning bush, the loud thunders of
Sinai, and the shinings of the light of God. That pointed exactness and
conciseness of narration that distinguish Moses, are also conspicuous in
the book of Job. If Moses did indeed write this book, he wrote it for
the nations, as well as for Israel; and took, as the best vehicle of a
general conveyance, a language most generally understood. At this day,
for the facilitating of intercourse in the Levant, Mediterranean,
Archipelago, etc., there is a language called Lingua Franca, the
language of the Franks. To Israel Moses conveyed the pure language of
their fathers; but rather than the nations should be famished for bread,
or die for thirst, he put manna in their coarse earthen vessels, and
wine in their wooden cups.

"You see, my dear sir, how strong is female obstinacy; I struggle and
contend for the body of Moses. I admire Moses; I admire Job. God, by the
prophet Ezekiel and the apostle St. James, ascertains the history of Job
to be a fact, not a fiction. And thus inspiration sustains its
inspiration.

"Will you, dear sir, think it worth while to collect and put together
these scattered scraps, as little pegs to better shelves, which you must
furbish, smooth, and point; - too hard a work for Mary the aged? Blessed
are the pure of heart, for they shall see God: and in him see all
truth." - M. F. S.

Miss Shepherd is a strong auxiliary to Mr. Good; still I remain
unconvinced. My readers must choose for themselves.

The history of Job, but strangely disguised, is well known among the
Asiatics. He is called by the Arabic and Persian historians Ayoub, which
is exactly the same as the Hebrew איוב Ayoub, which Europeans have
strangely metamorphosed into Job. In the Tareekh Muntekheb his genealogy
is given thus: Ayoub the son of Anosh, the son of Razakh, the son of
Ais, (Esau), the son of Isaac. He was a prophet, and was afflicted by a
grievous malady three years, or according to others, seven years; at the
end of which, when eighty years of age, he was restored to perfect
health, and had a son named Bash ben Ayoub. Other writers say he had
five sons, with whom he made war on a brutal people called Dsul Kefel,
whom he exterminated because they refused to receive the knowledge of
the true God, whom he preached to them. Khondemir, who entitles him Job
the patient, gives us his history in the following manner: -

"Job, by his father's side, was descended from Esau, and by his mother
from Lot. Abou Giaffer al Tabary relates that God sent him to preach to
the inhabitants of Thaniah, a people who dwelt between Remla and
Damascus; but three persons only received the truth. Nevertheless, as he
was very zealous in the service of God, he rewarded his faith and
obedience by heaping riches upon him, and giving him a numerous family.
This excited the envy of the devil, who, presenting himself before God,
accused Job as one who was selfish in his devotion; and, were it not for
the temporal blessings which he received from his Maker, he would not
worship even once in the day. God having given Satan permission to spoil
Job of his goods, and deprive him of his children, he gave the same
proofs of his piety, worshipping God as before, and patiently bearing
his great losses. Satan, enraged to be thus baffled, presented himself
once more before God, and asserted that Job continued thus faithful
because he knew that God would reward his constancy with an equal or
even greater portion of earthly blessings: but if he would afflict his
body by some grievous disease, he would soon abandon his service, and be
at the end of his patience. In order fully to show the piety of this
exemplary man, God permitted Satan to afflict his body as he pleased,
with the exception of his eyes, his ears, and his tongue. The devil,
having received this permission, blew up the nostrils of Job such a
pestilential heat as immediately turned his whole mass of blood into
corruption, so that his whole body became one ulcer, the smell of which
was so offensive that his greatest intimates could not approach him; and
he was obliged to be carried out of the city, and laid in a distant
place entirely by himself. Notwithstanding, Job continued both his
patience and piety. His wife, Rosina, never forsook him, but continued
daily to bring him the necessaries of life. Satan observing this, stole
from her the provision she had made for her husband; and when reduced to
the lowest ebb, he appeared to her under the form of an old bald woman,
and told her, that if she would give her the two tresses of hair that
hung down on her neck, she would provide her daily with what was
necessary for her husband's support. This offer appearing so very
advantageous in behalf of her afflicted husband, she accepted the offer,
and gave the two tresses to the old woman.

"Satan, overjoyed at the success of his plots, went to Job, told him
that his wife had been caught in the act of adultery, and that her
tresses had been cut off, and here was the proof of the fact. Job,
seeing this, and finding his wife without her tresses, not supposing
that he was deceived by the devil, lost his patience, and bound himself
by an oath, that if he should ever recover his health he would inflict
on her the most exemplary punishment. Satan, supposing he had now gained
his end, transformed himself into an angel of light, and went throughout
the country as a messenger of God, informing the people that Job, who
was counted a prophet, had fallen from his piety and brought the wrath
of God upon him; that they should no more listen to his preaching, but
banish him from among them, lest the curse of God should fall on the
whole country.

"Job, coming to understand how the matter stood, had recourse to God by
faith and prayer, and said these remarkable words, which are found in
the Koran: 'Distress closes me in on every side: but thou, O Lord, art
more merciful than all those who can feel compassion.' On this all his
pains and sufferings immediately ceased; for Gabriel, the faithful
servant of the Most High, descended from heaven, took Job by the hand,
and lifting him up from the place where he lay, stamped on the ground
with his foot, and immediately a spring of water rose up from the earth,
out of which Job having drunk, and washed his body, he was instantly
cleansed of all his ulcers, and restored to perfect health.

"God, having thus restored him, greatly multiplied his goods, so that
the rain and the snow which fell around his dwelling were precious; and
his riches became so abundant, as if showers of gold had descended upon
him."

This is the sum of the account given by the oriental historians, who,
forsaking the truth of the sacred history, have blended the story with
their own fables. The great facts are however the same in the main; and
we find that with them the personality, temptation, and deliverance of
Job, are matters of serious credibility. Abul Faragius says that the
trial of Job happened in the twenty-fifth year of Nahor, son of Serug;
thus making him prior to Abraham. He calls him Ayoub assadeek, Job the
righteous. See Abul Faragius, Ebn Batric, D'Herbelot, etc.

Commentators have considered this book as being divided into distinct
parts. Mr. Good, who considers it a regular Hebrew epic, divides it into
six parts or books, which he considers to be its natural division, and
unquestionably intended by the author. These six parts are, an opening
or exordium, containing the introductory history or decree concerning
Job; three distinct series of arguments, in each of which the speakers
are regularly allowed their respective turns; the summing up of the
controversy; and the close of the catastrophe, consisting of the
suffering hero's grand and glorious acquittal, and restoration to
prosperity and happiness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 1](job001.md)

</div>
