<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job031)  [Next](job033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 32:0</span></span>

Elihu comes forward, and empresses his disapprobation both of Job and
his three friends - with the one for justifying himself; and with the
others for taking up the subject in a wrong point of view, and not
answering satisfactorily - and makes a becoming apology for himself, vv.
1-22.

[Job 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 32:1</span></span>

These three men ceased to answer Job - They supposed that it was of no
use to attempt to reason any longer with a man who justified himself
before God. The truth is, they failed to convince Job of any point,
because they argued from false principles; and, as we have seen, Job had
the continual advantage of them. There were points on which he might
have been successfully assailed; but they did not know them. Elihu,
better acquainted both with human nature and the nature of the Divine
law, and of God's moral government of the world, steps in, and makes the
proper discriminations; acquits Job on the ground of their accusations,
but condemns him for his too great self-confidence, and his trusting too
much in his external righteousness; and, without duly considering his
frailty and imperfections, his incautiously arraigning the providence of
God of unkindness in its dealings with him. This was the point on which
Job was particularly vulnerable, and which Elihu very properly clears
up.

Because he was righteous tn his own eyes - The Septuagint, Syriac,
Arabic, and Chaldee, all read, "Because he was righteous in Their eyes;"
intimating, that they were now convinced that he was a holy man, and
that they had charged him foolishly. The reading of these ancient
versions is supported by a MS. of the thirteenth century, in Dr.
Kennicott's collections; which, instead of בעיניו beeinaiv, in His eyes,
has בעיניהם beeineyhem, in Their eyes. This is a reading of considerable
importance, but it is not noticed by De Rossi. Symmachus translates
nearly in the same way: Δια τον αυτον δικαιον φαινεσθαι επ' αυτων;
Because he appeared more righteous than themselves.

[Job 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 32:2</span></span>

Then was kindled the wrath - This means no more than that Elihu was
greatly excited, and felt a strong and zealous desire to vindicate the
justice and providence of God, against the aspersions of Job and his
friends.

Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite - Buz was the second son of Nahor,
the brother of Abram, [Gen 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021.md).

Of the kindred of Ram - Kemuel was the third son of Nahor; and is called
in Genesis (see above) the father of Aram, which is the same as Ram. A
city of the name of Buz is found in [Jer
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#023.md), which probably had its name
from this family; and, as it is mentioned with Dedan and Tema, we know
it must have been a city in Idumea, as the others were in that district.
Instead of the kindred of Ram, the Chaldee has of the kindred of
Abraham. But still the question has been asked, Who was Elihu? I answer,
He was "the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the kindred of Ram:" this is
all we know of him. But this Scriptural answer will not satisfy those
who are determined to find out mysteries where there are none. Some make
him a descendant of Judah; St. Jerome, Bede, Lyranus, and some of the
rabbins, make him Balaam the son of Beor, the magician; Bishop Warburton
makes him Ezra the scribe; and Dr. Hodges makes him the second person in
the glorious Trinity, the Lord Jesus Christ, and supposes that the chief
scope of this part of the book was to convict Job of self-righteousness,
and to show the necessity of the doctrine of justification by faith!
When these points are proved, they should be credited.

Because he justified himself rather than God - Literally, he justified
his soul, נפשו naphhso, before God. He defended, not only the whole of
his conduct, but also his motives, thoughts, etc.

[Job 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 32:3</span></span>

They had found no answer - They had condemned Job; and yet could not
answer his arguments on the general subject, and in vindication of
himself.

[Job 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 32:6</span></span>

I am young - How young he was, or how old they were, we cannot tell; but
there was no doubt a great disparity in their ages; and among the
Asiatics the youth never spoke in the presence of the elders, especially
on any subject of controversy.

[Job 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 32:7</span></span>

Days should speak - That is, men are to be reputed wise and experienced
in proportion to the time they have lived. The Easterns were remarkable
for treasuring up wise sayings: indeed, the principal part of their
boasted wisdom consisted in proverbs and maxims on different subjects.

[Job 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 32:8</span></span>

But there is a spirit in man - Mr. Good translates: -

"But surely there is an afflation in mankind,

And the inspiration of the Almighty actuateth them."

Coverdale, thus: -

Every man (no doute) hath a mynde; but it is the inspyracion of the
Almightie that geveth understondinge.

I will now offer my own opinion, but first give the original text: רוח
היא באנוש ונשמת שדי תבינם ruach hi beenosh venishmath shaddai tebinem.
"The spirit itself is in miserable man, and the breath of the Almighty
causeth them to understand," How true is it that in God we live, move,
and have our being! The spirit itself is in man as the spring or
fountain of his animal existence, and by the afflatus of this spirit he
becomes capable of understanding and reason, and consequently of
discerning Divine truth. The animal and intellectual lives are here
stated to be from God; and this appears to be an allusion to man's
creation, [Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007.md) : "And God breathed
into man's nostrils the breath of lives," נשמת חיים nishmath chaiyim,
i.e., animal and intellectual, and thus he became a living soul, נפש חיה
nephesh chaiyah, a rational animal. When man fell from God, the Spirit
of God was grieved, and departed from him; but was restored, as the
enlightener and corrector, in virtue of the purposed incarnation and
atonement of our Lord Jesus; hence, he is "the true Light that lighteth
every man that cometh into the world," [Joh
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009.md). That afflatus is therefore still
continued to אנוש enosh, man, in his wretched, fallen state; and it is
by that Spirit, the רוח אלהים Ruach Elohim, "the Spirit of the merciful
or covenant God," that we have any conscience, knowledge of good and
evil, judgment in Divine things, and, in a word, capability of being
saved. And when, through the light of that Spirit, convincing of sin,
righteousness, and judgment, the sinner turns to God through Christ, and
finds redemption in his blood, the remission of sins; then it is the
office of that same Spirit to give him understanding of the great work
that has been done in and for him; "for the Spirit itself (αυτο το
Πνευμα, [Rom 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016.md), the same words in
Greek as the Hebrew רוח היא ruach hi of Elihu) beareth witness with his
spirit that he is a child of God." It is the same Spirit which
sanctifies, the same Spirit that seals, and the same Spirit that lives
and works in the believer, guiding him by his counsel till it leads him
into glory. In this one saying, independently of the above paraphrase,
Elihu spoke more sense and sound doctrine than all Job's friends did in
the whole of the controversy.

[Job 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 32:9</span></span>

Great men are not always wise - This is a true saying, which the
experience of every age and every country increasingly verifies. And it
is most certain that, in the case before us, the aged did not understand
judgment; they had a great many wise and good sayings, which they had
collected, but showed neither wisdom nor discretion in applying them.

[Job 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 32:11</span></span>

I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons - Instead of
תבונותיכם tebunotheychem, your reasons, תכונותיכם techunotheychem, your
arguments, is the reading of nine of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. The
sense, however, is nearly the same.

Whilst ye searched out what to say - עד תחקרון מלין ad tachkerun millin;
"Whilst ye were searching up and down for words." A fine irony, which
they must have felt.

[Job 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 32:12</span></span>

Yea, I attended unto you - Instead of ועדיכם veadeychem, and unto you,
one MS. reads the above letters with points that cause it to signify and
your testimonies; which is the reading of the Syriac, Arabic, and
Septuagint.

Behold, there was none of you that convinced Job - Confuted Job. They
spoke multitudes of words, but were unable to overthrow his arguments.

[Job 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 32:13</span></span>

We have found out wisdom - We by dint of our own wisdom and
understanding, have found out the true system of God's providence; and
have been able to account for all the sufferings and tribulations of
Job. Had they been able to confute Job, they would have triumphed over
him in their own self-sufficiency.

God thrusteth him down, not man - This is no accidental thing that has
happened to him: he is suffering under the just judgments of God, and
therefore he must be the wicked man which we supposed him to be.

[Job 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 32:14</span></span>

He hath not directed - I am no party in this controversy; I have no
party feeling in it: he has not spoken a word against me, therefore I
have no cause of irritation. I shall speak for truth; not for conquest
or revenge. Neither will I answer him with your speeches; your passions
have been inflamed by contradiction, and you have spoken foolishly with
your lips.

[Job 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 32:15</span></span>

They were amazed - Mr. Good translates: "They (the speeches) are
dissipated; they no longer produce effect; the words have flirted away
from them." Your words, being without proper reference and point, are
scattered into thin air: there is nothing but sound in them; they are
quite destitute of sense. But I prefer the words as spoken of Job's
friends. They took their several parts in the controversy as long as
they could hope to maintain their ground: for a considerable time they
had been able to bring nothing new; at last, weary of their own
repetitions, they gave up the contest.

[Job 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 32:16</span></span>

When I had waited - I waited to hear if they had any thing to reply to
Job; and when I found them in effect speechless, then I ventured to come
forward.

[Job 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 32:17</span></span>

I will answer also my part - אענה חלקי aaneh chelki, "I will recite my
portion." We have already seen that the book of Job is a sort of drama,
in which several persons have their different parts to recite. Probably
the book was used in this way, in ancient times, for the sake of public
instruction. Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad, had recited their parts, and
Job had responded to each: nothing was brought to issue. Elihu, a
bystander, perceiving this, comes forward and takes a part, when all the
rest had expended their materials: yet Elihu, though he spoke well, was
incapable of closing the controversy; and God himself appears, and
decides the case.

[Job 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 32:18</span></span>

I am full of matter - מלים millim, "I am full of Words," or sayings;
i.e., wise sentences, and ancient opinions.

The spirit within me constraineth me - How similar to the words of St.
Paul! The love of Christ constraineth us. Elihu considered himself under
the influence of that Spirit of God which gives understanding, and felt
anxiously concerned for the welfare both of Job and his friends.

[Job 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 32:19</span></span>

My belly is as wine which hath no vent - New wine in a state of
effervescence.

Like new bottles - Bottles, or rather bags, made of goat-skins. The head
and shanks being cut off, the animal is cased out of the skin. The skin
is then properly dressed; the anus and four shank holes properly tied
up; and an aperture left at the neck or in some other place for the
liquor to be poured in, and drawn out. One of these now lies before me,
well tanned, and beautifully ornamented, and capable of holding many
gallons. They are used, not only to carry wine and water, but for
butter, and also for various dry goods. I have mentioned this in another
place. When the wine is in a state of fermentation, and the skin has no
vent, these bottles or bags are ready to burst; and if they be old, the
new wine destroys them, breaks the old stitching, or rends the old skin.
Our Lord makes use of the same figure, [Mat
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#017) (note.md); where see the note.

[Job 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 32:20</span></span>

I will open my lips and answer - In the preceding verse Elihu compares
himself to a skin-bottle, in which the wine was in a state of
fermentation, and the bottle ready to burst for want of vent. He carries
on the metaphor in this verse: the bottle must be opened to save it from
bursting; I will Open my mouth.

[Job 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 32:21</span></span>

Let me not - accept any man's person - I will speak the truth without
fear or favor.

Neither let me give flattering titles - I will not give epithets to any
man that are not descriptive of his true state. I will not beguile him
by telling him he is what he is not. אכנה acanneh, from כנה canah, is
generally supposed to signify to surname, to put a name to or upon a
name, as the French word surnom implies. It means to give proud titles
to persons who are worthless. It is well known that the Arabs make court
to their superiors by carefully avoiding to address them by their proper
names, instead of which they salute them with some title or epithet
expressive of respect - Scott See below. Titles expressive of office,
ecclesiastical, civil, or military, are always proper, and never
forbidden, because they serve for distinction; but the Asiatic titles
are in general bombastically and sinfully complimentary. The reader will
find several specimens at the end of this chapter.

[Job 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 32:22</span></span>

My Maker would soon take me away - Were I to copy this conduct while
under the influence which I now feel, God might justly consume me as in
a moment. He is my Maker; he made me to know truth, to tell truth, and
to live according to truth; for he is the God of truth: I shall,
therefore through his help, speak the Truth, the Whole Truth, and
Nothing but the Truth.

We find from the above that vain titles of ceremony, expressive of the
most eminent qualities, were given to worthless men, from time
immemorial; and no wonder, for hypocrisy entered into man at the same
time that sin entered into the world.

Of the flattering titles used in the East, I shall give a few specimens
from the (Arabic) Kooayid us Sultanet Shah Jehan, or, "The Rules
observed during the Reign of the Mogul Emperor Shah Jehan."

Speaking of the emperor, he is entitled,

"The Sun which illuminates the firmament in the universe of royalty and
dominion; the Moon, which irradiates the sky of monarchy and felicity;
the King who in pomp resembles Gem-sheed. His hand is boundless as the
ocean in bestowing bounties, being the key of the gates of kindness and
liberality!" Again: -

"The Sun of the heaven of prosperity and empire, the Shadow of God, the
Asylum of the Universe, the splendor of whose instructive front causes
light and gladness to the world and to mankind."

"The just and vigilant Monarch; the Asylum of Truth, the Refuge of the
World; the Diffuser of Light, the Solver of all human difficulties."

"The Lord of the Age, who is endowed with such perfect excellence, both
in internal and external qualifications, that on all occasions he holds
fast the thread of good counsel, prudence, and purity of morals."

"The faculty of apprehension is possessed by him in such a degree, that
before the matter ha s scarcely obtained utterance he comprehends the
purport, and gives answers with the tongue of inspiration."

Addresses to Persons of Distinction

"Let them convey to the presence of glorious empire, the Sultan, in pomp
like Solomon, the center of the universe, powerful as heaven!"

"Let them who kiss the carpet of the palace, in pomp like heaven, convey
this letter to his majesty, whose sight is as creative as alchymy, king
of kings, the asylum of the world!"

"To the exalted presence, which gratifies the desires of all people, the
most beneficent of the age, the vizier, protector of the universe, may
the Almighty perpetuate his fortune!"

"May this letter be dignified in the presence of Naweeb Saheb, diffuser
of benefits, of exalted pomp, the respectable, the discriminator of
ranks! May his power increase!"

"Let them convey this to the perusal of his excellency, conversant in
realities and mysteries, the support of excellencies, the cream of his
contemporaries, and the cherisher of the poor!"

These are a specimen of the flattering titles given in the East to
persons in eminent stations. Their kings they clothe in all the
attributes of the Deity, when both in their public and private character
they are corrupt and unholy, rascals in grain, and the ruthless
oppressors of suffering humanity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 33](job033.md)

</div>
