<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job020)  [Next](job022.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 21:0</span></span>

Job expresses himself as puzzled by the dispensations of Divine
Providence, because of the unequal distribution of temporal goods; he
shows that wicked men often live long, prosper in their families, in
their flocks, and in all their substance, and yet live in defiance of
God and sacred things, vv. 1-16. At other times their prosperity is
suddenly blasted, and they and their families come to ruin, [Job
21:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#017.md). God, however, is too wise to
err; and he deals out various lots to all according to his wisdom: some
come sooner, others later, to the grave: the strong and the weak, the
prince and the peasant, come to a similar end in this life; but the
wicked are reserved for a day of wrath, [Job
21:22-33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#022.md). He charges his friends with
falsehood in their pretended attempts to comfort him, [Job
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#034.md).

[Job 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 21:2</span></span>

Let this be your consolations - ותהי זאת תנחומתיכם uthehi zoth
tanchumotheychem may be translated, "And let this be your
retractations." Let what I am about to say induce you to retract what
you have said, and to recall your false judgments. נחם nacham signifies,
not only to comfort, but to change one's mind, to repent; hence the
Vulgate translates et agite paenitentiam, "and repent," which Coverdale
follows in his version, and amende yourselves. Some suppose the verse to
be understood ironically: I am now about to give you consolations for
those you have given me. When I have done, then turn them into mockery
if you please.

[Job 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 21:4</span></span>

As for me - האנכי heanochi, "Alas for me!" Is it not with a man that I
speak? And, if this be the case, why should not my spirit be troubled? I
do not reply against my Maker: I suffer much from God and man; why then
may I not have the privilege of complaining to creatures like myself?

[Job 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 21:5</span></span>

Mark me, and be astonished - Consider and compare the state in which I
was once, with that in which I am now; and be astonished at the
judgments and dispensations of God. You will then be confounded; you
will put your hands upon your mouths, and keep silent. Putting the hand
on the mouth, or the finger on the lips, was the token of silence. The
Egyptian god Harpocrates, who was the god of silence, is represented
with his finger compressing his upper lip.

[Job 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 21:6</span></span>

I am afraid - I am about to speak of the mysterious workings of
Providence; and I tremble at the thought of entering into a detail on
such a subject; my very flesh trembles.

[Job 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 21:7</span></span>

Wherefore do the wicked live - You have frequently asserted that the
wicked are invariably punished in this life; and that the righteous are
ever distinguished by the strongest marks of God's providential
kindness; how then does it come that many wicked men live long and
prosperously, and at last die in peace, without any evidence whatever of
God's displeasure? This is a fact that is occurring daily; none can deny
it; how then will you reconcile it with your maxims?

[Job 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 21:8</span></span>

Their seed is established - They see their own children grow up, and
become settled in the land; and behold their children's children also;
so that their generations are not cut off. Even the posterity of the
wicked continue.

[Job 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 21:9</span></span>

Neither is the rod of God upon them - They are not afflicted as other
men.

[Job 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 21:10</span></span>

Their bull gendereth - עבר ibbar, passes over, i.e., on the cow,
referring to the actions of the bull when coupling with the female.
Their flocks multiply greatly, they bring forth in time, and none of
them is barren.

[Job 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 21:11</span></span>

They send forth their little ones - It is not very clear whether this
refers to the young of the flocks or to their children. The first clause
may mean the former, the next clause the latter; while the young of
their cattle are in flocks, their numerous children are healthy and
vigorous, and dance for joy.

[Job 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 21:12</span></span>

They take the timbrel and harp - ישאו yisu, they rise up or lift
themselves up, probably alluding to the rural exercise of dancing. תף
toph, which we translate timbrel, means a sort of drum, such as the
tom-tom of the Asiatics. כנור kinnor may mean something of the harp
kind. עוגב ugab, organ, means nothing like the instrument now called the
organ, though thus translated both by the Septuagint and Vulgate; it
probably means the syrinx, composed of several unequal pipes, close at
the bottom, which when blown into at the top, gives a very shrill and
lively sound. To these instruments the youth are represented as dancing
joyfully. Mr. Good translates: "They trip merrily to the sound of the
pipe." And illustrates his translation with the following verse: -

"Now pursuing, now retreating,Now in circling troops they meet;

To brisk notes in cadence beating,Glance their many twinkling feet."

The original is intended to convey the true notion of the gambols of the
rustic nymphs and swains on festival occasions, and let it be observed
that this is spoken of the children of those who say unto God, "Depart
from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the
Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we
pray unto him?" [Job 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014.md), [Job
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#015.md). Is it any wonder that the
children of such parents should be living to the flesh, and serving the
lusts of the flesh? for neither they nor their parents know God, nor
pray unto him.

[Job 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 21:13</span></span>

They spend their days in wealth - There is a various reading here of
some importance. In the text we have יבלו yeballu, they grow old, or
wear out as with old age, terent vetustate; and in the margin, יכלו
yechallu, they consume; and the Masora states that this is one of the
eleven words which are written with ב beth and must be read with כ caph.
Several editions have the former word in the text, and the latter in the
margin; the former being what is called the kethib, the latter keri.
יבלו yeballu, they grow old, or wear out, is the reading of the Antwerp,
Paris, and London Polyglots; יכלו yechallu, they accomplish or spend, is
the reading of the Complutensian Polyglot, thirteen of Kennicott's and
De Rossi's MSS., the Septuagint, Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic. The
Vulgate has ducunt, "they lead or spend," from which our translation is
borrowed. I incline to the former, as Job's argument derives
considerable strength from this circumstance; they not only spend their
days in faring sumptuously every day; but they even wear out so as to
grow old in it; they are not cut off by any sudden judgment of God. This
is fact; therefore your doctrine, that the wicked are cut off suddenly
and have but a short time, is far from the truth.

In a moment go down to the grave - They wear out their years in
pleasure; grow old in their gay and giddy life; and die, as in a moment,
without previous sickness; or, as Mr. Good has it, They quietly descend
into the grave.

[Job 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 21:14</span></span>

They say unto God - This is the language of their conduct, though not
directly of their lips.

Depart from us - Let us alone; we do not trouble thee. Thy ways are
painful; we do not like cross-bearing. Thy ways are spiritual; we wish
to live after the flesh. We have learned to do our own will; we do not
wish to study thine.

[Job 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 21:15</span></span>

What is the Almighty - What allegiance do we owe to him? We feel no
obligation to obey him; and what profit can we derive from prayer? We
are as happy as flesh and blood can make us: our kingdom is of this
world; we wish for no other portion than that which we have. Those who
have never prayed as they ought know nothing of the benefits of prayer.

[Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 21:16</span></span>

Their good is not in their hand - With all their boasting and
self-dependence, God only lends them his bounty; and though it appears
to be their own, yet it is at his disposal. Some of the wicked he
permits to live and die in affluence, provided it be acquired in the
ordinary way of his providence, by trade, commerce, etc. Others he
permits to possess it for a while only, and then strips them of their
illegally procured property.

The counsel of the wicked is far from me - Some understand the words
thus: "Far be it from me to advocate the cause of the wicked." I have
nothing in common with them, and am not their apologist. I state a fact:
they are often found in continual prosperity. I state another fact: they
are often found in wretchedness and misery.

[Job 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 21:17</span></span>

How oft is the candle of the wicked put out? - The candle or lamp is
often used, both as the emblem of prosperity and of posterity.
Oftentimes the rejoicing of the wicked is short; and, not unfrequently,
his seed is cut off from the earth. The root is dried up, and the branch
is withered.

God distributeth sorrows in his anger - He must be incensed against
those who refuse to know, serve, and pray unto him. In his anger,
therefore, he portions out to each his due share of misery, vexation,
and wo.

[Job 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 21:18</span></span>

They are as stubble before the wind - "His fan is in his hand; he will
thoroughly cleanse his floor, and the chaff he will burn with
unquenchable fire. Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment,
but shall be like the chaff which the wind driveth away." Were not this
a common thought, I should have supposed that the author of this book
borrowed it from [Psa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004.md). The
original signifies that they shall be carried away by a furious storm;
and borne off as booty is by the swift-riding robbers of the desert, who
make a sudden irruption, and then set off at full speed with their prey.

[Job 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 21:19</span></span>

God layeth up his iniquity for his children - This is according to the
declaration of God, [Exo 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005.md) :
"Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the third
and fourth generation of them that hate me." This always supposes that
the children, who are thus visited, have copied their parents' example;
or that ill-gotten property is found in their hands, which has descended
to them from their wicked fathers; and of this God, in his judgments,
strips them. It is, however, very natural to suppose that children
brought up without the fear of God will walk in the sight of their own
eyes, and according to the imaginations of their own hearts.

He rewardeth him, and he shall know it - He shall so visit his
transgressions upon him, that he shall at last discern that it is God
who hath done it. And thus they will find that there would have been
profit in serving him, and safety in praying unto him. But this they
have neglected, and now it is too late.

[Job 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 21:20</span></span>

His eyes shall see his destruction - He shall perceive its approach, and
have the double punishment of fearing and feeling; feeling a Thousand
deaths in fearing One.

He shall drink of the wrath - The cup of God's wrath, the cup of
trembling, etc., is frequently expressed or referred to in the sacred
writings, [Deu 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033.md); [Isa
51:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017.md); [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015.md); [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008.md). It appears to be a metaphor
taken from those cups of poison which certain criminals were obliged to
drink. A cup of the juice of hemlock was the wrath or punishment
assigned by the Athenian magistrates to the philosopher Socrates.

[Job 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 21:21</span></span>

For what pleasure hath he in his house after him - What may happen to
his posterity he neither knows nor cares for, as he is now numbered with
the dead, and numbered with them before he had lived out half his years.
Some have translated the verse thus: "Behold how speedily God destroys
the house of the wicked after him! How he shortens the number of his
months!"

[Job 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 21:22</span></span>

Shall any teach God knowledge? - Who among the sons of men can pretend
to teach God how to govern the world, who himself teaches those that are
high - the heavenly inhabitants, that excel us infinitely both in
knowledge and wisdom? Neither angels nor men can comprehend the reasons
of the Divine providence. It is a depth known only to God.

[Job 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 21:23</span></span>

One dieth in his full strength - In this and the three following verses
Job shows that the inequality of fortune, goods, health, strength, etc.,
decides nothing either for or against persons in reference to the
approbation or disapprobation of God, as these various lots are no
indications of their wickedness or innocence. One has a sudden, another
a lingering death; but by none of these can their eternal states be
determined.

[Job 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 21:24</span></span>

His breasts are full of milk - The word עטיניו atinaiv, which occurs
nowhere else in the Hebrew Bible, is most likely an Arabic term, but
probably so provincial as to be now lost. (Arabic) atana signifies to
macerate hides so as to take off the hair: hence Mr. Good thinks it
means here, that sleekness of skin which is the effect of fatness both
in man and beast. But as the radical idea signifies to stink, as leather
does which is thus macerated, I cannot see how this meaning can apply
here. Under the root עטן atan, Mr. Parkhurst gives the following
definitions:" עטן occurs, not as a verb, but as a noun masculine plural,
in construction, עטיני atiney, the bowels, intestines; once [Job
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#024.md), עטיניו atinaiv, his bowels or
intestines, are full of, or abound with, חלב chalab, fat. So the lxx.:
Τα δε εγκατα αυτου πληρη στεατος. The Vulgate: Viscera, ejus plena sent
adipe, 'his intestines are full of fat.' May not עטינים atinim be a noun
masculine plural from עטה atah, to involve, formed as גליונים gailyonim,
mirrors, from גלה galah, to reveal? And may nor the intestines,
including those fatty parts, the mesentery and omentum, be so called on
account of their wonderful involutions?" I think this conjecture to be
as likely as any that has yet been formed.

[Job 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 21:26</span></span>

They shall lie down alike in the dust - Death levels all distinctions,
and the grave makes all equal. There may be a difference in the grave
itself; but the human corpse is the same in all. Splendid monuments
enshrine corruption; but the sod must lie close and heavy upon the
putrefying carcass, to prevent it from becoming the bane of the living.

[Job 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 21:27</span></span>

I know your thoughts - Ye still think that, because I am grievously
afflicted, I must therefore be a felonious transgressor.

[Job 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 21:28</span></span>

For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? - In order to prove your
point, ye ask, Where is the house of the tyrant and oppressor?

Are they not overthrown and destroyed? And is not this a proof that God
does not permit the wicked to enjoy prosperity?

[Job 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 21:29</span></span>

Have ye not asked them that go by the way? - This appears to be Job's
answer. Consult travelers who have gone through different countries; and
they will tell you that they have seen both examples - the wicked in
great prosperity in some instances, while suddenly destroyed in others.
See at the end of the chapter, [Job
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#034) (note.md).

Do ye not know their tokens - Mr. Good translates the whole verse thus:
"Surely thou canst never have inquired of men of travel; or thou couldst
not have been ignorant of their tokens. Hadst thou made proper
inquiries, thou wouldst have heard of their awful end in a thousand
instances. And also of their prosperity." See at the end of this
chapter, [Job 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#034) (note.md).

[Job 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 21:30</span></span>

That the wicked is reserved to the day of destruction? - Though every
one can tell that he has seen the wicked in prosperity, and even spend a
long life in it; yet this is no proof that God loves him, or that he
shall enjoy a prosperous lot in the next world. There, he shall meet
with the day of wrath. There, the wicked shall be punished, and the just
rewarded.

[Job 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 21:31</span></span>

Who shall declare his way to his face? - But while the wicked is in
power, who shall dare to tell him to his face what his true character
is? or, who shall dare to repay him the evil he has done? As such a
person cannot have his punishment in this life, he must have it in
another; and for this the day of wrath - the day of judgment, is
prepared.

[Job 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 21:32</span></span>

Yet shall he be brought to the grave - He shall die like other men; and
the corruption of the grave shall prey upon him. Mr. Carlyle, in his
specimens of Arabic poetry, Translations, p. 16, quotes this verse,
which he translates and paraphrases, והוא לקברות יובל "He shall be
brought to the grave," ועל גדוש ישקוד And shall watch upon the
high-raised heap." It was the opinion of the pagan Arabs, that upon the
death of any person, a bird, by them called Manah, issued from the
brain, and haunted the sepulcher of the deceased, uttering a lamentable
scream.

This notion, he adds, is evidently alluded to in [Job
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#032.md). Thus Abusahel, on the death of
his mistress: -

"If her ghost's funereal screech

Through the earth my grave should reach,

On that voice I loved so well

My transported ghost would dwell."

[Job 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 21:33</span></span>

The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him - Perhaps there is an
allusion here to the Asiatic mode of interment for princes, saints, and
nobles: a well-watered valley was chosen for the tomb, where a perpetual
spring might be secured. This was intended to be the emblem of a
resurrection, or of a future life; and to conceal as much as possible
the disgrace of the rotting carcass.

Every man shall draw after him - There seem to be two allusions intended
here:

1\. To death, the common lot of all. Millions have gone before him to
the tomb; and כל אדם col adam, all men, shall follow him: all past
generations have died, all succeeding generations shall die also.

2\. To pompous funeral processions; multitudes preceding, and multitudes
following, the corpse.

[Job 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">job 21:34</span></span>

How then comfort ye me in vain - Mr. Good translates: "How vainly then
would ye make me retract!" See the note on [Job
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#002.md). I cannot retract any thing I
have said, as I have proved by fact and testimony that your positions
are false and unfounded. Your pretensions to comfort me are as hollow as
the arguments you bring in support of your exceptionable doctrines.

This chapter may be called Job's triumph over the insinuated calumnies,
and specious but false doctrines, of his opponents. The irritability of
his temper no longer appears: from the time he got that glorious
discovery of his Redeemer, and the Joyous hope of an eternal
inheritance, [Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025.md), etc., we find
no more murmurings, nor unsanctified complainings. He is now full master
of himself; and reasons conclusively, because he reasons coolly.
Impassioned transports no longer carry him away: his mind is serene; his
heart, fixed; his hope, steady; and his faith, strong. Zophar the
Naamathite is now, in his presence, as an infant in the gripe of a
mighty giant. Another of these pretended friends but real enemies comes
forward to renew the attack with virulent invective, malevolent
insinuation, and unsupported assertion. Him, Job meets, and vanquishes
by pious resignation and fervent prayer. Though, at different times
after this, Job had his buffetings from his grand adversary, and some
seasons of comparative darkness, yet his faith is unshaken, and he
stands as a beaten anvil to the stroke. He effectually exculpates
himself, and vindicates the dispensations of his Maker.

There appears to be something in the [Job
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#029.md) which requires to be farther
examined: Have ye not asked them that go by the way? And do ye not know
their tokens? It is probable that this verse may allude to the custom of
burying the dead by the way-side, and raising up specious and
descriptive monuments over them. Job argues that the lot of outward
prosperity fell alike to the just and to the unjust, and that the
sepulchral monuments by the wayside were proofs of his assertion; for
his friends, as well as himself and others, had noted them, and asked
the history of such and such persons, from the nearest inhabitants of
the place; and the answers, in a great variety of cases, had been: "That
monument points out the place where a wicked man lies, who was all his
lifetime in prosperity and affluence, yet oppressed the poor, and shut
up the bowels of his compassion against the destitute; and this belongs
to a man who lived only to serve his God, and to do good to man
according to his power, yet had not a day of health, nor an hour of
prosperity; God having given to the former his portion in this life, and
reserved the recompense of the latter to a future state."

The Septuagint render the verse thus: - Ερωτησατε παραπορευμενους ὁδον,
και τα σημεια αυτων ουκ απαλλοτριωσατε, "Inquire of those who pass by
the way, and their signs \[monuments\] ye will not alienate." That is,
When ye hear the history of these persons, ye will not then assert that
the man who lived in prosperity was a genuine worshipper of the true
God, and therefore was blessed with temporal good, and that he who lived
in adversity was an enemy to God and was consequently cursed with the
want of secular blessings. Of the former ye will hear a different
account from those who dare now speak the truth, because the prosperous
oppressor is no more; And of the latter ye shall learn that, though
afflicted, destitute, and distressed, he was one of those who
acknowledged God in all his ways, and never performed an act of
religious service to him in hope of secular gain; sought his approbation
only, and met death cheerfully, in the hope of being eternally with the
Lord.

Neither good nor evil can be known by the occurrences of this life.
Every thing argues the certainty of a future state, and the necessity of
a day of judgment. They who are in the habit of marking casualties,
especially if those whom they love not are the subjects of them, as
tokens of Divine displeasure, only show an ignorance of God's
dispensations, and a malevolence of mind that would fain arm itself with
the celestial thunders, in order to transfix those whom they deem their
enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 22](job022.md)

</div>
