<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job009)  [Next](job011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 10:0</span></span>

Job is weary of life, and expostulates with God, [Job
10:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001). He appeals to God for his
innocence; and pleads on the weakness of his frame, and the manner of
his formation, [Job 10:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007). Complains
of his sufferings, and prays for respite, [Job
10:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014). Describes the state of the
dead, [Job 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021), [Job
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#022).

[Job 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 10:1</span></span>

My soul is weary of my life - Here is a proof that נפש nephesh does not
signify the animal life, but the soul or immortal mind, as distinguished
from חי chai, that animal life; and is a strong proof that Job believed
in the distinction between these two principles; was no materialist;
but, on the contrary, credited the proper immortality of the soul. This
is worthy of observation. See [Job
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#010).

I will leave my complaint - I still charge myself with the cause of my
own calamities; and shall not charge my Maker foolishly: but I must
deplore my wretched and forlorn state.

[Job 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 10:2</span></span>

Do not condemn me - Let me not be afflicted in thy wrath.

Show me wherefore thou contendest - If I am afflicted because of my
sins, show me what that sin is. God never afflicts but for past sin, or
to try his followers; or for the greater manifestation of his grace in
their support and deliverance.

[Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 10:3</span></span>

Is it good unto thee - Surely it can be no gratification to thee to
distress the children of men, as if thou didst despise the work of thy
own hands.

And shine upon the counsel - For by my afflictions the harsh judgments
of the wicked will appear to be confirmed: viz., that God regards not
his most fervent worshippers; and it is no benefit to lead a religious
life.

[Job 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 10:4</span></span>

Hast thou eyes of flesh! - Dost thou judge as man judges?

Illustrated by the next clause, Seest thou as man seeth?

[Job 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 10:5</span></span>

Are thy days as the days of man - אנוש enosh, wretched, miserable man.
Thy years as man's days; גבר gaber, the strong man. Thou art not
short-lived, like man in his present imperfect state; nor can the years
of the long-lived patriarchs be compared with thine. The difference of
the phraseology in the original justifies this view of the subject. Man
in his low estate cannot be likened unto thee; nor can he in his
greatest excellence, though made in thy own image and likeness, be
compared to thee.

[Job 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 10:6</span></span>

That thou inquirest - Is it becoming thy infinite dignity to concern
thyself so much with the affairs or transgressions of a despicable
mortal? A word spoken in the heart of most sinners.

[Job 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 10:7</span></span>

Thou knowest that I am not wicked - While thou hast this knowledge of me
and my conduct, why appear to be sifting me as if in order to find out
sin; and though none can be found, treating me as though I were a
transgressor?

[Job 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 10:8</span></span>

Thine hands have made me - Thou art well acquainted with human nature,
for thou art its author.

And fashioned me together round about - All my powers and faculties have
been planned and executed by thyself. It is thou who hast refined the
materials out of which I have been formed, and modified them into that
excellent symmetry and order in which they are now found; so that the
union and harmony of the different parts, (יחד yachad), and their
arrangement and completion, (סביב sabib), proclaim equally thy wisdom,
skill, power, and goodness.

Yet thou dost destroy me - ותבלעני vatteballeeni, "and thou wilt swallow
me up." Men generally care for and prize those works on which they have
spent most time, skill, and pains: but, although thou hast formed me
with such incredible skill and labor, yet thou art about to destroy me!
How dreadful an evil must sin be, when, on its account, God has
pronounced the sentence of death on all mankind; and that body, so
curiously and skilfully formed, must be decomposed, and reduced to dust!

[Job 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 10:9</span></span>

Thou hast made me as the clay - Thou hast fashioned me, according to thy
own mind, out of a mass of clay: after so much skill and pains expended,
men might naturally suppose they were to have a permanent being; but
thou hast decreed to turn them into dust!

[Job 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 10:10</span></span>

Hast thou not poured me out as milk - After all that some learned men
have said on this subject, in order to confine the images here to simple
nutrition, I am satisfied that generation is the true notion. Respicit
ad fetus in matris utero primam formationem, quum in embryonem ex
utriusque parentis semine coalescit - Ex semine liquido, lac quodammodo
referente, me formasti - In interpretando, inquit Hieronymus, omnino his
accedo qui de genitali semine accipiunt, quod ipsa tanquam natura
emulget, ac dein concrescere in utero ad coalescere jubet. I make no
apology for leaving this untranslated. The different expressions in this
and the following verse are very appropriate: the pouring out like
milk-coagulating, clothing with skin and flesh, fencing with bones and
sinews, are well imagined, and delicately, and at the same time
forcibly, expressed. If I believed that Job referred to nutrition, which
I do not, I might speak of the chyle, the chylopoietic organs, the
lacteal vessels, and the generation of all the solids and fluids from
this substance, which itself is derived from the food taken into the
stomach. But this process, properly speaking, does not take place till
the human being is brought into the world, it being previously nourished
by the mother by means of the funis umbilicus, without that action of
the stomach by which the chyle is prepared.

[Job 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 10:12</span></span>

Thou hast granted me life and favorer - Thou hast brought me from my
mother's womb; given me an actual existence among men; by thy favor or
mercy thou hast provided me with the means of life; and thy visitation -
thy continual providential care, has preserved me in life - has given me
the air I breathe, and furnished me with those powers which enable me to
respire it as an agent and preserver of life. It is by God's continued
visitation or influence that the life of any man is preserved; in him we
live, move, and have our being.

[Job 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 10:13</span></span>

And these things hast thou hid in thine heart - Thou hast had many
gracious purposes concerning me which thou hast not made known; but thy
visitations and mercy are sufficient proofs of kindness towards me;
though for purposes unknown to me thou hast sorely afflicted me, and
continuest to treat me as an enemy.

[Job 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 10:14</span></span>

If I sin - From thee nothing can be hidden; if I sin, thou takest
account of the transgression, and canst not hold me for innocent when
thou knowest I am guilty.

[Job 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 10:15</span></span>

If I be wicked - I must meet with that punishment that is due to the
workers of iniquity.

If I be righteous - I am only in the state which my duty to my Creator
requires me to be in; and I cannot therefore suppose that on this
account I can deserve any thing by way of favor from the justice of my
Maker.

I am full of confusion - I am confounded at my state and circumstances.
I know that thou art merciful, and dost not afflict willingly the
children of men; I know I have not wickedly departed from thee; and yet
I am treated by thee as if I were an apostate from every good. I am
therefore full of confusion. See thou to my affliction; and bring me out
of it in such a way as shall at once prove my innocence, the
righteousness of thy ways, and the mercy of thy nature.

[Job 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 10:16</span></span>

For it increaseth - Probably this refers to the affliction mentioned
above, which is increased in proportion to its duration. Every day made
his escape from such a load of evils less and less probable.

Thou huntest me as a fierce lion - As the hunters attack the king of
beasts in the forest, so my friends attack me. They assail me on every
side.

Thou showest thyself marvelous - Thy designs, thy ways, thy works, are
all incomprehensible to me; thou dost both confound and overpower me.
Mr. Good translates thus: -

"For uprousing as a ravenous lion dost thou spring upon me.

And again thou showest over me thy vast power."

[Job 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 10:17</span></span>

Thou renewest thy witnesses - In this speech of Job he is ever referring
to trials in courts of judicature, and almost all his terms are
forensic. Thou bringest witnesses in continual succession to confound
and convict me.

Changes and war - I am as if attacked by successive troops; one company
being wearied, another succeeds to the attack, so that I am harassed by
continual warfare.

[Job 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 10:18</span></span>

Wherefore then - Why didst thou give me a being, when thou didst foresee
I should be exposed to such incredible hardships? See on [Job
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010) (note), etc.

[Job 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 10:19</span></span>

I should have been as though - Had I given up the ghost as soon as born,
as I could not then have been conscious of existence, it would have
been, as it respects myself, as though I had never been; being
immediately transported from my mother's womb to the grave.

[Job 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 10:20</span></span>

Are not my days few? - My life cannot be long; let me have a little
respite before I die.

[Job 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 10:21</span></span>

I shall not return - I shall not return again from the dust to have a
dwelling among men.

To the land of darkness - See the notes on [Job
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005). There are here a crowd of obscure
and dislocated terms, admirably expressive of the obscurity and
uncertainty of the subject. What do we know of the state of separate
spirits? What do we know of the spiritual world? How do souls exist
separate from their respective bodies? Of what are they capable and what
is their employment? Who can answer these questions? Perhaps nothing can
be said much better of the state than is here said, a land of obscurity,
like darkness. The shadow of death - A place where death rules, over
which he projects his shadow, intercepting every light of every kind of
life. Without any order, ולא סדרים velo sedarim, having no arrangements,
no distinctions of inhabitants; the poor and the rich are there, the
master and his slave, the king and the beggar, their bodies in equal
corruption and disgrace, their souls distinguished only by their moral
character. Stripped of their flesh, they stand in their naked simplicity
before God in that place.

[Job 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 10:22</span></span>

Where the light is as darkness - A palpable obscure: it is space and
place, and has only such light or capability of distinction as renders
"darkness visible." The following words of Sophocles convey the same
idea: Ιω σκοτος εμοι φαος; "Thou darkness be my light." It is, as the
Vulgate expresses it, Terra tenebrosa, et operta mortis caligine: Terra
miseriae et tenebrarum, ubi umbra mortis, et nullus ordo, sed
sempiternus horror inhabitat: "A murky land, covered with the thick
darkness of death: a land of wretchedness and obscurities, where is the
shadow of death, and no order, but sempiternal horror dwells
everywhere." Or, as Coverdale expresses this last clause, Wheras is no
ordre but terrible feare as in the darknesse. A duration not
characterized or measured by any of the attributes of time; where there
is no order of darkness and light, night and day, heat and cold, summer
and winter. It is the state of the dead! The place of separate spirits!
It is out of time, out of probation, beyond change or mutability. It is
on the confines of eternity! But what is This? and where? Eternity! how
can I form any conception of thee? In thee there is no order, no bounds,
no substance, no progression, no change, no past, no present, no future!
Thou art an indescribable something, to which there is no analogy in the
compass of creation. Thou art infinity and incomprehensibility to all
finite beings. Thou art what, living, I know not, and what I must die to
know; and even then I shall apprehend no more of thee than merely that
thou art E-T-E-R-N-I-T-Y!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 11](job011)

</div>
