<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job000)  [Next](job002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

Character of Job, [Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md). His
family, [Job 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#002.md). His substance, [Job
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md). Care of has family, [Job
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#004.md), [Job
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005.md). Satan accuses him to God as a
selfish person, who served God only for the hope of secular rewards,
[Job 1:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006.md). Satan is permitted to
strip him of all his children and property, [Job
1:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012.md). Job's remarkable resignation
and patience, [Job 1:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020.md).

[Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 1:1</span></span>

In the land of Uz - This country was situated in Idumea, or the land of
Edom, in Arabia Petraea, of which it comprised a very large district.
See the preface.

Whose name was Job - The original is איוב Aiyob; and this orthography is
followed by the Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic. From the Vulgate we borrow
Job, not very dissimilar from the Ιωβ Iob of the Septuagint. The name
signifies sorrowful, or he that weeps. He is supposed to have been
called Jobab. See more in the preface.

Perfect and upright - תם וישר tam veyashar; Complete as to his mind and
heart, and Straight or Correct as to his moral deportment.

Feared God - Had him in continual reverence as the fountain of justice,
truth, and goodness.

Eschewed evil - סר מרע sar mera, departing from, or avoiding evil. We
have the word eschew from the old French eschever, which signifies to
avoid. All within was holy, all without was righteous; and his whole
life was employed in departing from evil, and drawing nigh to God.
Coverdale translates an innocent and vertuous man, soch one as feared
God, an eschued evell. From this translation we retain the word eschew.

[Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 1:3</span></span>

His substance also was seven thousand sheep - A thousand, says the
Chaldee, for each of his sons. Three thousand camels: a thousand for
each of his daughters. Five hundred yoke of oxen for himself. And five
hundred she-asses for his wife. Thus the Targum divides the substance of
this eminent man.

A very great household - עבדה רבה מאד abuddah rabbah meod, "a very great
estate." The word עבדה abuddah refers chiefly to husbandry, including
all manner of labor in the field, with cattle, and every description of
servants.

The greatest of all the men of the East - He was more eminent than any
other person in that region in wisdom, wealth, and piety. He was the
chief emir of that district.

[Job 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 1:4</span></span>

Feasted in their houses, every one his day - It is likely that a
birthday festival is here intended. When the birthday of one arrived, he
invited his brothers and sisters to feast with him; and each observed
the same custom.

[Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 1:5</span></span>

When the days of their feasting were gone about - At the conclusion of
the year, when the birthday of each had been celebrated, the pious
father appears to have gathered them all together, that the whole family
might hold a feast to the Lord, offering burnt-offerings in order to
make an atonement for sins of all kinds, whether presumptuous or
committed through ignorance. This we may consider as a general custom
among the godly in those ancient times.

And cursed God in their hearts - וברכו אלהים uberechu Elohim. In this
book, according to most interpreters, the verb ברך barach signifies both
to bless and to curse; and the noun אלהים Elohim signifies the true God,
false gods, and great or mighty. The reason why Job offered the
burnt-offerings appears to have been this: in a country where idolatry
flourished, he thought it possible that his children might, in their
festivity, have given way to idolatrous thoughts, or done something
prescribed by idolatrous rites; and therefore the words may be rendered
thus: It may be that my children have blessed the gods in their hearts.
Others think that the word ברך barach should be understood as implying
farewell, bidding adieu - lest my children have bidden adieu to God,
that is, renounced him, and cast off his fear. To me this is very
unlikely. Mr. Mason Good contends that the word should be understood in
its regular and general sense, to bless; and that the conjunction ו vau
should be translated nor. "Peradventure my sons may have sinned, nor
blessed God in their hearts." This version he supports with great
learning. I think the sense given above is more plain, and less
embarrassed. They might have been guilty of some species of idolatry.
This is possible even among those called Christians, in their banquets;
witness their songs to Bacchus, Venus, etc., which are countless in
number, and often sung by persons who would think themselves injured,
not to be reputed Christians. Coverdale, in his translation, (1535),
renders the passage thus: Peradventure my sonnes have done some offense,
and have been unthankful to God in their hertes.

Thus did Job continually - At the end of every year, when all the
birthday festivals had gone round.

[Job 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 1:6</span></span>

There was a day when the sons of God - All the versions, and indeed all
the critics, are puzzled with the phrase sons of God; בני האלהים beney
haelohim, literally, sons of the God, or sons of the gods. The Vulgate
has simply filii dei, sons of God. The Septuagint, οἱ αγγελοι του θεου,
the angels of God. The Chaldee, כתי מלאכיא kittey malachaiya, troops of
angels. The Syriac retains the Hebrew words and letters, only leaving
out the demonstrative ה he in the word האלהים haelohim, thus, (Syriac)
baney Elohim. The Arabic nearly copies the Hebrew also, (Arabic) banoa
Iloheem; to which, if we give not the literal translation of the Hebrew,
we may give what translation we please. Coverdale (1535) translates it,
servauntes of God. The Targum supposes that this assembly took place on
the day of the great atonement, which occurred once each year. And there
was a day of judgment in the beginning of the year; and the troops of
angels came, that they might stand in judgment before the Lord. But what
are we to make of this whole account? Expositions are endless. That of
Mr. Peters appears to me to be at once the most simple and the most
judicious: "The Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men, for
there is a necessity of condescending to our capacities, and of suiting
the revelation to our apprehension. As kings, therefore, transact their
most important affairs in a solemn council or assembly, so God is
pleased to represent himself as having his council likewise; and as
passing the decrees of his providence in an assembly of his holy angels.
We have here, in the case of Job, the same grand assembly held, as was
before in that of Ahab, 1 Kings 22:6-23; the same host of heaven, called
here the sons of God, presenting themselves before Jehovah, as in the
vision of Micaiah they are said to stand on his right hand and on his
left. A wicked spirit appearing among them, here called Satan or the
adversary, and there a lying spirit; both bent on mischief, and ready to
do all the hurt they were permitted to do; for both were under the
control of his power. The imagery is just the same; and the only
difference is in the manner of the relation. That mentioned above,
Micaiah, as a prophet, and in the actual exercise of his prophetic
office, delivers, as he received it, in a vision. "I saw the Lord
sitting on his throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing by him, on
his right hand and on his left, and there came forth a Lying Spirit, and
stood Before the Lord, and said," [Kg1
22:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019.md). The other, as a historian,
interweaves it with his history; and tells us, in his plain narrative
style, "There was a day when the sons of God came to Present themselves
Before the Lord, and Satan came also among them." And this he delivers
in the same manner as he does, There was a man in the land of Uz, whose
name was Job.

"The things delivered to us by these two inspired writers are the same
in substance, equally high, and above the reach of human sight and
knowledge; but the manner of delivering them is different, each as
suited best to his particular purpose. This, then is the prophetical way
of representing things, as to the manner of doing them, which, whether
done exactly in the same manner, concerns us not to know; but which are
really done: and God would have them described as done in this manner,
to make the more lively and lasting impression on us. At the same time,
it must not be forgotten that representations of this kind are founded
in a well-known and established truth, viz., the doctrine of good and
bad angels, a point revealed from the beginning, and without a previous
knowledge of which, the visions of the prophets could scarcely be
intelligible." See [Gen 28:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#010.md).

And Satan came also - This word also is emphatic in the original, השטן
hassatan, the Satan, or the adversary; translated by the Septuagint ὁ
Διαβολος. The original word is preserved by the Chaldee, Syriac, and
Arabic; indeed, in each of them the word signifies an adversary. St.
Peter, [Pe1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008.md), plainly refers to
this place; and fully proves that השטן hassatan, which he literally
translates ὁ αντιδικος, the Adversary, is no other than ὁ Διαβολος, the
Devil, or chief of bad demons, which he adds to others by way of
explanation. There are many διαμονες, demons, mentioned in Scripture,
but the word Satan or devil is never found in the originals of the Old
and New Testaments in the plural number. Hence we reasonably infer, that
all evil spirits are under the government of One chief, the Devil, who
is more powerful and more wicked than the rest. From the Greek Διαβολος
comes the Latin Diabolus, the Spanish Diablo, the French Diable, the
Italian Diavolo, the German Teuffel, the Dutch Duivel, the Anglo-Saxon
and the English Devil, which some would derive from the compound The -
Evil; ὁ πονηρος, the evil one, or wicked one.

It is now fashionable to deny the existence of this evil spirit; and
this is one of what St. John ([Rev
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024).md) calls τα βαθη του σατανα, the
depths of Satan; as he well knows that they who deny his being will not
be afraid of his power and influence; will not watch against his wiles
and devices; will not pray to God for deliverance from the evil one;
will not expect him to be trampled down under their feet, who has no
existence; and, consequently, they will become an easy and unopposing
prey to the enemy of their souls. By leading men to disbelieve and deny
his existence, he throws them off their guard; and is then their
complete master, and they are led captive by him at his will. It is well
known that, among all those who make any profession of religion, those
who deny the existence of the devil are they who pray little or none at
all; and are, apparently, as careless about the existence of God as they
are about the being of a devil. Piety to God is with them out of the
question; for those who do not pray, especially in private, (and I never
met with a devil-denier who did), have no religion of any kind,
whatsoever pretensions they may choose to make.

[Job 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 1:7</span></span>

From going to and fro in the earth - The translation of the Septuagint
is curious: Περιελθων την γην και εμπεριπατησας την ὑπ' ουρανον,
παρειμι; "Having gone round the earth, and walked over all that is under
heaven, I am come hither." The Chaldee says, "I am come from going round
the earth to examine the works of the children of men; and from walking
through it." Coverdale, who generally hits the sense, translates thus: I
have gone aboute the londe ond walked thorow it. Mr. Good has it, from
roaming round the earth, and walking about it.

St. Peter, as has been already stated, [Pe1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008.md), refers to this: "Be sober, be
vigilant; for your Adversary the Devil Goeth About, as a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour." I rather think, with Coverdale, that ארץ
arets here signifies rather that land, than the habitable globe. The
words are exceedingly emphatic; and the latter verb התהלך hithhallech
being in the hithpael conjugation shows how earnest and determined the
devil is in his work: he sets himself to walk; he is busily employed in
it; he is seeking the destruction of men; and while they sleep, he wakes
- while they are careless, he is alert. The spirit of this saying is
often expressed by the simple inhabitants of the country: when they
perceive a man plotting mischief, and frequent in transgression, they
say, The devil is Busy with him.

[Job 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 1:8</span></span>

Hast thou considered my servant Job - Literally, Hast thou placed thy
heart on my servant Job? Hast thou viewed his conduct with attention,
whilst thou wert roaming about, seeking whom thou mightest devour? viz.,
the careless, prayerless, and profligate in general.

[Job 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 1:9</span></span>

Doth Job fear God for naught? - Thou hast made it his interest to be
exemplary in his conduct: for this assertion Satan gives his reasons in
what immediately follows.

[Job 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 1:10</span></span>

Hast not thou made a hedge about him - Thou hast fortified him with
spikes and spears. Thou hast defended him as by an unapproachable hedge.
He is an object of thy peculiar care; and is not exposed to the common
trials of life.

[Job 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 1:11</span></span>

But put forth thine hand - Shoot the dart of poverty and affliction
against him.

And he will curse thee to thy face - אם לא על פניך יברכך im lo al
paneycha yebarechecca, "If he will not bless thee to thy appearances."
He will bless thee only in proportion to the temporal good thou
bestowest upon him; to the providential and gracious appearances or
displays of thy power in his behalf. If thou wilt be gracious, he will
be pious. The exact maxim of a great statesman, Sir Robert Walpole:
Every man has his price. "But you have not bought such a one?" "No,
because I would not go up to his price. He valued himself at more than I
thought him worth; and I could get others cheaper, who, in the general
muster, would do as well." No doubt Sir R. met with many such; and the
devil many more. But still God has multitudes that will neither sell
their souls, their consciences, nor their country, for any price; who,
though God should slay them, will nevertheless trust in him; and be
honest men, howsoever tempted by the devil and his vicegerents. So did
Job; so have done thousands; so will all do, in whose hearts Christ
dwells by faith.

[Job 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 1:12</span></span>

All that he hath is in thy power - Satan cannot deprive a man even of an
ass, a sheep, or a pig, but by especial permission of God. His power and
malice are ever bounded, and under control.

So Satan went forth - The Targum adds, with authority from the presence
of the Lord.

[Job 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 1:13</span></span>

There was a day - The first day of the week, says the Targum. It no
doubt refers to one of those birthday festivals mentioned before.

[Job 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 1:14</span></span>

The asses feeding beside them - אתנות athonoth, the she-asses, which
appear to have been more domesticated, as of more worth and use than the
others, both for their milk and their work.

[Job 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 1:15</span></span>

And the Sabeans fell - The Vulgate alone understands this of a people.
The Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic, understand it as implying a
marauding party. The Chaldee says, "Lilith, queen of Zamargad, rushed
suddenly upon them, and carried them away." The Sabeans mentioned here
are supposed to have been the same with those who were the descendants
of Abraham by Keturah, whose son Jokshan begat Sheba. The sons of
Keturah were sent by Abraham into the east, [Gen
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006.md), and inhabited Arabia Deserta, on
the east of the land of Uz. Hordes of predatory banditti were frequent
in those countries and continue so to the present day. They made sudden
incursions, and carried off men, women, children, cattle, and goods of
every description; and immediately retired to the desert, whither it was
in vain to pursue them.

[Job 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 1:16</span></span>

The fire of God is fallen - Though the fire of God may mean a great, a
tremendous fire, yet it is most natural to suppose lightning is meant;
for as thunder was considered to be the voice of God, so lightning was
the fire of God. And as the prince of the power of the air was permitted
now to arm himself with this dreadful artillery of heaven, he might
easily direct the zigzag lightning to every part of the fields where the
sheep were feeding, and so destroy the whole in a moment.

[Job 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 1:17</span></span>

The Chaldeans made out three bands - The Chaldeans inhabited each side
of the Euphrates near to Babylon, which was their capital. They were
also mixed with the wandering Arabs, and lived like them on rapine. They
were the descendants of Chesed, son of Nahor and brother of Huz, from
whom they had their name Casdim, which we translate Chaldeans. They
divided themselves into three bands, in order the more speedily and
effectually to encompass, collect, and drive off the three thousand
camels: probably they mounted the camels and rode off.

[Job 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 1:19</span></span>

A great wind from the wilderness - Here was another proof of the
influence of the prince of the power of the air. What mischief might he
not do with this tremendous agent, were he not constantly under the
control of the Almighty! He seems to have directed four different
currents, which, blowing against the four corners or sides of the house,
crushed it together, and involved all within in one common ruin.

[Job 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 1:20</span></span>

Rent his mantle - Tearing the garments, shaving or pulling off the hair
of the head, throwing dust or ashes on the head, and fitting on the
ground, were acts by which immoderate grief was expressed. Job must have
felt the bitterness of anguish when he was told that, in addition to the
loss of all his property, he was deprived of his ten children by a
violent death. Had he not felt this most poignantly, he would have been
unworthy of the name of man.

Worshipped - Prostrated himself; lay all along upon the ground, with his
face in the dust.

[Job 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 1:21</span></span>

Naked came I out of my mother's womb - I had no earthly possessions when
I came into the world; I cannot have less going out of it. What I have
the Lord gave: as it was his free gift, he has a right to resume it when
he pleases; and I owe him gratitude for the time he has permitted me to
enjoy this gift.

Naked shall I return thither - Whither? Not to his mother's womb surely;
nor does he call the earth his mother in this place. In the first clause
of the verse he speaks without a metaphor, and in the latter he speaks
in reference to the ground on which he was about to fall. As I came out
of my mother's womb destitute of the earthly possessions, so shall I
return שמה shammah, There; i.e., to the earth on which he was now
falling. That mother earth was a common expression in different nations,
I allow; but I believe no such metaphor was now in the mind of Job.

The Lord gave - The Chaldee has, "The Word of the Lord, מימרא דיי
meymera dayai, gave; and the Word of the Lord and the house of his
judgment, have taken away!" Word is used here personally, as in many
other places of all the Targums.

Blessed be the name of the Lord - The following is a fine paraphrase on
the sentiment in this verse: -

"Good when he gives, supremely good;Nor less when he denies;

Afflictions from his sovereign hand,Are blessings in disguise."

Seeing I have lost my temporal goods, and all my domestic comforts, may
God alone be all my portion! The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Coverdale,
add, The Lord hath done as he pleased.

[Job 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 1:22</span></span>

In all this Job sinned not - He did not give way to any action, passion,
or expression, offensive to his Maker. He did not charge God with acting
unkindly towards him, but felt as perfectly satisfied with the privation
which the hand of God had occasioned, as he was with the affluence and
health which that hand had bestowed. This is the transaction that gave
the strong and vivid colouring to the character of Job; in this, and in
this alone, he was a pattern of patience and resignation. In this Satan
was utterly disappointed; he found a man who loved his God more than his
earthly portion. This was a rare case, even in the experience of the
devil. He had seen multitudes who bartered their God for money, and
their hopes of blessedness in the world to come for secular possessions
in the present. He had been so often successful in this kind of
temptation, that he made no doubt he should succeed again. He saw many
who, when riches increased, set their hearts on them, and forgot God. He
saw many also who, when deprived of earthly comforts, blasphemed their
Maker. He therefore inferred that Job, in similar circumstances, would
act like the others; he was disappointed. Reader, has he, by riches or
poverty, succeeded with thee? Art thou pious when affluent, and patient
and contented when in poverty?

That Job lived after the giving of the law, seems to me clear from many
references to the rites and ceremonies instituted by Moses. In [Job
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005.md), we are informed that he
sanctified his children, and offered burnt-offerings daily to the
morning for each of them. This was a general ordinance of the law, as we
may see, [Lev 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#007.md) : "Moses said unto
Aaron, Go unto the altar, and offer thy sin-offering and thy
burnt-offering, and make an atonement for thyself and for the people."
[Lev 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022.md) : "And Aaron lifted up his
hands towards the people, and blessed them, and came down from offering
the burnt-offering."

This sort of offering, we are told above, Job offered continually; and
this also was according to the law, [Exo
29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042.md) : "This shall be a continual
burnt-offering throughout your generations." See also [Num
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#003.md), [Num
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#006.md), [Num
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#010.md), [Num
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#015.md), [Num
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#024.md), [Num
28:31](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#031.md).

This custom was observed after the captivity, [Ezr
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#005.md) : "They offered the continual
burnt-offering: and of every one that offered a freewill-offering." See
also [Neh 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#033.md). Ezekiel, who
prophesied during the captivity, enjoins this positively, [Eze
46:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#013.md) : "Thou shalt daily prepare a
burnt-offering unto the Lord; thou shalt prepare it every morning."

Job appears to have thought that his children might have sinned through
ignorance, or sinned privately; and it was consequently necessary to
make the due sacrifices to God in order to prevent his wrath and their
punishment; he therefore offered the burnt-offering, which was
prescribed by the law in cases of sins committed through ignorance. See
the ordinances Leviticus 4:1-35; [Lev
5:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015.md), and particularly [Num
15:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#024.md). I think it may be fairly
presumed that the offerings which Job made for his children were in
reference to these laws.

The worship of the sun, moon, and stars, as being the most prevalent and
most seductive idolatry, was very expressly forbidden by the law, [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019.md) : "Take heed, lest thou lift up
thine eyes to heaven; and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the
stars, even all the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them,
and serve them." Job purges himself from this species of idolatry, [Job
31:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026.md) : "If I beheld the sun when
it shined, or the moon walking in brightness, and my heart hath been
secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand: this also were an
iniquity to be punished by the judge; for I should have denied the God
that is above."

He clears himself also from adultery in reference to the law enacted
against that sin, [Job 31:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#009.md) : "If
mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my
neighbor's door; then let my wife grind to another: for this is a
heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges." See
the law against this sin, [Exo 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014.md),
[Exo 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017.md) : "Thou shalt not commit
adultery: thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's wife." [Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010.md) : "The man that committeth
adultery with another man's wife shall surely be put to death;" see [Deu
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022.md). And for the judge's office in
such cases, see [Deu 17:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#009.md) : "Thou
shalt come unto the priests and Levites, and unto the judge that shall
be in those days; and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment."
[Sa1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025.md) : "If one man sin against
another, the judge shall judge him."

The following will, I think, be considered an evident allusion to the
passage of the Red Sea, and the destruction of the proud Egyptian king:
[Job 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#011.md), [Job
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#012.md) : "The pillars of heaven
tremble, and are astonished at his reproof. He divideth the sea with his
power; and by his understanding he smiteth through the proud." These,
with several others that might be adduced, are presumptive proofs that
the writer of this book lived after the giving and establishment of the
law, if not much later, let Job himself live when he might. See other
proofs in the notes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 2](job002.md)

</div>
