<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job035)  [Next](job037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 36:0</span></span>

Elihu vindicates God's justice, and his providential and gracious
dealings with men, [Job 36:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#001).
Promises of God to the obedient, and threatenings to the disobedient;
also promises to the poor and afflicted, [Job
36:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#010). Sundry proofs of God's
merely, with suitable exhortations and cautions, vv. 17-33.

[Job 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 36:1</span></span>

Elihu also proceeded - Mr. Heath gives a good summary of this chapter.
Elihu goes on to lay before Job the impropriety of his behavior towards
God, and desires him to consider how vain it will prove. That God
Almighty will never yield the point; that he will administer impartial
justice to all men, [Job 36:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#002). That
the general course of his providence is to favor the righteous: and that
though he may sometimes correct them in love, yet if they submit
patiently to his fatherly corrections, they shall enjoy all manner of
prosperity; but if they be stubborn, and will not submit, they will only
draw down greater proofs of his displeasure, [Job
36:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#007). He tells him that, had he
followed the former course, he had probably, before now, been restored
to his former condition; whereas, by persisting in the latter course, he
was in a fair way of becoming a signal example of Divine justice, [Job
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#017), [Job
36:18](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#018). He therefore warns him to use
the present opportunity, lest God should cut him off while he was in a
state of rebellion against him; for with God neither wealth, power, nor
any other argument that he could use, would be of any avail, [Job
36:18-26](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#018). That God was infinitely
powerful; there was no resisting him: and infinitely wise, as
sufficiently appeared by his works; there was, therefore, no escaping
out of his hands. That his purity was so great that the sun, in his
presence, was more dim than the smallest ray of light when compared to
that grand luminary; that his holiness was manifest by his aversion to
iniquity; and his goodness, in supplying the wants of his creatures.

[Job 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 36:2</span></span>

That I have yet to speak on God's behalf - I have other proofs to allege
in behalf of God's justice and providence.

[Job 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 36:3</span></span>

I will fetch my knowledge from afar - למרחוק lemerachok, "from the
distant place," meaning probably both remote antiquity and heaven; see
below. I will show thee that all antiquity and experience are on my
side. I can bring proofs from the remotest ages and from the most
distant countries to demonstrate that God is infinitely Wise, and can do
nothing foolish or erroneous; that he is infinitely Powerful, and can
bring all the purposes of his wisdom to effect; that he is infinitely
Good, and can will nothing, and can do nothing that is not good in
itself, and well calculated to do good to his creatures. And I shall
show that his operations in the heavens and on the earth prove and
demonstrate the whole.

And will ascribe righteousness to my Maker - By proving the above
points, the righteous conduct of God, and his gracious government of the
world, will be fully established. That Elihu brings his knowledge from
afar - from every part of the creation, as well as from the Divine
nature - is evident from the end of the chapter.

1\. The omnipotence of God; - God is great.

2\. The eternity of God - We know him not, the number of his years
cannot be found out, [Job 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#026).

3\. From the economy of God in the atmosphere, in dews, rain, vapor, and
the irrigation of the earth; - He maketh small the drops, etc., [Job
36:27](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#027), [Job
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#028).

4\. In the thunder and lightning, by which he performs such wonders in
the atmosphere, and executes such judgments in the world; - Also who can
understand the noise of his tabernacle? He spreadeth his light upon it.
He judgeth the people, etc., [Job
36:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#029).

[Job 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 36:4</span></span>

My words shall not be false - My words shall be truth without falsity.

He that is perfect in knowledge is with thee - "The perfection of
knowledge is with thee." Thou art a sensible, well-informed man, and
will be able to judge of what I say.

[Job 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 36:5</span></span>

God is mighty and despiseth not any - He reproaches no man for his want
of knowledge. If any man lack wisdom, he may come to God, who giveth
liberally, and upbraideth not. I prefer this to the passive sense, will
not be despised.

He is mighty - Literally, "He is mighty in strength of heart;" he can
never be terrified nor alarmed.

[Job 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 36:6</span></span>

He preserveth not the life - He will not give life to the wicked; all
such forfeit life by their transgressions.

But giveth right - Justice will he give to the afflicted or humble,
עניים aniyim.

[Job 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 36:7</span></span>

He withdraweth not his eyes - Exactly similar to those words of David,
[Psa 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015) : "The eyes of the Lord are
upon the righteous."

But with kings are they on the throne - I think the words should be read
thus: - "But with kings upon the throne shall he place them; and they
shall be exalted for ever." The word וישיבם vaiyeshibem, he will
establish or place them, should be added to the first clause, as I have
done; and then the sense becomes much clearer. Instead of לנצח fo da
lanetsach, forever, perhaps to victory would be a better sense: "But
with kings upon the throne will he place them; and they shall be exalted
or triumph to victory." This is precisely the same idea, and conveyed in
nearly the same words, as that of our Lord: - "To him that overcometh
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and
am set down with my Father in his throne;" [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021). "Unto him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings and
priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory," etc.; [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006).

[Job 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 36:8</span></span>

And if they be bound in fetters - These are means which God uses, not of
punishment, but of correction.

[Job 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 36:9</span></span>

He showeth them their work - He shows them the exceeding sinfulness of
sin.

That they have exceeded - יתגברו yithgabbaru, "that they have
strengthened themselves," and did not trust in the living God; and
therefore they would not help themselves when trouble came.

[Job 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 36:10</span></span>

He openeth also their ear - He gives them to understand the reason why
they are thus corrected, and commands them to return from those
iniquities which have induced him to visit them with afflictions and
distresses.

[Job 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 36:11</span></span>

If they obey and serve him - There may appear in the course of
Providence to be some exceptions to this general rule; but it is most
true, that this is literally or spiritually fulfilled to all the genuine
followers of God. Every man is happy, in whatsoever circumstances, whose
heart is unreservedly dedicated to his Maker.

[Job 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 36:12</span></span>

But if they obey not - This also is a general rule, from which, in the
course of Providence, there are only few, and those only apparent,
deviations. Instead of they shall perish by the sword, the meaning of
the Hebrew בשלח יעברו beshelach yaaboru, is, "By a dart they shall pass
by." They shall be in continual dangers, and often fall before they have
lived out half their days. Mr. Good translates: They pass by as an
arrow. The Vulgate: Transibunt per gladium. "They shall pass away by the
sword."

[Job 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 36:13</span></span>

But the hypocrites in heart - חנפי chanphey, the profligates, the
impious, those who have neither the form nor the power of godliness. The
hypocrite is he who has the form but not the power, though he wishes to
be thought as inwardly righteous as he is outwardly correct; and he
takes up the profession of religion only to serve secular ends. This is
not the meaning of the word in the book of Job, where it frequently
occurs.

They cry not - "Though he binds them, yet they cry not." They are too
obstinate to humble themselves even under the mighty hand of God.

[Job 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 36:14</span></span>

They die in youth - Exactly what the psalmist says, "Bloody and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days," [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023). Literally, the words of Elihu
are, "They shall die in the youth of their soul."

Their life is among the unclean - בקדשים bakedeshim, among the whores,
harlots, prostitutes, and sodomites. In this sense the word is used,
though it also signifies consecrated persons; but we know that in
idolatry characters of this kind were consecrated to Baal and Ashtaroth,
Venus, Priapus, etc. Mr. Good translates the rabble. The Septuagint:
Their life shalt be wounded by the angels.

[Job 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 36:15</span></span>

And openeth their ears in oppression - He will let them know for what
end they are afflicted, and why he permits them to be oppressed. The
word יגל yigel might be translated he shall make them exult, or sing
with joy, in oppression; like the three Hebrews in the burning fiery
furnace.

[Job 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 36:16</span></span>

Even so would he have removed thee - If thou hadst turned to, obeyed,
and served him, thy present state would have been widely different from
what it is.

[Job 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 36:17</span></span>

But thou hast fulfilled the judgment of the wicked - As thou art acting
like the wicked, so God deals with thee as he deals with them. Elihu is
not a whit behind Job's other friends. None of them seems to have known
any thing of the permission given by God to Satan to afflict and torment
an innocent man.

[Job 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 36:18</span></span>

Because there is wrath - This is a time in which God is punishing the
wicked; take heed lest thou be cut off in a moment. Redeem the time; the
days are evil.

Then a great ransom - When he determines to destroy, who can save?

[Job 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 36:20</span></span>

Desire not the night - Thou hast wished for death; (here called night);
desire it not; leave that with God. If he hear thee, and send death,
thou mayest be cut off in a way at which thy soul would shudder.

[Job 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 36:21</span></span>

Regard not iniquity - It is sinful to entertain such wishes; it is an
insult to the providence of God. He sends affliction; he knows this to
be best for thee: but thou hast preferred death to affliction, thereby
setting thy wisdom against the wisdom of God. Many in affliction, long
for death; and yet they are not prepared to appear before God! What
madness is this! If he takes them at their wish, they are ruined for
ever. Affliction may be the means of their salvation; the wished-for
death, of their eternal destruction.

[Job 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 36:22</span></span>

God exalteth by his power - He has brought thee low, but he can raise
thee up. Thou art not yet out of the reach of his mercy. Thy affliction
is a proof that he acts towards thee as a merciful Parent. He knows what
is best to be done; he teaches thee how thou shouldst suffer and
improve. Why sin against his kindness? Who can teach like him?

[Job 36:23](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 36:23</span></span>

Who hath enjoined him his way - Has God taken instructions from any man
how he shall govern the world?

Thou hast wrought iniquity? - Who can prove, in the whole compass of the
creation, that there is one thing imperfect, superabundant, or out of
its place? Who can show that there is, in the course of the Divine
providence, one unrighteous, cruel, or unwise act? All the cunning and
wickedness of man have never been able to find out the smallest flaw in
the work of God.

[Job 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 36:24</span></span>

Remember that thou magnify his work - Take this into consideration;
instead of fretting against the dispensations of Divine providence, and
quarrelling with thy Maker, attentively survey his works; consider the
operation of his hands; and see the proofs of his wisdom in the plan of
all, of his power in the production and support of all, and of his
goodness in the end for which all have been made, and to which every
operation in nature most obviously tends; and then magnify his work.
Speak of him as thou shalt find; let the visible works of thy Maker
prove to thee his eternal power and Godhead, and let nature lead thee to
the Creator.

[Job 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 36:25</span></span>

Every man may see it - He who says he can examine the earth with a
philosophic eye, and the heavens with the eye of an astronomer, and yet
says he cannot see in them a system of infinite skill and contrivance,
must be ignorant of science, or lie against his conscience, and be
utterly unworthy of confidence or respect.

[Job 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 36:26</span></span>

God is great - He is omnipotent.

We know him not - He is unsearchable.

Neither can the number of his years be searched out - He is eternal.

These three propositions are an ample foundation for endless
disquisition. As to paraphrase and comment, they need none in this
place; they are too profound, comprehensive, and sublime.

[Job 36:27](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 36:27</span></span>

He maketh small the drops of water - This appears simply to refer to
evaporation, and perhaps it would be better to translate יגרע yegara,
"he exhales;" detaches the smallest particles of the aqueous mass from
the surface in order to form clouds, as reservoirs for the purpose of
furnishing rain for the watering of the earth. God is seen in little
things, as well as great things; and the inconceivably little, as well
as the stupendously great, are equally the work of Omnipotence.

They pour down rain - These exceedingly minute drops or vapor become
collected in clouds; and then, when agitated by winds, etc. many
particles being united, they become too heavy to be sustained by the air
in which they before were suspended, and so fall down in rain, which is
either a mist, a drizzle, a shower, a storm, or a waterspout, according
to the influence of different winds, or the presence and quantum of the
electric fluid. And all this is proportioned, לאדו le-edo, "to its
vapor," to the quantity of the fluid evaporated and condensed into
clouds.

[Job 36:28](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 36:28</span></span>

Which the clouds do drop - In proportion to the evaporation will be the
clouds or masses of volatilized and suspended vapor; and in proportion
to this will be the quantum of rain which in different forms will fall
upon the earth. There is a remarkable addition to this verse in the
Septuagint. I shall insert the whole verse: Ῥυησονται παλαιωματα,
εσκιασε δε νεφη επι αμυθητῳ βροτῳ· ὡραν εθετο κτηνεσιν, οιδασι δε κοιτης
ταξιν· επι τουτοις πασιν ουκ εξισταται σου ἡ διανοια, ουδε διαλλασσεται
σου ἡ καρδια απο σωματος; "The rains descend, and the clouds cover with
their shadows multitudes of men: he hath appointed to animals to know
the order of their dwellings. At the contemplation of these things is
not thy mind transported, and thy heart ready to part from thy body?"

[Job 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 36:29</span></span>

Can any understand the spreadings of the clouds - Though the vapor
appear to be fortuitously raised, and subject, when suspended in the
atmosphere, to innumerable accidents, to different winds and currents
which might drive it all to the sandy deserts, or direct its course so
that it should fall again into the great deep from which it has been
exhaled, without watering and refreshing the earth; yet so does the good
and wise providence of God manage this matter, that every part of the
arable terrene surface receives an ample supply; and in every place,
where requisite, it may be truly said that "The rain cometh down, and
the snow from heaven, and water the earth, and cause it to bring forth
and bud, that it may minister seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater." In Egypt, where there is little or no rain, the earth is watered
by the annual inundation of the Nile; there, because this system of
evaporation is not necessary, it does not exist. Who can account for
this economy? How are these clouds so judiciously and effectually spread
through the atmosphere, so as to supply the wants of the earth, of men,
and of cattle? I ask, with Elihu, "Who can understand the spreadings of
these clouds?" And I should like to see that volunteer in the solution
of paradoxes who would step forward and say, I am the man.

The noise of his tabernacle? - By the tabernacle we may understand the
whole firmament or atmospheric expansion; the place where the Almighty
seems more particularly to dwell; whence he sends forth the rain of his
strength, and the thunder of his power. The noise must refer to the
blowing of winds and tempests. or to the claps, peals, and rattling of
thunder, by means of the electric fluid.

[Job 36:30](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 36:30</span></span>

He spreadeth his light upon it - Or, as Mr. Good translates, "He
throweth forth from it his flash." These two verses may both have an
allusion to the sudden rarefaction of that part of the atmosphere whence
the thunder proceeds, by the agency of the electric fluid; the rushing
in of the air on each side to restore the equilibrium, which the passage
of the fire had before destroyed. The noise produced by this sudden
rushing in of the air, as well as that occasioned by the ignition of the
hydrogen gas, which is one of the constituents of water, is the thunder
of his tabernacle, viz., the atmosphere, where God appears, in such
cases, to be manifesting his presence and his power. Elihu says that God
spreadeth his light upon it. This is spoken in reference to the flashes
and coruscations of lightning in the time of thunder storms, when, even
in a dark night, a sudden flash illuminates for a moment the surface of
the earth under that place.

And covereth the bottom of the sea - He doth whatsoever it pleaseth him
in the heavens above, in the earth beneath, in the sea, and in all deep
places. Yea, the depths of the sea are as much under his control and
influence as the atmosphere, and its whole collection of vapours,
meteors, and galvanic and electric fluids.

[Job 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 36:31</span></span>

By them judgeth he the people - He makes storms, tempests, winds,
hurricanes, tornadoes, thunder and lightning, drought and inundation,
the instruments of his justice, to punish rebellious nations.

He giveth meat in abundance - Though by these he punishes offenders, yet
through the same, as instruments, he provides for the wants of men and
animals in general. Storms, tempests, and hurricanes, agitate the lower
regions of the atmosphere, disperse noxious vapours, and thus render it
fit for respiration; and without these it would soon become a stagnant,
putrid, and deadly mass, in which neither animals could live, nor
vegetables thrive. And by dews, rains, snows, frosts, winds, cold, and
heat, he fructifies the earth, and causes it to bring forth abundantly,
so that every thing living is filled with plenteousness. Some critics
translate this latter clause thus: - He passeth sentence amain. I cannot
see this meaning in the original words. Not one of the versions has so
understood them; nor does this translation, supposing even that the
Hebrew would bear it, give so fine and so elegant an idea as that of the
common version. I always feel reluctant to give a sense in any case that
is not supported in some of its parts by any of the ancient versions,
and more especially when it is contrary to the whole of them; and still
more particularly when opposed to the Arabic, which in the Book of Job,
containing so many Arabisms, I consider to be of very great importance.

[Job 36:32](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 36:32</span></span>

With clouds he covereth the light - This is all extraordinary saying, על
כפים כמה אור al cappayim kissah or, which Mr. Good translates, "He
brandisheth the blaze athwart the concave." The Vulgate, with which all
the other versions less or more agree, has, In manibus abscondit lucem,
"In his hands he hideth the light;" or, more literally, "By the hollow
of his hands (כפים cappayim) he concealeth the light, (אור or,") the
fountain of light, i.e., the Sun.

And commandeth it not to shine by the cloud that cometh betwixt - I am
afraid this is no translation of the original. Old Coverdale is better:
- And at his commandement it commeth agayne; which is a near copy of the
Vulgate. Here again Mr. Good departs from all the versions, both ancient
and modern, by translating thus: - "And launcheth his penetrating bolt."
Dr. Stock, in my opinion, comes nearer the original and the versions in
his translation: -

"And giveth charge as to what it shall meet."

The mending of the text by conjecture, to which we should only recur in
desperate necessity, has furnished Mr. Good and Reiske with the above
translation. For my own part, I must acknowledge an extreme difficulty
both here and in the concluding verse, on which I am unwilling to lay a
correcting hand. I think something of the doctrine of eclipses is here
referred to; the defect of the solar light, by the interposition of the
moon. So in the time of an eclipse God is represented as covering the
body of the sun with the hollow of his hand, and thus obscuring the
solar light, and then removing his hand so as to permit it to
re-illuminate the earth.

Mr. Good gets his translation by dividing the words in a different
manner from the present text. I shall give both: -

Hebrew:

ויצו עליה במפגיע

Vayetsav aleyha bemaphgia

Mr. Good:

ויצוע ליהב מפגיע

Veyezvo liahbe mapegio.

Of which he learnedly contends, "And launcheth his penetrating bolt," is
the literal sense. The change here made, to produce the above meaning,
is not a violent one; and I must leave the reader to judge of its
importance.

[Job 36:33](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">job 36:33</span></span>

The noise thereof showeth concerning it, the cattle also concerning the
vapor - I think this translation very unhappy. I shall give each
hemistich in the original: -

יגיד עליו רעו

Yaggid alaiv reo

מקנה אף על עולה

Mikneh aph al oleh.

I think this may be translated without any violence to any word in the
text: -

Its loud noise (or his thunder) shall proclaim concerning him;

A magazine of wrath against iniquity.

This is literal, and gives, in my opinion, a proper meaning of the
passage, and one in strict connection with the context. And it is worthy
of remark that every wicked man trembles at the noise of thunder and the
flash of lightning, and considers this a treasury of Divine wrath,
emphatically called among us the artillery of the skies; and whenever
the noise is heard, it is considered the voice of God. Thus the thunder
declares concerning him. The next chapter, which is a continuation of
the subject here, confirms and illustrates this meaning. For יגיד
yaggid, Houbigant reads יניד yanid; and for מקנה mikneh, מקנאת
mikkinath; and translates thus: "He agitates with himself his thunder,
from the indignation of his wrath against iniquity."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 37](job037)

</div>
