<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job019)  [Next](job021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 20:0</span></span>

Zophar answers Job, and largely details the wretchedness of the wicked
and the hypocrite; shows that the rejoicing of such is short and
transitory, [Job 20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#001). That he is
punished in his family and in his person, [Job
20:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#010). That he shall be stripped of
his ill-gotten wealth, and shall be in misery, though in the midst of
affluence, [Job 20:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015). He shall at
last die a violent death, and his family and property be finally
destroyed, [Job 20:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024).

[Job 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 20:2</span></span>

Therefore do my thoughts - It has already been observed that Zophar was
the most inveterate of all Job's enemies, for we really must cease to
call them friends. He sets no bounds to his invective, and outrages
every rule of charity. A man of such a bitter spirit must have been, in
general, very unhappy. With him Job is, by insinuation, every thing that
is base, vile, and hypocritical. Mr. Good translates this verse thus:
"Whither would my tumult transport me? And how far my agitation within
me?" This is all the modesty that appears in Zophar's discourse. He
acknowledges that he is pressed by the impetuosity of his spirit to
reply to Job's self-vindication. The original is variously translated,
but the sense is as above.

For this I make haste - ובעבור חושי בי ubaabur chushi bi, there is
sensibility in me, and my feelings provoke me to reply.

[Job 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 20:3</span></span>

I have heard the check of my reproach - Some suppose that Zophar quotes
the words of Job, and that some words should be supplied to indicate
this meaning; e.g., "I have heard (sayest thou) the check or charge of
my reproach?" Or it may refer to what Job says of Zophar and his
companions, [Job 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#002), [Job
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003) : How long will ye vex may soul -
these ten times have ye reproached me. Zophar therefore assumes his old
ground, and retracts nothing of what he had said. Like many of his own
complexion in the present day, he was determined to believe that his
judgment was infallible, and that he could not err.

[Job 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 20:4</span></span>

Knowest thou not this of old - This is a maxim as ancient as the world;
it began with the first man: A wicked man shall triumph but a short
time; God will destroy the proud doer.

Since man was placed upon earth - Literally, since Adam was placed on
the earth; that is, since the fall, wickedness and hypocrisy have
existed; but they have never triumphed long. Thou hast lately been
expressing confidence in reference to a general judgment; but such is
thy character, that thou hast little reason to anticipate with any joy
the decisions of that day.

[Job 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 20:6</span></span>

Though his excellency mount up to the heavens - Probably referring to
the original state of Adam, of whose fall he appears to have spoken,
[Job 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004). He was created in the image
of God; but by his sin against his Maker he fell into wretchedness,
misery, death, and destruction.

[Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 20:7</span></span>

He shall perish for ever - He is dust, and shall return to the dust from
which he was taken. Zophar here hints his disbelief in that doctrine,
the resurrection of the body, which Job had so solemnly asserted in the
preceding chapter. Or he might have been like some in the present day,
who believe that the wicked shall be annihilated, and the bodies of the
righteous only be raised from the dead; but I know of no scripture by
which such a doctrine is confirmed.

Like his own dung - His reputation shall be abominable, and his putrid
carcass shall resemble his own excrement. A speech that partakes as much
of the malevolence as of the asperity of Zophar's spirit.

[Job 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 20:8</span></span>

He shall fly away as a dream - Instead of rising again from corruption,
as thou hast asserted, ([Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026)),
with a new body, his flesh shall rot in the earth, and his spirit be
dissipated like a vapor; and, like a vision of the night, nothing shall
remain but the bare impression that such a creature had once existed,
but shall appear no more for ever.

[Job 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 20:10</span></span>

His children shall seek to please the poor - They shall be reduced to
the lowest degree of poverty and want, so as to be obliged to become
servants to the poor. Cursed be Ham, a servant of servants shall he be.
There are cases where the poor actually serve the poor; and this is the
lowest or most abject state of poverty.

His hands shall restore their goods - He shall be obliged to restore the
goods that he has taken by violence. Mr. Good translates: His branches
shall be involved in his iniquity; i.e., his children shall suffer on
his account. "His own hands shall render to himself the evil that he has
done to others." - Calmet. The clause is variously translated.

[Job 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 20:11</span></span>

His bones are full of the sin of his youth - Our translators have
followed the Vulgate, Ossa ejus implebuntur vitiis adolescentiae ejus;
"his bones shall be filled with the sins of his youth." The Syriac and
Arabic have, his bones are full of marrow; and the Targum is to the same
sense. At first view it might appear that Zophar refers to those
infirmities in old age, which are the consequences of youthful vices and
irregularities. עלומו alumau, which we translate his youth, may be
rendered his hidden things; as if he had said, his secret vices bring
down his strength to the dust. For this rendering Rosenmuller contends,
and several other German critics. Mr. Good contends for the same.

[Job 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 20:12</span></span>

Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth - This seems to refer to the
secret sins mentioned above.

Hide it under his tongue - This and the four following verses contain an
allegory; and the reference is to a man who, instead of taking wholesome
food, takes what is poisonous, and is so delighted with it because it is
sweet, that he rolls it under his tongue, and will scarcely let it down
into his stomach, he is so delighted with the taste; "he spares it, and
forsakes it not, but keeps it still within his mouth," [Job
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#013). "But when he swallows it, it is
turned to the gall of asps within him," [Job
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014), which shall corrode and torture
his bowels.

[Job 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 20:15</span></span>

He shall vomit them up again - This is also an allusion to an effect of
most ordinary poisons; they occasion a nausea, and often excruciating
vomiting; nature striving to eject what it knows, if retained, will be
its bane.

[Job 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 20:16</span></span>

He shall suck the poison of asps - That delicious morsel, that secret,
easily-besetting sin, so palatable, and so pleasurable, shall act on the
life of his soul, as the poison of asps would do on the life of his
body. The poison is called the gall of asps, it being anciently supposed
that the poison of serpents consists in their gall, which is thought to
be copiously exuded when those animals are enraged; as it has been often
seen that their bite is not poisonous when they are not angry. Pliny, in
speaking of the various parts of animals, Hist. Nat. lib. xi., c. 37,
states, from this circumstance, that in the gall, the poison of serpents
consists; ne quis miretur id (fel) venenum esse serpentum. And in lib.
xxviii., c. 9, he ranks the gall of horses among the poisons: Damnatur
(fel) equinum tantum inter venena. We see, therefore, that the gall was
considered to be the source whence the poison of serpents was generated,
not only in Arabia, but also in Italy.

[Job 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 20:17</span></span>

He shall not see the rivers - Mr. Good has the following judicious note
on this passage: "Honey and butter are the common results of a rich,
well-watered pasturage, offering a perpetual banquet of grass to kine,
and of nectar to bees; and thus loading the possessor with the most
luscious luxuries of pastoral life, peculiarly so before the discovery
of the means of obtaining sugar. The expression appears to have been
proverbial; and is certainly used here to denote a very high degree of
temporal prosperity." See also [Job
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006). To the Hebrews such expressions
were quite familiar. See [Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008);
[Exo 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#005); [Exo
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003); [Kg2
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#032); [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020), and elsewhere. The Greek and
Roman writers abound in such images. Milk and honey were such delicacies
with the ancients, that Pindar compares his song to them for its
smoothness and sweetness: -

Χαιρε

Φιλος. Εγω τοδε τοι

Πεμπω μεμιγμενον μελι λευκῳ

Συν γαλακτι· κιρναμενα δ' εερς' αμφεπει πομ' αοιδιμον, Αιολισιν εν
πνοαισιν αυλων.

Pind. Nem. iii., ver. 133.

"Hail, friend! to thee I tune my song;

For thee its mingled sweets prepare;

Mellifluous accents pour along;

Verse, pure as milk, to thee I bear;

On all thy actions falls the dew of praise;

Pierian draughts thy thirst of fame assuage,

And breathing flutes thy songs of triumph raise."

J. B. C.

Qui te, Pollio, amat, veniat, quo te quoque gaudet;

Mella fluant illi, ferat et rubus asper amomum.

Virg. Ecl. iii., ver. 88.

"Who Pollio loves, and who his muse admires;

Let Pollio's fortune crown his full desires

Let myrrh, instead of thorn, his fences fill;

And showers of honey from his oaks distil!"

Dryden.

Ovid, describing the golden age, employs the same image: -

Flumina jam lactis, jam flumina nectaris ibant;

Flavaque de viridi stillabant ilice mella.

Metam. lib. i., ver. 3.

"Floods were with milk, and floods with nectar, fill'd;

And honey from the sweating oak distill'd."

Dryden.

Horace employs a similar image in nearly the same words: -

Mella cava manant ex ilice, montibus altis;

Levis crepante lympha desilit pede.

Epod. xvi., ver. 46.

"From hollow oaks, where honey'd streams distil,

And bounds with noisy foot the pebbled rill."

Francis.

Job employs the same metaphor, [Job
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006) : -

When I washed my steps with butter,

And the rock poured out to me rivers of oil.

Isaiah, also, [Isa 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022), uses the same
when describing the produce of a heifer and two ewes: -

From the plenty of milk that they shall produce,

He shall eat butter: butter and honey shall he eat,

Whosoever is left in the midst of the land.

And Joel, [Joe 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018) : -

And it shall come to pass in that day,

The mountains shall drop down new wine,

And the hills shall flow with milk;

And all the rivers of Judah shall flow with waters.

These expressions denote fertility and abundance; and are often employed
to point out the excellence of the promised land, which is frequently
denominated a land flowing with milk and honey: and even the superior
blessings of the Gospel are thus characterized, [Isa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001).

[Job 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 20:18</span></span>

That which he laboureth for shall he restore - I prefer here the reading
of the Arabic, which is also supported by the Syriac, and is much nearer
to the Hebrew text than the common version. He shall return to labor,
but he shall not eat; he shall toil, and not be permitted to enjoy the
fruit of his labor. The whole of this verse Mr. Good thus translates: -

"To labor shall he return, but he shall not eat.

A dearth his recompense: yea, nothing shall he taste."

It may be inquired how Mr. Good arrives at this meaning. It is by
considering the word יעלס yaalos, which we translate he shall rejoice,
as the Arabic (Arabic) alasa, "he ate, drank, tasted;" and the word כהיל
kehil, which we make a compound word, keeheyl, "according to substance,"
to be the pure Arabic word (Arabic) kahala, "it was fruitless," applied
to a year of dearth: hence kahlan, "a barren year." Conceiving these two
to be pure Arabic words, for which he seems to have sufficient
authority, he renders תמורתו temuratho, his recompense, as in [Job
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#031), and not restitution, as here.
The general meaning is, He shall labor and toil, but shall not reap, for
God shall send on his land blasting and mildew. Houbigant translates the
verse thus: Reddet labore partum; neque id absumet; copiosae fuerunt
mercaturae ejus, sed illis non fruetur. "He shall restore what he gained
by labor, nor shall he consume it; his merchandises were abundant, but
he shall not enjoy them." O, how doctors disagree! Old Coverdale gives a
good sense, which is no unfrequent thing with this venerable translator:
-

But laboure shal he, and yet have nothinge to eate; great travayle shal
he make for riches, but he shal not enjoye them.

[Job 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 20:19</span></span>

He hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor - Literally, He hath broken
in pieces the forsaken of the poor; כי רצץ עזב דלים ki ritstsats azab
dallim. The poor have fled from famine, and left their children behind
them; and this hard-hearted wretch, meaning Job all the while, has
suffered them to perish, when he might have saved them alive.

He hath violently taken away a house which he builded not - Or rather,
He hath thrown down a house, and hath not rebuilt it. By neglecting or
destroying the forsaken orphans of the poor, mentioned above, he has
destroyed a house, (a family), while he might, by helping the wretched,
have preserved the family from becoming extinct.

[Job 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 20:20</span></span>

Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly - I have already
remarked that the word בטן beten, which we translate belly, often means
in the sacred Scriptures the whole of the human trunk; the regions of
the thorax and abdomen, with their contents; the heart, lungs, liver,
etc., and consequently all the thoughts, purposes, and inclinations of
the mind, of which those viscera were supposed to be the functionaries.
The meaning seems to be, "He shall never be satisfied; he shall have an
endless desire after secular good, and shall never be able to obtain
what he covets."

[Job 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 20:21</span></span>

There shall none of his meat be left - Coverdale translates thus: He
devoured so gredily, that he left nothinge behynde, therefore his goodes
shal not prospere. He shall be stripped of every thing.

[Job 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 20:22</span></span>

In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits - This is a
fine saying, and few of the menders of Job's text have been able to
improve the version. It is literally true of every great, rich, wicked
man; he has no God, and anxieties and perplexities torment him,
notwithstanding he has his portion in this life.

Every hand of the wicked shall come upon him - All kinds of misery shall
be his portion. Coverdale translates: Though he had plenteousnesse of
every thinge, yet was he poore; and, therefore, he is but a wretch on
every syde.

[Job 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 20:23</span></span>

When he is about to fill his belly - Here seems a plain allusion to the
lustings of the children of Israel in the desert. God showered down
quails upon them, and showered down his wrath while the flesh was in
their mouth. The allusion is too plain to be mistaken; and this gives
some countenance to the bishop of Killala's version of [Job
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020) -

"Because he acknowledged not the quail in his stomach,

In the midst of his delight he shall not escape."

That שלו, which we translate quietness, means a quail, also the history
of the Hebrews' lustings, [Exo
16:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002), and [Num
11:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031), sufficiently proves. Let the
reader mark all the expressions here, [Job
20:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020), and compare them with [Num
11:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031), and he will probably be of
opinion that Zophar has that history immediately in view, which speaks
of the Hebrews' murmurings for bread and flesh, and the miraculous
showers of manna and quails, and the judgments that fell on them for
their murmurings. Let us compare a few passages: -

[Job 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020). He shall not feel
quietness - שלו selav, the quail. "He shall not save of that which he
desired." [Job 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021) : "There shall
none of his meat be left." [Exo 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#019)
: "Let no man leave of it till the morning."

[Job 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#022). In the fullness of his
sufficiency, he shall be in straits - [Exo
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#020) : "But some of them left of it
until the morning, and it bred worms and stank."

[Job 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023). When he is about to fill
his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him, and shall rain
it upon him while he is eating - [Num
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033) : "And while the flesh was yet
between their teeth, ere it was chewed, the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very
great plague." [Psa 78:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026) : "He
rained flesh upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like as the sand of
the sea: so they did eat and were filled-but, while the meat was in
their mouth, the wrath of God came upon them," etc. These show to what
Zophar refers.

[Job 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 20:24</span></span>

He shall flee from the iron weapon - Or, "Though he should flee from the
iron armor, the brazen bow should strike him through." So that yf he fle
the yron weapens, he shal be shott with the stele bow - Coverdale. That
is, he shall most certainly perish: all kinds of deaths await him.

[Job 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 20:25</span></span>

It is drawn, and cometh out - This refers to archery: The arrow is drawn
out of the sheaf or quiver, and discharged from the bow against its
mark, and pierces the vitals, and passes through the body. So Coverdale
- The arowe shal be taken forth, and go out at his backe.

[Job 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 20:26</span></span>

A fire not blown shall consume him - As Zophar is here showing that the
wicked cannot escape from the Divine judgments; so he points out the
different instruments which God employs for their destruction. The wrath
of God - any secret or supernatural curse. The iron weapon - the spear
or such like. The bow, and its swift-flying arrow.

Darkness - deep horror and perplexity. A fire not blown - a supernatural
fire; lightning: such as fell on Korah, and his company, to whose
destruction there is probably here an allusion: hence the words, It
shall go ill with him who is left in his tabernacle. "And the Lord spake
unto Moses and Aaron, Separate yourselves from among this congregation,
that I may consume them in a moment. Get ye up from about the tabernacle
of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Depart from the tents of these wicked men.
There came out a fire from the Lord and consumed the two hundred and
fifty men that offered incense;" [Num
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#020), etc.

[Job 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 20:27</span></span>

The heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise up
against him - Another allusion, if I mistake not, to the destruction of
Korah and his company. The heaven revealed their iniquity; God declared
out of heaven his judgment of their rebellion. "And the glory of the
Lord appeared unto all the congregation;" [Num
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#020), etc. And then the earth rose up
against them. "The ground clave asunder that was under them, and the
earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up; and they went down alive
into the pit, and the earth closed upon them;" [Num
16:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031).

[Job 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 20:28</span></span>

The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in
the day of his wrath - A farther allusion to the punishment of the
rebellious company of Korah, who not only perished themselves, but their
houses also, and their goods. [Num
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032). These examples were all in
point, on the ground assumed by Zophar; and such well-attested facts
would not be passed over by him, had he known the record of them; and
that he did know it, alludes to it, and quotes the very circumstances,
is more than probable.

[Job 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 20:29</span></span>

This is the portion - As God has dealt with the murmuring Israelites,
and with the rebellious sons of Korah, so will he deal with those who
murmur against the dispensations of his providence, and rebel against
his authority. Instead of an earthly portion, and an ecclesiastical
heritage, such as Korah, Dathan, and Abiram sought; they shall have fire
from God to scorch them, and the earth to swallow them up. Dr. Stock,
bishop of Killala, who has noticed the allusion to the quails, and for
which he has been most unmeritedly ridiculed, gives us the following
note on the passage: - "Here I apprehend is a fresh example of the known
usage of Hebrew poets, in adorning their compositions by allusions to
facts in the history of their own people. It has escaped all the
interpreters; and it is the more important, because it fixes the date of
this poem, so far as to prove its having been composed subsequently to
the transgression of Israel, at Kibroth Hattaavah, recorded in [Num
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#033), [Num
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#034). Because the wicked acknowledges
not the quail, that is, the meat with which God has filled his stomach;
but, like the ungrateful Israelites, crammed, and blasphemed his feeder,
as Milton finely expresses it, he shall experience the same punishment
with them, and be cut off in the midst of his enjoyment, as Moses tells
us the people were who lusted." If I mistake not, I have added
considerable strength to the prelate's reasoning, by showing that there
is a reference also to the history of the manna, and to that which
details the rebellion of Korah and his company; and if so, (and they may
dispute who please), it is a proof that the Book of Job is not so old
as, much less older than, the Pentateuch, as some have endeavored to
prove, but with no evidence of success, at least to my mind: a point
which never has been, and I am certain never can be, proved; which has
multitudes of presumptions against it, and not one clear incontestable
fact for it. Mr. Good has done more in this case than any of his
predecessors, and yet Mr. Good has failed; no wonder then that others,
unmerciful criticisers of the bishop of Killala, have failed also, who
had not a tenth part of Mr. Good's learning, nor one-hundredth part of
his critical acumen. It is, however, strange that men cannot suffer
others to differ from them on a subject of confessed difficulty and
comparatively little importance, without raising up the cry of heresy
against them, and treating them with superciliousness and contempt!
These should know, if they are clergymen, whether dignified or not, that
such conduct ill becomes the sacerdotal character; and that ante barbam
docet senes cannot be always spoken to the teacher's advantage. As a
good story is not the worse for being twice told, the following lines
from a clergyman, who, for his humility and piety, was as much an honor
to his vocation as he was to human nature, may not be amiss, in point of
advice to all Warburtonian spirits: -

"Be calm in arguing, for fierceness makes

Error a fault, and truth discourtesy.

Why should I feel another man's mistakes

More than his sickness or his poverty?

In love I should: but anger is not love

Nor wisdom neither; therefore, gently move.

Calmness is great advantage: he that lets

Another chafe, may warm him at his fire,

Mark all his wanderings, and enjoy his frets;

As cunning fencers suffer heat to tire.

Truth dwells not in the clouds: the bow that's there

Doth often aim at, never hit, the sphere."

Hebert.

Dr. Stock's work on the Book of Job will stand honourably on the same
shelf with the best on this difficult subject.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 21](job021)

</div>
