<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh008)  [Next](joh010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 9:0</span></span>

Account of the man who was born blind, [Joh
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001.md). Christ heals him, [Joh
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006.md), [Joh
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007.md). The man is questioned by his
neighbors, [Joh 9:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008.md). He is brought
to the Pharisees, who question him, [Joh
9:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#013.md), and then his parents, [Joh
9:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#018.md). They again interrogate the
man, who, vindicating the conduct of Christ, is excommunicated by them,
[Joh 9:24-34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024.md). Jesus, hearing of the
conduct of the Pharisees, afterwards finds the man, and reveals himself
to him, [Joh 9:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#035.md). He passes
sentence on the obduracy and blindness of the Pharisees, [Joh
9:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039.md).

[John 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 9:1</span></span>

And as Jesus passed by - This chapter is a continuation of the
preceding, and therefore the word Jesus is not in the Greek text: it
begins simply thus - And passing along, και παραγων, etc. Having left
the temple, where the Jews were going to stone him, ([Joh
8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059).md), it is probable our Lord went,
according to his custom, to the mount of Olives. The next day, which was
the Sabbath, [Joh 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#014.md), he met a man
who had been born blind, sitting in some public place, and asking alms
from those who passed by, [Joh 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008.md).

[John 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 9:2</span></span>

Who did sin, this man, or his parents - The doctrine of the
transmigration of souls appears to have been an article in the creed of
the Pharisees, and it was pretty general both among the Greeks and the
Asiatics. The Pythagoreans believed the souls of men were sent into
other bodies for the punishment of some sin which they had committed in
a pre-existent state. This seems to have been the foundation of the
disciples question to our Lord. Did this man sin in a pre-existent
state, that he is punished in this body with blindness? Or, did his
parents commit some sin, for which they are thus plagued in their
offspring?

Most of the Asiatic nations have believed in the doctrine of
transmigration. The Hindoos still hold it; and profess to tell precisely
the sin which the person committed in another body, by the afflictions
which he endures in this: they profess also to tell the cures for these.
For instance, they say the headache is a punishment for having, in a
former state, spoken irrevently to father or mother. Madness is a
punishment for having been disobedient to father or mother, or to one's
spiritual guide. The epilepsy is a punishment for having, in a former
state, administered poison to any one at the command of his master. Pain
in the eyes is a punishment for having, in another body, coveted another
man's wife. Blindness is a punishment for having killed his mother: but
this person they say, before his new birth, will suffer many years'
torment in hell. See many curious particulars relative to this in the
Ayeen Akbery, vol. iii. p. 168-175; and in the Institutes of Menu, chap.
xi. Inst. 48-53.

The Jewish rabbins have had the same belief from the very remotest
antiquity. Origen cites an apocryphal book of the Hebrews, in which the
patriarch Jacob is made to speak thus: I am an angel of God; one of the
first order of spirits. Men call me Jacob, but my true name, which God
has given me, is Israel: Orat. Joseph. apud Orig. Many of the Jewish
doctors have believed that the souls of Adam, Abraham, and Phineas, have
successively animated the great men of their nation. Philo says that the
air is full of spirits, and that some, through their natural propensity,
join themselves to bodies; and that others have an aversion from such a
union. See several other things relative to this point in his treatises,
De Plant. Noe - De Gigantibus - De Confus. Ling. - De Somniis, etc.; and
see Calmet, where he is pretty largely quoted.

The Hindoos believe that the most of their misfortunes arise out of the
sins of a former birth; and, in moments of grief not unfrequently break
out into exclamations like the following: - "Ah! in a former birth how
many sins must I have committed, that I am thus afflicted!" "I am now
suffering for the sins of a former birth; and the sins that I am now
committing are to fill me with misery in a following birth. There is no
end to my sufferings!"

Josephus, Ant. b. xvii. c. 1, s. 3, and War, b. ii. c. 8, s. 14, gives
an account of the doctrine of the Pharisees on this subject. He
intimates that the souls of those only who were pious were permitted to
reanimate human bodies, and this was rather by way of reward than
punishment; and that the souls of the vicious are put into eternal
prisons, where they are continually tormented, and out of which they can
never escape. But it is very likely that Josephus has not told the whole
truth here; and that the doctrine of the Pharisees on this subject was
nearly the same with that of the Papists on purgatory. Those who are
very wicked go irrecoverably to hell; but those who are not so have the
privilege of expiating their venial sins in purgatory. Thus, probably,
is the Pharisean doctrine of the transmigration to be understood. Those
who were comparatively pious went into other bodies, for the expiation
of any remaining guilt which had not been removed previously to a sudden
or premature death, after which they were fully prepared for paradise;
but others who had been incorrigibly wicked were sent at once into hell,
without ever being offered the privilege of amendment, or escape. For
the reasons which may be collected above, much as I reverence Bishop
Pearce, I cannot agree with his note on this passage, where he says that
the words of the disciples should be thus understood: - Who did sin?
This man, that he is blind? or his parents, that he was born so? He
thinks it probable that the disciples did not know that the man was born
blind: if he was, then it was for some sin of his parents - if he was
not born so, then this blindness came unto him as a punishment for some
crime of his own. It may be just necessary to say, that some of the
rabbins believed that it was possible for an infant to sin in the womb,
and to be punished with some bodily infirmity in consequence. See
several examples in Lightfoot on this place.

[John 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 9:3</span></span>

Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents - That is, the blindness
of this person is not occasioned by any sin of his own, nor of his
parents, but has happened in the ordinary course of Divine providence,
and shall now become the instrument of salvation to his soul,
edification to others, and glory to God. Many of the Jews thought that
marks on the body were proofs of sin in the soul. From a like
persuasion, probably arose that proverb among our northern
neighbors-Mark him whom God marks.

[John 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 9:4</span></span>

While it is day - Though I plainly perceive that the cure of this man
will draw down upon me the malice of the Jewish rulers, yet I must
accomplish the work for which I came into the world whole it is day -
while the term of this life of mine shall last. It was about six months
after this that our Lord was crucified. It is very likely that the day
was now declining, and night coming on; and he took occasion from this
circumstance to introduce the elegant metaphor immediately following. By
this we are taught that no opportunity for doing good should be omitted
- Day representing the opportunity: Night, the loss of that opportunity.

[John 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 9:5</span></span>

I am the light of the world - Like the sun, it is my business to
dispense light and heat every where; and to neglect no opportunity that
may offer to enlighten and save the bodies and souls of men. See [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md).

[John 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 9:6</span></span>

Anointed the eyes of the blind man - It would be difficult to find out
the reason which induced our Lord to act thus. It is certain, this
procedure can never be supposed to have been any likely medical means to
restore sight to a man who was born blind; this action, therefore, had
no tendency to assist the miracle. If his eye-lids had been only so
gummed together that they needed nothing but to be suppled and well
washed, it is not likely that this could possibly have been omitted from
his birth until now. The Jews believed that there was some virtue in
spittle to cure the diseases of the eye; but then they always
accompanied this with some charm. Our Lord might make clay with the
spittle to show that no charms or spells were used, and to draw their
attention more particularly to the miracle which he was about to work.
Perhaps the best lesson we can learn from this is: That God will do his
own work in his own way; and, to hide pride from man, will often
accomplish the most beneficial ends by means not only simple or
despicable in themselves, but by such also as appear entirely contrary,
in their nature and operation, to the end proposed to be effected by
them.

[John 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 9:7</span></span>

Siloam - Called also Shiloah, Silos, or Siloa, was a fountain under the
walls of Jerusalem, towards the east, between the city and the brook
Kidron. Calmet thinks that this was the same with En-rogel, or the
fuller's fountain, which is mentioned in [Jos
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007.md); [Jos
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016.md); in [Sa2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#017.md); and in [Kg1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#009.md). Its waters were collected in a
great reservoir for the use of the city; and a stream from it supplied
the pool of Bethesda.

By interpretation, Sent - From the Hebrew שלח shalach, he sent: either
because it was looked upon as a gift sent from God, for the use of the
city; or because its waters were directed or sent by canals or pipes,
into different quarters, for the same purpose. Some think there is an
allusion here to [Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md); that this
fountain was a type of Shiloh, the Christ, the Sent of God; and that it
was to direct the man's mind to the accomplishment of the above prophecy
that our Lord sent him to this fountain. This supposition does not
appear very solid. The Turks have this fountain still in great
veneration, and think the waters of it are good for diseases of the
eyes. Lightfoot says that the spring of Siloam discharged itself by a
double stream into a twofold pool - the upper was called שילוח shiloach
- the lower שלח shelach; the one signifying απεϚαλμενος, sent, the
latter, κωδιων fleeces; and that our Lord marked this point so
particularly, to inform the blind man that it was not to Shelach, but to
Shiloach, that he must go to wash his eyes. These two pools seem to be
referred to in [Isa 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023.md); [Isa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009.md).

[John 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 9:8</span></span>

That he was blind - Ὁτι τυφλος ην: but, instead of this, προσαιτης, when
he begged, or was a beggar, is the reading of ABC\*DKL, seven others,
both the Syriac, both the Arabic, later Persic, Coptic, Ethiopic,
Armenian, Sahidic, Gothic, Slavonic, Vulgate, eight copies of the Itala,
and some of the primitive fathers. This is in all probability the true
reading, and is received by Griesbach into the text.

Beggars in all countries have a language peculiar to themselves. The
language of the Jewish beggars was the following: זבי כי Deserve
something by me - Give me something that God may reward you. רכי ני זכי
גר מך O ye tender-hearted, do yourselves good by me. Another form, which
seems to have been used by such as had formerly been in better
circumstances, was this: סכי כי מה הוינא אסתכל בי מה אנא Look back and
see what I have been; look upon me now, and see what I am. See
Lightfoot.

[John 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 9:9</span></span>

Some said, This is he - This miracle was not wrought in private - nor
before a few persons - nor was it lightly credited. Those who knew him
before were divided in their opinion concerning him: not whether the man
who sat there begging was blind before - for this was known to all; nor,
whether the person now before them saw clearly - for this was now
notorious; but whether this was the person who was born blind, and who
used in a particular place to sit begging.

Others said, He is like him - This was very natural: for certainly the
restoration of his sight must have given him a very different appearance
to what he had before.

[John 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 9:11</span></span>

A man that is called Jesus - The whole of this relation is simple and
artless in the highest degree. The blind man had never seen Jesus, but
he had heard of his name - he felt that he had put something on his
eyes, which he afterwards found to be clay - but how this was made he
could not tell, because he could not see Jesus when he did it; therefore
he does not say, he made clay of spittle - but simply, he made clay, and
spread it upon my eyes. Where a multitude of incidents must necessarily
come into review, imposture and falsehood generally commit themselves,
as it is termed; but, however numerous the circumstances may be in a
relation of fact, simple truth is never embarrassed.

[John 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 9:12</span></span>

Where is he? - They had designed to seize and deliver him up to the
Sanhedrin, as a violater of the law, because he had done this on the
Sabbath day.

[John 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 9:13</span></span>

They brought to the Pharisees - These had the chief rule, and determined
all controversies among the people; in every case of religion, their
judgment was final: the people, now fully convinced that the man had
been cured, brought him to the Pharisees, that they might determine how
this was done, and whether it had been done legally.

[John 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 9:14</span></span>

It was the Sabbath - Some of the ancient rabbins taught, and they have
been followed by some moderns, not much better skilled in physic than
themselves, that the saliva is a cure for several disorders of the eyes;
but the former held this to be contrary to the law, if applied on the
Sabbath. See Lightfoot's Hor. Talm.

[John 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 9:16</span></span>

This man is not of God - He can neither be the Messiah, nor a prophet,
for he has broken the Sabbath. The Jews always argued falsely on this
principle. The law relative to the observation of the Sabbath never
forbade any work but what was of the servile and unnecessary kind. Works
of necessity and mercy never could be forbidden on that day by him whose
name is mercy, and whose nature is love; for the Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath; were it otherwise, the Sabbath would
be rather a curse than a blessing.

How can a man that is a sinner, etc. - They knew very well that though
magicians and impostors might do things apparently miraculous, yet
nothing really good could be performed by them. We might have safely
defied all the magicians in Egypt, who are said to have been so
successful in imitating some of the miracles of Moses, to have opened
the eyes of one blind man, or to have done any essential good either to
the body or to the soul.

And there was a division among them - Σχισμα, a schism, a decided
difference of opinion, which caused a separation of the assembly.

[John 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 9:17</span></span>

He is a prophet - They had intended to lay snares for the poor man,
that, getting him to acknowledge Christ for the Messiah, they might put
him out of the synagogue, [Joh 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022.md),
or put him to death, that such a witness to the Divine power of Christ
might not appear against them. But, as the mercy of God had given him
his sight, so the wisdom of God taught him how to escape the snares laid
for his ruin. On all thy glory there shall be a defense, says the
prophet, [Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005.md). When God gives any
particular mercy or grace, he sends power to preserve it, and wisdom to
improve it. The man said, He is a prophet. Now, according to a Jewish
maxim, a prophet might dispense with the observation of the Sabbath. See
Grotius. If they allow that Jesus was a prophet, then, even in their
sense, he might break the law of the Sabbath, and be guiltless: or, if
they did not allow him to be a prophet, they must account for the
miracle some other way than by the power of God; as from Satan or his
agents no good can proceed - to do this it was impossible. So the wisdom
of God taught the poor man to give them such an answer as put them into
a complete dilemma, from which they could not possibly extricate
themselves.

[John 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 9:18</span></span>

But the Jews did not believe - All the subterfuge they could use was
simply to sin against their conscience, by asserting that the man had
not been blind; but out of this subterfuge they were soon driven by the
testimony of the parents, who, if tried farther on this subject, might
have produced as witness, not only the whole neighborhood, but nearly
the whole city: for it appears the man got his bread by publicly
begging, [Joh 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008.md).

That he had been blind, and received his sight - This clause is omitted
in some MSS., probably because similar words occur immediately after.
There is, however, no evidence against it, sufficient to exclude it from
the test.

[John 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 9:21</span></span>

He is of age - Ἡλικιαν εχει, literally, he has stature, i.e. he is a
full-grown man; and in this sense the phrase is used by the best Greek
writers. See Kypke and Raphelius. Mature age was fixed among the Jews at
thirty years.

[John 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 9:22</span></span>

Put out of the synagogue - That is, excommunicated - separated from all
religious connection with those who worshipped God. This was the lesser
kind of excommunication among the Jews and was termed nidui. The cherem,
or anathema, was not used against the followers of Christ till after the
resurrection.

[John 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 9:24</span></span>

Give God the praise - Having called the man a second time, they
proceeded to deal with him in the most solemn manner; and therefore they
put him to his oath; for the words above were the form of an oath,
proposed by the chief magistrate to those who were to give evidence to
any particular fact, or to attest any thing, as produced by or belonging
to the Lord. See [Jos 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019.md); [Sa1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#005.md), and [Luk
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#018.md). But, while they solemnly put
him to his oath, they endeavored to put their own words in his mouth,
viz. he is a sinner - a pretender to the prophetic character, and a
transgressor of the law of God: - assert this, or you will not please
us.

[John 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 9:25</span></span>

Whereas I was blind, now I see - He pays no attention to their cavils,
nor to their perversion of justice; but, in the simplicity of his heart,
speaks to the fact, of the reality of which he was ready to give them
the most substantial evidence.

[John 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 9:27</span></span>

I have told you already - So he did, [Joh
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#015.md). And did ye not hear? Ye
certainly did. Why then do you wish to hear it again? Is it because ye
wish to become his disciples? The poor man continued steady in his
testimony; and, by putting this question to them, he knew he should soon
put an end to the debate.

[John 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 9:28</span></span>

Then they reviled him - Ελοιδορησαν. Eustathius derives λοιδορια from
λογος, a word, and δορυ, a spear: - they spoke cutting, piercing words.
Solomon talks of some who spoke like the piercings of a sword, [Pro
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#018.md). And the psalmist speaks of
words that are like drawn swords, [Psa
55:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#021.md), words which show that the
person who speaks them has his heart full of murderous intentions; and
that, if he had the same power with a sword as he has with his tongue,
he would destroy him whom he thus reproaches.

We are Moses' disciples - By this they meant that they were genuine
Pharisees; for they did not allow the Sadducees to be disciples of
Moses.

[John 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 9:29</span></span>

We know not from whence he is - As if they had said: We have the fullest
assurance that the commission of Moses was Divine; but we have no proof
that this man has such a commission: and should we leave Moses, and
attach ourselves to this stranger? No.

[John 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 9:30</span></span>

Why herein is a marvellous thing - As if he had said, This is wonderful
indeed! Is it possible that such persons as you are, whose business it
is to distinguish good from evil, and who pretend to know a true from a
false prophet, cannot decide in a case so plain? Has not the man opened
my eyes? Is not the miracle known to all the town; and could any one do
it who was not endued with the power of God?

[John 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 9:31</span></span>

God heareth not sinners - I believe the word ἁμαρτωλων signifies
heathens, or persons not proselyted to the Jewish religion; and
therefore it is put in opposition to θεοσεβης, a worshipper of the true
God. See the note on [Luk 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037.md). But in
what sense may it be said, following our common version, that God
heareth not sinners? When they regard iniquity in their heart - when
they wish to be saved, and yet abide in their sins - when they will not
separate themselves from the workers and works of iniquity. In all these
cases, God heareth not sinners.

[John 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 9:32</span></span>

Since the world began - Εκ του αιωνος, From the age - probably meaning
from the commencement of time. Neither Moses nor the prophets have ever
opened the eyes of a man who was born blind: if this person then were
not the best of beings, would God grant him a privilege which he has
hitherto denied to his choicest favorites?

Opened the eyes of one that was born blind - It will readily appear that
our Lord performed no surgical operation in this cure: the man was born
blind, and he was restored to sight by the power of God; the simple
means used could have had no effect in the cure; the miracle is
therefore complete. That there are cases, in which a person who was born
blind may be restored to sight by surgical means, we know: but no such
means were used by Christ: and it is worthy of remark that, from the
foundation of the world, no person born blind has been restored to
sight, even by surgical operation, till about the year of our Lord,
1728; when the celebrated Dr. Cheselden, by couching the eyes of a young
man, 14 years of age, who had been born blind, restored him to perfect
soundness. This was the effect of well directed surgery: that performed
by Christ was a miracle.

[John 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 9:33</span></span>

If this man were not of God, etc. - A very just conclusion: God is the
fountain of all good: all good must proceed from him, and no good can be
done but through him; if this person were not commissioned by the good
God, he could not perform such beneficent miracles as these.

[John 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 9:34</span></span>

Thou wast altogether born in sins - Thou hast not only been a vile
wretch in some other pre-existent state, but thy parents also have been
grossly iniquitous; therefore thou and they are punished by this
blindness: Thou wast altogether born in sins - thou art no other than a
sinful lump of deformity, and utterly unfit to have any connection with
those who worship God.

And they cast him out - They immediately excommunicated him, as the
margin properly reads - drove him from their assembly with disdain, and
forbade his farther appearing in the worship of God. Thus a simple man,
guided by the Spirit of truth, and continuing steady in his testimony,
utterly confounded the most eminent Jewish doctors. When they had no
longer either reason or argument to oppose to him, as a proof of their
discomfiture and a monument of their reproach and shame, they had
recourse to the secular arm, and thus silenced by political power a
person whom they had neither reason nor religion to withstand. They hare
had since many followers in their crimes. A false religion, supported by
the state, has, by fire and sword silenced those whose truth in the end
annihilated the system of their opponents.

[John 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 9:35</span></span>

Dost thou believe on the Son of God? - This was the same with, Dost thou
believe on the Messiah? for these two characters were inseparable; see
[Joh 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034.md), [Joh
1:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049.md); [Joh
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036.md); [Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016.md); [Mar
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md).

[John 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 9:36</span></span>

Who is he, Lord? - It is very likely that the blind man did not know
that it was Jesus the Christ who now spoke to him; for it is evident he
had never seen him before this time; and he might now see him without
knowing that he was the person by whom he was cured, till our Lord made
that discovery of himself, mentioned in the following verse.

[John 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 9:38</span></span>

And he said, Lord, I believe - That is, I believe thou art the Messiah;
and, to give the fullest proof of the sincerity of his faith, he fell
down before and adored him. Never having seen Jesus before, but simply
knowing that a person of that name had opened his eyes, he had only
considered him as a holy man and a prophet; but now that he sees and
hears him he is convinced of his divinity, and glorifies him as his
Savior. We may hear much of Jesus, but can never know his glories and
excellencies till he has discovered himself to our hearts by his own
Spirit; then we believe on him, trust him with our souls, and trust in
him for our salvation. The word κυριε has two meanings: it signifies
Lord, or Sovereign Ruler, and Sir, a title of civil respect. In the
latter sense it seems evidently used in the 36th verse, because the poor
man did not then know that Jesus was the Messiah; in the former sense it
is used in this verse - now the healed man knew the quality of his
benefactor.

[John 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 9:39</span></span>

For judgment I am come - I am come to manifest and execute the just
judgment of God:

1\. By giving sight to the blind, and light to the Gentiles who sit in
darkness.

2\. By removing the true light from those who, pretending to make a
proper use of it, only abuse the mercy of God.

In a word, salvation shall be taken away from the Jews, because they
reject it; and the kingdom of God shall be given to the Gentiles.

[John 9:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 9:40</span></span>

Are we blind also? - These Pharisees understood Christ as speaking of
blindness in a spiritual sense, and wished to know if he considered them
in that state.

[John 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 9:41</span></span>

If ye were blind - If ye had not had sufficient opportunities to have
acquainted yourselves with my Divine nature, by the unparalleled
miracles which I have wrought before you? and the holy doctrine which I
have preached, then your rejecting me could not be imputed to you as
sin; but because ye say, we see - we are perfectly capable of judging
between a true and false prophet, and can from the Scriptures point out
the Messiah by his works - on this account you are guilty, and your sin
is of no common nature, it remaineth, i.e. it shall not be expiated: as
ye have rejected the Lord from being your deliverer, so the Lord has
rejected you from being his people. When the Scripture speaks of sin
remaining, it is always put in opposition to pardon; for pardon is
termed the taking away of sin, [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md); [Psa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005.md). And this is the proper import of
the phrase, αφεσις των ἁμαρτιων, which occurs so frequently in the
sacred writings.

1\. The history of the man who was born blind and cured by our Lord is,
in every point of view, instructive. His simplicity, his courage, his
constancy, and his gratitude are all so many subjects worthy of
attention and emulation. He certainly confessed the truth at the most
imminent risk of his life; and therefore, as Stephen was the first
martyr for Christianity, this man was the first confessor. The power and
influence of Truth, in supporting its friends and confounding its
adversaries, are well exemplified in him; and not less so, that
providence of God by which he was preserved from the malice of these bad
men. The whole story is related with inimitable simplicity, and cannot
be read by the most cold-hearted without extorting the exclamation, How
forcible are right words?

2\. It has already been remarked that, since the world began, there is
no evidence that any man born blind was ever restored to sight by
surgical means, till the days of Mr. Cheselden, who was a celebrated
surgeon at St. Thomas's Hospital, London. For though, even before the
Christian era, there is reason to believe that both the Greek and Roman
physicians performed operations to remove blindness occasioned by the
cataract, yet we know of none of these ever attempted on the eyes of
those who had been born blind, much less of any such persons being
restored to sight. The cure before us must have been wholly miraculous -
no appropriate means were used to effect it. What was done had rather a
tendency to prevent and destroy sight than to help or restore it. The
blindness in question was probably occasioned by a morbid structure of
the organs of sight; and our Lord, by his sovereign power,
instantaneously restored them to perfect soundness, without the
intervention of any healing process. In this case there could be neither
deception nor collusion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 10](joh010.md)

</div>
