<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh007)  [Next](joh009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 8:0</span></span>

The story of the woman taken in adultery, [Joh
8:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md). Jesus declares himself the
light of the world, [Joh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md). The
Pharisees cavil, [Joh 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013.md). Jesus
answers, and shows his authority, [Joh
8:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014.md). He delivers a second
discourse, in which he convicts them of sin, and foretells their dying
in it, because of their unbelief, [Joh
8:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021.md). They question him; he
answers, and foretells his own death, [Joh
8:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025.md). Many believe on him, in
consequence of this last discourse, [Joh
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030.md). To whom he gives suitable
advice, [Joh 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031.md), [Joh
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032.md). The Jews again cavil, and plead
the nobility and advantages of their birth, [Joh
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033.md). Jesus shows the vanity of their
pretensions, and the wickedness of their hearts, [Joh
8:34-47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md). They blaspheme, and Christ
convicts and reproves them, and asserts his Divine nature, [Joh
8:48-58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md). They attempt to stone him,
[Joh 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md).

[John 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 8:3</span></span>

A woman taken in adultery - Some of the popish writers say that her name
was Susanna; that she was espoused to an old decrepid man, named
Manasseh; that she died a saint in Spain, whither she had followed St.
James. These accounts the judicious Calmet properly terms fables.

It is allowed that adultery was exceedingly common at this time, so
common that they had ceased to put the law in force against it. The
waters of jealousy were no longer drunk, the culprits or those suspected
of this crime, being so very numerous; and the men who were guilty
themselves dared not try their suspected wives, as it was believed the
waters would have no evil effect upon the wife, if the husband himself
had been criminal. See the whole of the process on the waters of
jealousy in the notes on [Num 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#014.md)
(note), etc.; and see at the end of chap. 18 (note).

[John 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 8:5</span></span>

That such should be stoned - It is not strictly true that Moses ordered
adultery in general to be punished by stoning. The law simply says that
the adulterer and the adulteress shall be put to death. [Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010.md); [Deu
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022.md). The rabbins say they were
strangled. This they affirm was the ordinary mode of punishment, where
the species of death was not marked in the law, If the person guilty of
an act of this kind had been betrothed, but not married, she was to be
stoned: [Deu 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023.md). But if she was the
daughter of a priest, she was to be burned alive: [Lev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#009.md). It appears, from [Eze
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038.md), [Eze
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040.md), that adulteresses in the time
of that prophet were stoned, and pierced with a sword.

Selden and Fagius suppose that this woman's case was the same with that
mentioned, [Deu 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023.md). If a damsel
that is a virgin be betrothed unto a husband, and a man find her in the
city, and lie with her; then ye shall stone them with stones that they
die, the damsel because she cried not, and the man because he hath
humbled his neighbors wife. As the Pharisees spoke of stoning the woman,
it is possible this was her case; and some suppose that the apparent
indulgence with which our Lord treated her insinuates that she had
suffered some sort of violence, though not entirely innocent. Therefore
he said, I do not condemn thee, i.e. to death, because violence had been
used. Sin no more. Nevertheless thou art in certain respects guilty;
thou mightest have made more resistance.

[John 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 8:6</span></span>

That they might have to accuse him - Had our Lord condemned the woman to
death, they might have accused him to Pilate, as arrogating to himself
the power of life and death, which the Romans had taken away from the
Jews; besides, the Roman laws did not condemn an adulteress to be put to
death. On the other hand, if he had said she should not be put to death,
they might have represented him to the people as one who decided
contrary to the law, and favored the crime of which the woman was
accused.

With his finger wrote - Several MSS. add their sins who accused her, and
the sins of all men. There are many idle conjectures concerning what our
Lord wrote on the ground, several of which may be seen in Calmet.

We never find that Christ wrote any thing before or after this; and what
he wrote at this time we know not. On this the pious Quesnel makes the
following reflections: -

"1. Since Jesus Christ never wrote but once that we hear of in his whole
life; 2. since he did it only in the dust; 3. since it was only to avoid
condemning a sinner; and, 4. since he would not have that which he wrote
so much as known; let men learn from hence never to write but when it is
necessary or useful; to do it with humility and modesty; and to do it on
a principle of charity. How widely does Christ differ from men! He
writes his Divine thoughts in the dust: they wish to have theirs cut in
marble, and engraved on brass." Schools for children are frequently held
under trees in Bengal, and the children who are beginning to learn write
the letters of the alphabet in the dust. This saves pen, ink, and paper.

Ward.

[John 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 8:7</span></span>

He that is without sin - Αναμαρτητος, meaning the same kind of sin,
adultery, fornication, etc. Kypke has largely proved that the verb
ἁμαρτανειν is used in this sense by the best Greek writers.

Let him first cast a stone at her - Or, upon her, επ' αυτῃ. The Jewish
method of stoning, according to the rabbins, was as follows: The
culprit, half naked, the hands tied behind the back, was placed on a
scaffold, ten or twelve feet high; the witnesses, who stood with her,
pushed her off with great force: if she was killed by the fall there was
nothing farther done; but, if she was not, one of the witnesses took up
a very large stone, and dashed it upon her breast, which generally was
the coup de grace, or finishing stroke. This mode of punishment seems
referred to, [Mat 21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044.md). However, this
procedure does not appear to have been always attended to. See [Lev
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016.md), and [Joh
8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md) of this chapter.

[John 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 8:9</span></span>

Being convicted by their own conscience - So it is likely they were all
guilty of similar crimes. Their own is not in the original, and is
needless: being convicted by conscience is expressive enough.

Beginning at the eldest even unto the last - Απο των πρεσβυτερων ἑως των
εσχατων, from the most honorable to those of the least repute. In this
sense the words are undoubtedly to be understood.

The woman standing in the midst - But if they all went out, how could
she be in the midst? It is not said that all the people whom our Lord
had been instructing went out, but only her accusers: see [Joh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#002.md). The rest undoubtedly continued
with their teacher.

[John 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 8:11</span></span>

Neither do I condemn thee - Bishop Pearce says: "It would have been
strange if Jesus, when he was not a magistrate, and had not the
witnesses before him to examine them, and when she had not been tried
and condemned by the law and legal judges, should have taken upon him to
condemn her. This being the case, it appears why Jesus avoided giving an
answer to the question of the scribes and Pharisees, and also how little
reason there is to conclude from hence that Christ seems in this case
not enough to have discouraged adultery, though he called it a sin. And
yet this opinion took place so early among the Christians, that the
reading of this story was industriously avoided, in the lessons recited
out of the Gospels, in the public service of the churches; as if Jesus's
saying, I do not condemn thee, had given too much countenance to women
guilty of that crime. In consequence of this, as it was never read in
the churches, and is now not to be found in any of the Evangelistaria,
and as it was probably marked in the MSS. as a portion not to be read
there, this whole story, from [Joh
8:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#001.md), inclusive, came, in length of
time, to be left out in some MSS., though in the greater part it is
still remaining." Thus far the judicious and learned bishop. How the
passage stands in all the MSS. hitherto collated may be seen in Wetstein
and Griesbach. After weighing what has been adduced in favor of its
authenticity, and seriously considering its state in the MSS., as
exhibited in the Var. Lect. of Griesbach, I must confess, the evidence
in its favor does not appear to me to be striking. Yet I by no means
would have it expunged from the text. Its absence from many MSS., and
the confused manner in which it appears in others, may be readily
accounted for on the principles laid down by Bishop Pearce above. It may
however be necessary to observe, that a very perfect connection subsists
between [Joh 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052.md) and [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md) - all the intermediate verses
having been omitted by MSS. of the first antiquity and authority. In
some MSS. it is found at the end of this Gospel; in others a vacant
place is left in this chapter; and in others it is placed after the 21st
chapter of Luke. See at the end of this chapter.

[John 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 8:12</span></span>

Then spake Jesus again unto them - Allowing the story about the woman
taken in adultery to be authentic, and to stand here in its proper
place, we may consider that our Lord, having begun to teach the people
in the temple, was interrupted by the introduction of this woman by the
scribes and Pharisees; and now, having dismissed them and the woman
also, he resumes his discourse.

I am the light of the world - The fountain whence an intellectual light
and spiritual understanding proceed: without me all is darkness, misery,
and death. The Divine Being was, by the rabbins denominated, The light
of the world. So in Bamidbar Rabba: "The Israelites said to God, O Lord
of the universe, thou commandest us to light lamps to thee, yet thou art
The Light of The World: and with thee the light dwelleth." Our Lord,
therefore, assumes here a well known character of the Supreme Being; and
with this we find the Jews were greatly offended.

Shall not walk in darkness - He shall be saved from ignorance,
infidelity, and sin. If he follow me, become my disciple, and believe on
my name, he shall have my Spirit to bear witness with his, that he is a
child of God. He shall have the light of life - such a light as brings
and supports life. The sun, the fountain of light, is also the fountain
of life: by his vivifying influences, all things live - neither animal
nor vegetative life could exist, were it not for his influence. Jesus,
the Sun of righteousness, [Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md), is
the fountain of all spiritual and eternal Life. His light brings life
with it, and they who walk in his light live in his life. This sentiment
is beautifully expressed and illustrated in the following inimitable
verse (all monosyllables except one word) of that second Spenser,
Phineas Fletcher. Speaking of the conversion of a soul to God, he says:
-

"New Light new Love, new Love new Life hath bred;

A Life that lives by Love, and loves by Light:

A Love to him, to whom all Loves are wed;

A Light, to whom the sun is darkest night:

Eye's Light, heart's Love, soul's only Life he is:

Life, soul, love, heart, Light, eye, and all are his:

He eye, Light, heart, Love, soul; He all my joy and bliss."

Purple Island, Can. I. v. 7.

Some suppose our Lord alludes to the custom of lighting lamps or
torches, on the first day of the feast of tabernacles. But as these
words seem to have been spoken the day after that last and great day of
the feast, mentioned [Joh 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md), they
may rather be considered as referring to the following custom: It has
already been observed, that the Jews added a ninth day to this feast,
which day they termed, The feast of joy for the law; and on that day
they were accustomed to take all the sacred books out of the chest where
they had been deposited, and put a lighted candle in their place, in
allusion to [Pro 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023.md) : For the
commandment is a Lamp (or Candle) and the law is life: or to [Psa
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105.md) : Thy word is a Lamp unto my
feet, and a Light unto my path. If this custom existed in the time of
our Lord, it is most likely that it is to it he here alludes; as it must
have happened about the same time in which these words were spoken. See
Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. c. xxi.

As the Messiah was frequently spoken of by the prophets under the emblem
of light, see [Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001.md); [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md); [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002.md), the Pharisees must at once
perceive that he intended to recommend himself to the people as the
Messiah, when he said, I am the light of the world.

The rabbins think that the Messiah is intended in [Gen
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008.md), And God said, Let there be light,
and there was light. "From this we may learn that the holy and blessed
God saw the light of the Messiah and his works before the world was
created; and reserved it for the Messiah, and his generation, under the
throne of his glory. Satan said to the holy and blessed God, For whom
dost thou reserve that light which is under the throne of thy glory? God
answered: For him who shall subdue thee, and overwhelm thee with
confusion. Satan rejoined, Lord of the universe, show that person to me!
God said, Come and see him. When he saw him, he was greatly agitated,
and fell upon his face, saying, Truly this is the Messiah, who shall
cast me and idolaters into hell." Yalcut Rubeni, fol. 6. This is a very
remarkable saying; and, as it might have existed in the time of our
Lord, to it he might have alluded in the verse before us. The thing
itself is true: the Messiah is the light of the world, and by him
Satan's empire of idolatry is destroyed in the world, and the kingdom of
light and life established. See several similar testimonies in
Schoettgen.

[John 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 8:13</span></span>

Thou bearest record - As if they had said, Dost thou imagine that we
shall believe thee, in a matter so important, on thy bare assertion? Had
these people attended to the teaching and miracles of Christ, they would
have seen that his pretensions to the Messiahship were supported by the
most irrefragable testimony.

[John 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 8:14</span></span>

I know whence I came - I came from God, and am going to God, and can
neither do nor say any thing but what leads to and glorifies him.

[John 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 8:15</span></span>

Ye judge after the flesh - Because I appear in the form of man, judging
from this appearance, ye think I am but a mere man - pay attention to my
teaching and miracles, and ye shall then see that nothing less than
infinite wisdom and unlimited power could teach and do what I have
taught and performed. Our Lord speaks here exactly in the character of
an ambassador. Such a person does not bring a second with him to vouch
his truth; his credentials from his king ascertain his character: he
represents the king's person. So our Lord represents the Father as
bearing witness with him. The miracles which he wrought were the proof
from heaven that he was the promised Messiah: these were the great seal
of all his pretensions.

[John 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 8:19</span></span>

Ye neither know me, etc. - Ye know neither the Messiah, nor the God that
sent him.

If ye had known me - If ye had received my teaching, ye would have got
such an acquaintance with the nature and attributes of God as ye never
could have had, and never can have any other way. That is a true saying,
No man hath seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, who lay an the
bosom of the Father. he hath Declared him. The nature and perfections of
God never can be properly known, but in the light of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. It is worthy of remark that, in all this discourse, our blessed
Lord ever speaks of the Father and himself as two distinct persons.
Therefore, the Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, as some
persons vainly imagine; though it is plain enough that the completest
unity and equality subsists between them.

[John 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 8:20</span></span>

The treasury - Lightfoot observes, from the rabbins, that the treasury
was in what was called the court of the women - that there were thirteen
chests in it; in the thirteenth only the women were permitted to put
their offerings. Probably the other twelve were placed there in
reference to the twelve tribes; each perhaps inscribed with the name of
one of Jacob's twelve sons.

It seems that our Lord sometimes sat in this court to teach the people.
See [Mar 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041.md), etc.

His hour was not yet come - The time was not arrived, in which he had
determined to give himself up into the hands of his crucifiers.

[John 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 8:21</span></span>

Then said Jesus again unto them - He had said the same things to them
the day before. See [Joh 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034.md).

Ye shall seek me - When your calamities come upon you, ye shall in vain
seek for the help of the Messiah, whom ye now reject, and whom ye shall
shortly crucify.

[John 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 8:22</span></span>

Will he kill himself? - They now understood that he spoke concerning his
death; but before, [Joh 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035.md), they
thought he spoke of going to some of the Grecian provinces, to preach to
the dispersed Jews.

[John 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 8:23</span></span>

Ye are from beneath - Ye are capable of murder, and of self-murder too,
because ye have nothing of God in you. Ye are altogether earthly,
sensual, and devilish. They verified this character in murdering the
Lord Jesus; and many of them afterwards, to escape famine, etc., put an
end to their own lives.

[John 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 8:25</span></span>

Who art thou? - This marks the indignation of the Pharisees - as if they
had said: Who art thou that takest upon thee to deal out threatenings in
this manner against us?

Jesus saith unto them, Even the same that I said unto you from the
beginning - Rather, Just what I have already told you, i.e. that I am
the light of the world - the Christ - the Savior of mankind. There are a
variety of renderings for this verse among the critics. Some consider
την αρχην (which makes the principal difficulty in the text) as the
answer of our Lord. Who art thou? I am την αρχην, the chief, the
supreme; and have therefore a right to judge, and to execute judgment.
But if our Lord had intended to convey this meaning, he would doubtless
have said ἡ Αρχη, or ὁ Αρχων, and not την αρχην, in the accusative case.
This mode of reading appears to have been followed by the Vulgate, some
copies of the Itala, and some of the fathers; but this construction can
never be reconciled to the Greek text. Others take την αρχην as an
adverb, in which sense it is repeatedly used by the best Greek writers;
and, connecting the 25th with the 26th verse, they translate thus: I
have indeed, as I Assure ye, many things to say of you, and to condemn
in you. See Wakefield. Raphelius takes up the words nearly in the same
way, and defends his mode of exposition with much critical learning; and
to him I refer the reader. I have given it that meaning which I thought
the most simple and plain, should any departure from our own version be
thought necessary: both convey a good and consistent sense.

[John 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 8:26</span></span>

I have many things to say and to judge of you - Or, to speak and to
condemn, etc. I could speedily expose all your iniquities - your pride
and ambition, your hypocrisy and irreligion, your hatred to the light,
and your malice against the truth, together with the present obstinate
unbelief of your hearts, and show that these are the reasons why I say
you will die in your sins; but these will appear in their true light:
when, after you have crucified me, the judgments of God shall descend
upon and consume you.

He that sent me is true - Whatever he hath spoken of you by the prophets
shall surely come to pass; his word cannot fail.

[John 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 8:28</span></span>

When ye have lifted up - When ye have crucified me, and thus filled up
the measure of your iniquities, ye shall know that I am the Christ, by
the signs that shall follow; and ye shall know that what I spoke is
true, by the judgments that shall follow. To be lifted up, is a common
mode of expression, among the Jewish writers, for to die, or to be
killed.

[John 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 8:29</span></span>

The Father hath not left me alone - Though ye shalt have power to put me
to death, yet this shall not be because he hath abandoned me. No - he is
ever with me, because I do that which pleaseth him; and it is his
pleasure that I should lay down my life for the salvation of the world.
Does not our Lord allude to the following scriptures? - Sacrifice and
offering thou didst not desire; my ears hast thou opened: (or, a body
hast thou prepared me: [Heb 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005).md):
then said I, Lo, I come: this is written in the volume of the book
concerning me. I delight to do thy will, O my God! Thy law is in my
heart. [Psa 40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006.md).

[John 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 8:30</span></span>

As he spake these words, many believed on him - The same sun that
hardens the clay softens the wax. This discourse, which proved the savor
of death unto death to the obstinate Pharisees, became the savor of life
unto life to many of the simple-hearted people.

[John 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 8:31</span></span>

If ye continue in my word - Or, in this doctrine of mine. It is not
enough to receive God's truth - we must retain and walk in it. And it is
only when we receive the truth, love it, keep it, and walk in it, that
we are the genuine disciples of Christ.

[John 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 8:32</span></span>

Ye shall know the truth - Shall have a constant experimental knowledge
of its power and efficacy.

And the truth shall make you free - It was a maxim of the Jews, "That no
man was free, but he who exercised himself in the meditation of the
law." No man is truly free, but he in whose heart the power of sin is
destroyed, and who has received the Spirit of adoption, through which he
cries, Abba! Father! See [Rom 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md).
The bondage of sin is the most grievous bondage; and freedom from its
guilt and influence is the greatest liberty.

[John 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 8:33</span></span>

They answered - That is, the other Jews who had not believed - the
carping, cavilling Pharisees already mentioned; for the words cannot be
spoken of the simple people who had already believed. See [Joh
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030.md).

Were never in bondage to any man - This assertion was not only false,
but it was ridiculous in the extreme; seeing their whole history, sacred
and profane, is full of recitals of their servitude in Egypt, in
Chaldea, under the Persians, under the Macedonians, and under the
Romans. But those who are not under the influence of the truth of God
will speak and act according to the influence of the spirit of falsehood
and error. If the words are to be restrained to themselves alone, they
may be understood thus: We are Abraham's seed: and we were never in
bondage. Both these propositions had a faint shadow of truth.

[John 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 8:34</span></span>

Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin - Or, δουλος εστι, etc.,
is the slave of sin. This was the slavery of which Christ spoke; and
deliverance from it, was the liberty which he promised.

[John 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 8:35</span></span>

And the servant abideth not in the house - Or, rather, Now the slave
abided not in the family. As if Jesus had said: And now that I am
speaking of a slave, I will add one thing more, viz. a slave has no
right to any part of the inheritance in the family to which he belongs;
but the son, the legitimate son, has a right. He can make any servant of
the family free, though no slave can. He can divide or bestow the
inheritance as he pleases. Our Lord seems here to refer to the sending
away of Ishmael, mentioned, [Gen
21:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010.md). Only those who are genuine
children can inherit the estate. If sons, then heirs: heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ: [Gal 4:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021.md);
[Rom 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017.md); and see Bishop Pearce's
Paraphrase.

[John 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 8:37</span></span>

My word hath no place in you - Or, this doctrine of mine hath no place
to you. Ye hear the truths of God, but ye do not heed them: the word of
life has no influence over you; and how can it, when you seek to kill me
because I proclaim this truth to you?

It is a dismal omen when a person is regardless of the truth of God: it
is more so to be provoked against it: but to persecute and endeavor to
destroy those who preach it is the last degree of perverseness and
obduracy. The word of God requires a heart which is empty. A heart
filled with earthly projects, carnal interests ambition, thoughts of
raising a fortune, and with the love of the superfluities and pleasures
of life, is not fit to receive the seed of the kingdom. When a man shuts
his heart against it by his passions, he at the same time opens it to
all sorts of crimes. Quesnel.

From what is here said, it is manifest, says Dr. Lightfoot, that the
whole tendency of our Savior's discourse is to show the Jews, that they
are the seed of that serpent which was to bruise the heel of the
Messiah: else what could that mean, [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md) : Ye are of your father the
devil, i.e. ye are the seed of the serpent.

[John 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 8:38</span></span>

I speak that which I have seen - I speak nothing but that unchangeable,
eternal truth which I have received from the bosom of God.

Ye do that which ye have seen - Instead of ἑωρακατε, ye have seen, I
think we should read ηκουσατε, ye have heard, on the authority of BCKL,
fifteen others; Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, later Syriac in the margin,
Gothic, one copy of the Itala; Origen, Cyril, and Chrysostom. This
reading, says Bishop Pearce, (who has adopted it), seems preferable to
the other, because it could not be said, with the same propriety, that
the Jews had seen any thing with their father the devil, as it could
that Jesus had seen with his.

Jesus saw the Father, for he was the Word that was with God from
eternity. The Jews did not see, they only felt and heard, their father
the devil. It is the interest of Satan to keep himself out of sight, and
to work in the dark.

[John 8:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 8:39</span></span>

If ye were Abraham's children - Griesbach reads εϚε, ye are, instead of
ητε, ye were, on the authority of BDL, Vulgate, four copies of the
Itala; Origen and Augustin.

Ye would do the works of Abraham - As the son has the nature of his
father in him, and naturally imitates him, so, if ye were the children
of Abraham, ye would imitate him in his faith, obedience, and
uprightness; but this ye do not, for ye seek to kill me - ye are
watching for an opportunity to destroy me, merely because I tell you the
truth: Abraham never did any thing like this; therefore, you have no
spiritual relationship to him.

[John 8:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 8:41</span></span>

Ye do the deeds of your father - You have certainly another father than
Abraham - one who has instilled his own malignant nature into you; and,
as ye seek to murder me for telling you the truth, ye must be the
offspring of him who was a murderer from the beginning, and stood not in
the truth, [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md).

We be not born of fornication - We are not a mixed, spurious breed - our
tribes and families have been kept distinct - we are descended from
Abraham by his legal wife Sarah; and we are no idolaters.

We have one Father, even God - In the spiritual sense of father and son,
we are not a spurious, that is, an idolatrous race; because we
acknowledge none as our spiritual father, and worship none as such, but
the true God. See Bishop Pearce.

[John 8:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 8:42</span></span>

If God were your Father, ye would love me - I came from God, and it
would be absurd to suppose that you would persecute me if you were under
the influence of God. The children of the same father should not murder
each other.

[John 8:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 8:43</span></span>

Why do ye not understand my speech? - Την λαλιαν την εμην, This my mode
of speaking - when illustrating spiritual by natural things: λαλια
refers to the manner of speaking; λογος, to the matter or subject on
which he spoke. For λαλιαν, the Codex Bezae had originally αληθειαν: why
do ye not acknowledge this Truth of mine? A few other MSS. agree in this
reading.

Because ye cannot hear my word - That is, ye cannot bear my doctrine: it
comes too close to you; it searches your hearts, detects your hypocrisy,
and exposes your iniquitous intentions and designs; and as ye are
determined not to leave your sins, so ye are purposed not to hear my
doctrine.

[John 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 8:44</span></span>

Ye are of your father the devil - Ye are the seed of the old serpent.
See on [Joh 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#037) (note.md).

The lusts of your father - Like father like son. What Satan desires, ye
desire; because ye are filled with his nature. Awful state of
unregenerate men! They have the nearest alliance to Satan; they partake
of his nature and have in them the same principles and propensities
which characterize the very nature and essence of the devil! Reader,
canst thou rest in this state? Apply to God, through Christ, that thou
mayest be born again.

He was a murderer from the beginning - It was through him that Adam
transgressed; in consequence of which death entered into the world, and
slew him and all his posterity. This was the sentiment of the Jews
themselves. In Sohar Kadash, the wicked are called, "The children of the
old serpent, who slew Adam and all his descendants." See Schoettgen.

Abode not in the truth - He stood not in the truth - was once in a state
of glorious felicity, but fell from it; and, being deprived of all good
himself, he could not endure that others should enjoy any; therefore by
his lies he deceived Eve, and brought her, her husband, and, through
them, their posterity, into his own condemnation.

He speaketh of his own - Εκ των ιδιων λαλει, He speaketh of his own
offspring, or, from his own disposition, for he is the father and
fountain of all error and falsity; and all who are deceived by him, and
partake of his disposition, falsity and cruelty, are his offspring, for
he is a liar, and the father of it - και ὁ πατηρ αυτου - literally, his
father also. There is considerable difficulty in this verse. The
Cainites, and the Archontites, mentioned by Epiphanius, read it thus:
"Ye are the children of your father the devil, because he is a liar, and
his father was a liar. He was a man-slayer, and he did not remain in the
truth. When he speaketh, he speaketh a lie of his own, (progenitors
understood), because his father also was a liar." The consequences which
the above heretics drew from this verse were the following. They said
that the father of the Jews was a demon; that he also had a demon for
his father; and that he had a demon for his father, etc. The Archontites
maintained that Cain had a demon for his father, the spirit which our
Lord speaks of here; and that the Jews proceeded from the race of Cain.

Grotius, supposing that the devil who tempted Eve was not the prince of
devils, but rather a subordinate one, seems to think he may be
understood here, he is a liar, and his father also, which is the literal
translation of the latter clause of the text, ὡς και ὁ πατηρ αυτου, as
it has been read by many of the primitive fathers.

Mr. Wakefield, by changing το, before ψευδος, into τις, gives the text
the following translation: - "The devil is your father, and ye willingly
perform the lusts of your father. He was a man-slayer from the first,
and continued not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When
Any One speaketh a lie, he speaketh according to his own kindred: for
his father also is a liar." Our own translation, that refers πατηρ αυτου
to ψευδος, a lie, and not to ψευϚης, a liar, is probably the most
correct.

[John 8:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 8:46</span></span>

Which of you convinceth me of sin? - Do you pretend to reject the truths
which I announce, because my life does not correspond to the doctrines I
have taught? But can any of you prove me guilty of any fault? You have
maliciously watched all my steps; have you seen the smallest matter to
reprove, in any part of my conduct?

But it is probable that ἁμαρτια, sin, is put here in opposition to
αληθεια, truth, in the same verse, and then it should be rendered
falsehood. The very best Greek writers use the word in the same sense:
this, Kypke proves by quotations from Polybius, Lucian, Dionysius
Halicarnassensis, Plutarch, Thucydides, and Hippocrates. Raphelius adds
a pertinent quotation from Herodotus, and shows that the purest Latin
writers have used the word peccatum, sin, in the sense of error or
falsehood. See the note on [Gen 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013.md).

[John 8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 8:47</span></span>

He that is of God - Meaning probably himself: he who came from God, or
was born of God - heareth the words of God - has the constant
inspiration of his Spirit, speaks nothing but truth, and cannot possibly
err.

[John 8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 8:48</span></span>

Thou art a Samaritan - This was the same, among them, as heretic, or
schismatic, among us. This is the only time in which the Jews gave our
Lord this title of reproach; and they probably grounded it on his having
preached among them, and lodged in their villages. See the account in
[Joh 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#039.md), [Joh
4:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#040.md); but Samaritan, among them, meant
a person unworthy of any credit.

Hast a devil? - Art possessed by an evil spirit; and art, in
consequence, deranged.

[John 8:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 8:49</span></span>

I have not a devil - The first part of the charge was too futile: if
taken literally, it was both absurd and impossible; they did not believe
it themselves, and therefore our Lord does not stop a moment to refute
it; but he answers to the second with the utmost meekness and
conclusiveness: I honor God. This is what no demon can do, nor any man
who is under such influence.

[John 8:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 8:50</span></span>

I seek not mine own glory - Another proof that I am not influenced by
any spirit but that which proceeds from God. But there is one that
seeketh - i.e. my glory - and judgeth - will punish you for your
determined obstinacy and iniquity.

[John 8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 8:51</span></span>

Shall never see death - As Moses promised a long life, with abundance of
temporal blessings, to those who should keep his statutes and
ordinances, so he who keeps my doctrine shall not only have a long life,
but shall never see death - he shall never come under the power of the
death of the soul, but shall live eternally with me in glory.

[John 8:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#054.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">joh 8:54</span></span>

Your God - Many MSS. and most of the versions read ἡμων, our, instead of
ὑμων. The variation is of very little consequence. They called God their
God, while enemies to him both in their spirit and conduct.

[John 8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">joh 8:56</span></span>

Abraham rejoiced to see my day - Or, he earnestly desired to see my day;
ηγαλλιασατο, from αγαν, very much, and ἁλλομαι, I leap - his soul leaped
forward in earnest hope and strong expectation that he might see the
incarnation of Jesus Christ. The metaphor appears to be taken from a
person who, desiring to see a long-expected friend who is coming, runs
forward, now and then jumping up to see if he can discover him. There is
a saying very like this in Sohar Numer fol. 61: "Abraham rejoiced
because he could know, and perceive, and cleave to the Divine Name." The
Divine name is יהוה Yehovah; and by this they simply mean God himself.

And he saw it - Not only in the first promise, [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015.md), for the other patriarchs saw
this as well as he; and not only in that promise which was made
particularly to himself, [Gen 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007.md);
[Gen 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md), (compared with [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016).md), that the Messiah should spring
from his family; but he saw this day especially when Jehovah appeared to
him in a human form, [Gen 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002.md), [Gen
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017.md), which many suppose to have been
a manifestation of the Lord Jesus.

[John 8:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#057.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">joh 8:57</span></span>

Thou art not yet fifty years old - Some MSS. read forty. The age of our
blessed Lord has never been properly determined. Some of the primitive
fathers believed that he was fifty years old when he was crucified; but
their foundation, which is no other than these words of the Jews, is but
a very uncertain one. Calmet thinks that our Lord was at this time about
thirty-four years and ten months old, and that he was crucified about
the middle of his thirty-sixth year; and asserts that the vulgar era is
three years too late. On the other hand, some allow him to have been but
thirty-one years old, and that his ministry had lasted but one year.
Many opinions on this subject, which are scarcely worthy of being
copied, may be found in Calmet.

[John 8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">joh 8:58</span></span>

Before Abraham was, I am - The following is a literal translation of
Calmet's note on this passage: - "I am from all eternity. I have existed
before all ages. You consider in me only the person who speaks to you,
and who has appeared to you within a particular time. But besides this
human nature, which ye think ye know, there is in me a Divine and
eternal nature. Both, united, subsist together in my person. Abraham
knew how to distinguish them. He adored me as his God; and desired me as
his Savior. He has seen me in my eternity, and he predicted my coming
into the world." On the same verse Bishop Pearce speaks as follows: -
"What Jesus here says relates (I think) to his existence antecedent to
Abraham's days, and not to his having been the Christ appointed and
foretold before that time; for, if Jesus had meant this, the answer I
apprehend would not have been a pertinent one. He might have been
appointed and foretold for the Christ; but if he had not had an
existence before Abraham's days, neither could he have seen Abraham,
(as, according to our English translation, the Jews suppose him to have
said), nor could Abraham have seen him, as I suppose the Jews understood
him to have said in the preceding verse, to which words of the Jews the
words of Jesus here are intended as an answer."

[John 8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">joh 8:59</span></span>

Then took they up stones, etc. - It appears that the Jews understood him
as asserting his Godhead; and, supposing him to be a blasphemer, they
proceeded to stone him, according to the law. [Lev
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016.md).

But Jesus hid himself - In all probability he rendered himself invisible
- though some will have it that he conveyed himself away from those Jews
who were his enemies, by mixing himself with the many who believed on
him, ([Joh 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#030.md), [Joh
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031).md), and who, we may suppose,
favored his escape. Pearce.

But where did they find the stones, Christ and they being in the temple?
It is answered:

1st. It is probable, as the buildings of the temple had not been yet
completed, there might have been many stones near the place; or,

2dly. They might have gone out so the outer courts for them; and, before
their return, our Lord had escaped. See Lightfoot and Calmet.

Going through the midst of them, and so passed by - These words are
wanting in the Codex Bezae, and in several editions and versions.
Erasmus, Grotius, Beza, Pearce, and Griesbach, think them not genuine.
The latter has left them out of the test. But, notwithstanding what
these critics have said, the words seem necessary to explain the manner
of our Lord's escape.

1st. He hid himself, by becoming invisible; and then,

2dly. He passed through the midst of them, and thus got clear away from
the place.

See a similar escape mentioned, [Luk
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#030.md), and the note there.

The subjects of this chapter are both uncommon and of vast importance.

1\. The case of the woman taken in adultery, when properly and candidly
considered, is both intelligible and edifying. It is likely that the
accusation was well founded; and that the scribes and Pharisees
endeavored maliciously to serve themselves of the fact, to embroil our
Lord with the civil power, or ruin his moral reputation. Our Lord was no
magistrate, and therefore could not, with any propriety, give judgment
in the case; had he done it, it must have been considered an invasion of
the rights and office of the civil magistrate, and would have afforded
them ground for a process against him. On the other hand, had he
acquitted the woman, he might have been considered, not only as setting
aside the law of Moses, but as being indulgent to a crime of great moral
turpitude, and the report of this must have ruined his moral character.
He disappointed this malice by refusing to enter into the case; and
overwhelmed his adversaries with confusion, by unmasking their hearts,
and pointing out their private abominations. It is generally supposed
that our Lord acquitted the woman: this is incorrect; he neither
acquitted nor condemned her: he did not enter at all juridically into
the business. His saying, Neither do I condemn thee, was no more than a
simple declaration that he would not concern himself with the matter -
that being the office of the chief magistrate; but, as a preacher of
righteousness, he exhorted her to abandon her evil practices, lest the
punishment, which she was now likely to escape, should be inflicted on
her for a repetition of her transgression.

2\. In several places in this chapter, our Lord shows his intimate union
with the Father, both in will, doctrine, and deed; and though he never
speaks so as to confound the persons, yet he evidently shows that such
was the indivisible unity, subsisting between the Father and the Son,
that what the one witnessed, the other witnessed; what the one did, the
other did; and that he who saw the one necessarily saw the other.

3\. The original state of Satan is here pointed out - he abode not in
the truth, [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md). Therefore he was
once in the truth, in righteousness and true holiness - and he fell from
that truth into sin and falsehood, so that he became the father of lies
and the first murderer. Our Lord confirms here the Mosaic account of the
fall of man, and shows that this fall was brought about by his lies, and
that these lies issued in the murder or destruction both of the body and
soul of man.

4\. The patience and meekness exercised by our Lord, towards his most
fell and unrelenting enemies, are worthy the especial regard of all
those who are persecuted for righteousness. - When he was reviled, he
reviled not again. As the searcher of hearts, he simply declared their
state, [Joh 8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md), in order to their
conviction and conversion: not to have done so, would have been to
betray their souls. In this part of his conduct we find two grand
virtues united, which are rarely associated in man, Meekness and
Fidelity - patience to bear all insults and personal injuries; and
boldness, is the face of persecution and death, to declare the truth.
The meek man generally leaves the sinner unreproved: the bold and
zealous man often betrays a want of due self-management, and reproves
sin in a spirit which prevents the reproof from reaching the heart. In
this respect also, our blessed Lord has left us an example, that we
should follow his steps. Let him that readeth understand.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 9](joh009.md)

</div>
