<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh010)  [Next](joh012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 11:0</span></span>

Account of the sickness of Lazarus, [Joh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001). His sisters Martha and Mary send
for Christ, [Joh 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#002). Our Lord's
discourse with his disciples on this sickness and consequent death, [Joh
11:3-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#003). He arrives at Bethany four
days after the burying of Lazarus, [Joh
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#017), [Joh
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#018). Martha meets Christ - their
conversation, [Joh 11:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#019). She
returns and Mary goes out to meet him, in great distress, [Joh
11:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#028). Christ comes to the grave -
his conversation there, [Joh 11:34-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#034).
He raises Lazarus from the dead, [Joh
11:43-46](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043). The priests and Pharisees,
hearing of this, hold a council, and plot his destruction, [Joh
11:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047), [Joh
11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048). The remarkable prophecy of
Caiaphas, and the consequent proceedings of the Jews, [Joh
11:49-53](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#049). Jesus withdraws into a city
called Ephraim, [Joh 11:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054). They lay
wait for him at the passover, [Joh
11:55-57](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#055).

[John 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 11:1</span></span>

Lazarus, of Bethany - St. John, who seldom relates any thing but what
the other evangelists have omitted, does not tell us what gave rise to
that familiar acquaintance and friendship that subsisted between our
Lord and this family. It is surprising that the other evangelists have
omitted so remarkable an account as this is, in which some of the finest
traits in our Lord's character are exhibited. The conjecture of Grotius
has a good deal of weight. He thinks that the other three evangelists
wrote their histories during the life of Lazarus; and that they did not
mention him for fear of exciting the malice of the Jews against him. And
indeed we find, from [Joh 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#010), that
they sought to put Lazarus to death also, that our Lord might not have
one monument of his power and goodness remaining in the land. Probably
both Lazarus and his sisters were dead before St. John wrote. Bethany
was situated at the foot of the mount of Olives, about two miles from
Jerusalem. Bishop Pearce observes that "there is a large gap in John's
history of Christ in this place. What is mentioned in the preceding
chapter passed at the feast of the dedication, [Joh
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022), about the middle of our
December; and this miracle of raising Lazarus from the dead seems to
have been wrought but a little before the following passover, in the end
of March, at which time Jesus was crucified, as may (he thinks) be
gathered from verses 54 and 55 of this chapter, and from [Joh
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#009)." John has, therefore, according
to the bishop's calculation, omitted to mention the several miracles
which our Lord wrought for above three months after the things mentioned
in the preceding chapter.

Calmet says, Christ left Jerusalem the day after the dedication took
place, which was the 18th of December. He event then to Bethabara, where
he continued preaching and his disciples baptizing. About the middle of
the following January Lazarus fell sick: Christ did not leave Bethabara
till after the death of Lazarus, which happened about the 18th of the
same month.

Bishop Newcome supposes that our Lord might have stayed about a month at
Bethabara.

The harmonists and chronologists differ much in fixing dates, and
ascertaining times. In cases of this nature, I believe men may
innocently guess as well as they can; but they should assert nothing.

[John 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 11:2</span></span>

It was that Mary which anointed - There is much disagreement between
learned men relative to the two anointings of our Lord, and the persons
who performed these acts. The various conjectures concerning these
points the reader will find in the notes on [Mat
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007), etc., but particularly at the
end of that chapter. Dr. Lightfoot inquires, Why should Bethany be
called the town of Martha and Mary, and not of Lazarus? And he thinks
the reason is, that Martha and Mary had been well known by that
anointing of our Lord, which is mentioned [Luk
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037); (see the note there); but the
name of Lazarus had not been mentioned till now, there being no
transaction by which he could properly be brought into view. He
therefore thinks that the aorist αλειψασα, which we translate anointed,
should have its full force, and be translated, who had formerly
anointed; and this he thinks to have been the reason of that familiarity
which subsisted between our Lord and this family; and, on this ground,
they could confidently send for our Lord when Lazarus fell sick. This
seems a very reasonable conjecture; and it is very likely that the
familiarity arose out of the anointing.

Others think that the anointing of which the evangelist speaks is that
mentioned [Joh 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001), etc., and which
happened about six days before the passover. St. John, therefore, is
supposed to anticipate the account, because it served more particularly
to designate the person of whom he was speaking.

[John 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 11:3</span></span>

He whom thou lovest is sick - Nothing could be more simple, nor more
modest, than this prayer: they do not say, Come and heal him: or,
Command the disease to depart even where thou art, and it will obey
thee: - they content themselves with simply stating the case, and using
an indirect but a most forcible argument, to induce our Lord to show
forth his power and goodness: - He is sick, and thou lovest him;
therefore thou canst neither abandon him, not us.

[John 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 11:4</span></span>

This sickness is not unto death - Not to final privation of life at this
time; but a temporary death shall be now permitted, that the glory of
God may appear in the miracle of his resurrection. It is very likely
that this verse contains the message which Christ sent back, by the
person whom the afflicted sisters had sent to him; and this, no doubt,
served much to strengthen their confidence, though their faith must have
been greatly exercised by the death of their brother: for when this took
place, though they buried him, yet they believed, even then, probably on
the ground of this message, that Jesus might raise him from the dead.
See [Joh 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#022).

[John 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 11:5</span></span>

Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus - Therefore his
staying two days longer in Bethabara was not through lack of affection
for this distressed family, but merely that he might have a more
favorable opportunity of proving to them how much he loved them. Christ
never denies a less favor, but in order to confer a greater. God's
delays, in answering prayers offered to him by persons in distress, are
often proofs of his purpose to confer some great kindness, and they are
also proofs that his wisdom finds it necessary to permit an increase of
the affliction, that his goodness may be more conspicuous in its
removal.

[John 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 11:8</span></span>

The Jews of late sought to stone thee - It was but a few weeks before
that they were going to stone him in the temple, on the day of the feast
of the dedication, [Joh 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031).

[John 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 11:9</span></span>

Are there not twelve hours in the day? - The Jews, as well as most other
nations, divided the day, from sun-rising to sun-setting, into twelve
equal parts; but these parts, or hours, were longer or shorter,
according to the different seasons of the year. See the note on [Joh
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039). Our Lord alludes to the case of
a traveler, who has to walk the whole day: the day points out the time
of life - the night that of death. He has already used the same mode of
speech, [Joh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#004) : I must work the
works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night cometh when no man
can work. Here he refers to what the apostles had just said - The Jews
were but just now going to stone thee. Are there not, said he, twelve
hours in the day? I have not traveled these twelve hours yet - my last
hour is not yet come; and the Jews, with all their malice and hatred,
shall not be able to bring it a moment sooner than God has purposed. I
am immortal till my work is done; and this, that I am now going to
Bethany to perform, is a part of it. When all is completed, then their
hour, and that of the power of darkness, shall commence. See [Luk
22:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#053).

If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not - A traveler should use the
day to walk in, and not the night. During the day he has the sun, the
light of this world: he sees his way, and does not stumble: but, if he
walk in the night, he stumbleth, because there is no light in it, [Joh
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#010); i.e. there is no sun above the
horizon. The words εν αυτῳ, [Joh
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#010), refer not to the man, but to
the world, the sun, its light, not being above the horizon. Life is the
time to fulfill the will of God, and to prepare for glory. Jesus is the
light of the world; he that walks in his Spirit, and by his direction,
cannot stumble - cannot fall into sin, nor be surprised by an unexpected
death. But he who walks in the night, in the darkness of his own heart,
and according to the maxims of this dark world, he stumbles - falls into
sin, and at last falls into hell. Reader! do not dream of walking to
heaven in the night of thy death. God has given thee the warning:
receive it, and begin to live to him, and for eternity.

[John 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 11:11</span></span>

Lazarus sleepeth - It was very common among the Jews to express death by
sleep; and the expression, falling asleep - sleeping with their fathers,
etc., were in great use among them. The Hebrews probably used this form
of speech to signify their belief in the immortality of the soul, and
the resurrection of the body.

It is certain that our Lord received no intimation of Lazarus's death
from any person, and that he knew it through that power by which he
knows all things.

[John 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 11:12</span></span>

If he sleep, he shall do well - That is, if he sleep only, etc. Though
the word sleep frequently meant death, (see [Act
7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060); [Co1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030); [Co1
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#018), [Co1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)), yet, as it was an ambiguous
term, the disciples appear here to have mistaken its meaning. Because,
in certain acute disorders, the composing the patient to rest was a
favorable sign; therefore the words, If he sleep, he shall do well, or
recover, became a proverbial forth of speech among the Jews. In most
diseases, sleep is a very favorable prognostic: hence that saying of
Menander: -

Ὑπνος δε πασης εϚιν ὑγιεια νοσου.

Sleep is a remedy for every disease.

See Grotius here. The meaning of the disciples seems to have been this:
There can be no need for thee to go into Judea to awake our friend
Lazarus; he will awake time enough, and his very sleep is a presage of
his recovery: therefore do not hazard thy life by going.

[John 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 11:15</span></span>

I am glad for your sakes that I was not there - "I tell you plainly,
Lazarus is dead: and I am glad I was not there - if I had been, I should
have been prevailed on to have healed him almost as soon as he fell
sick, and I should not have had so striking an occasion to manifest the
glory of God to you, and to establish you in the faith." It was a
miracle to discover that Lazarus was dead, as no person had come to
announce it. It was a greater miracle to raise a dead man than to cure a
sick man. And it was a still greater miracle, to raise one that was
three or four days buried, and in whose body putrefaction might have
begun to take place, than to raise one that was but newly dead. See [Joh
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039).

[John 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 11:16</span></span>

Thomas, which is called Didymus - Thomas, or תאום Thaom, was his Hebrew
name, and signifies a twin - one who had a brother or a sister born with
him at the same time: Didymus, Διδυμος, is a literal translation of the
Hebrew word into Greek. In [Gen 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#024),
Esau and Jacob are called תומים thomeem, twins; Septuag. διδυμα, from
διδυμος, a twin - from the Anglo-Saxon, to double.

Let us also go, that we may die with him - That is, "Seeing we cannot
dissuade our Lord from going, and his death is likely to be the
inevitable consequence, let us give him the fullest proof we can of our
love, by going and suffering death with him." Some think Thomas spoke
these words peevishly, and that they should be translated thus, Must we
also go, and expose ourselves to destruction with him? which is as much
as to say: "If he will obstinately go and risk his life in so imminent a
danger, let us act with more prudence and caution." But I think the
first sense is to be preferred. When a matter is spoken which concerns
the moral character of a person, and which may be understood in a good
and a bad sense, that sense which is most favorable to the person should
certainly be adopted. This is taking things by the best handle, and both
justice and mercy require it. The conduct of most men widely differs
from this: of such an old proverb says, "They feed like the flies - pass
over all a man's whole parts, to light upon his sores."

[John 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 11:17</span></span>

He had lain in the grave four days already - Our Lord probably left
Bethabara the day, or the day after, Lazarus died. He came to Bethany
three days after; and it appears that Lazarus had been buried about four
days, and consequently that he had been put in the grave the day or day
after he died. Though it was the Jewish custom to embalm their dead, yet
we find, from [Joh 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039), that he had
not been embalmed; and God wisely ordered this, that the miracle might
appear the more striking.

[John 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 11:18</span></span>

Fifteen furlongs - About two miles: for the Jewish miles contained about
seven furlongs and a half. So Lightfoot, and the margin.

[John 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 11:19</span></span>

Many of the Jews came - Bethany being so nigh to Jerusalem, many of the
relatives and friends of the family came, according to the Jewish
custom, to mourn with the afflicted sisters. Mourning, among the Jews,
lasted about thirty days: the three first days were termed days of
weeping: then followed seven of lamentation. During the three days, the
mourner did no servile work; and, if any one saluted him, he did not
return the salutation. During the seven days, he did no servile work,
except in private - lay with his bed on the floor - did not put on his
sandals - did not wash nor anoint himself - had his head covered - and
neither read in the law, the Mishnah, nor the Talmud. All the thirty
days he continued unshaven, wore no white or new clothes, and did not
sew up the rents which he had made in his garments. See Lightfoot, and
see on [Joh 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#031) (note).

[John 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 11:20</span></span>

Martha - went and met him - Some suppose she was the eldest of the two
sisters - she seems to have had the management of the house. See [Luk
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040).

Mary sat still in the house - It is likely that by this circumstance the
evangelist intended to convey the idea of her sorrow and distress;
because anciently afflicted persons were accustomed to put themselves in
this posture, as expressive of their distress; their grief having
rendered them as it were immovable. See [Ezr
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003), [Ezr
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#004); [Neh
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#004); [Psa
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001); [Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001); [Luk
1:79](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#079); and [Mat
27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061).

[John 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 11:21</span></span>

If thou hadst been here, my brother had not died - Mary said the same
words to him a little after, [Joh
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#032), which proves that these sisters
had not a complete knowledge of the omnipotence of Christ: they thought
he could cure at hand, but not at a distance; or they thought that it
was because he did not know of their brother's indisposition that he
permitted him to die. In either of these cases it plainly appears they
had not a proper notion of his divinity; and indeed the following verse
proves that they considered him in no other light than that of a
prophet. Query - Was it not proper that Christ should, in general, as
much as might be, hide the knowledge of his divinity from those with
whom he ordinarily lodged? Had they known him fully, would not the
reverence and awe connected with such a knowledge have overwhelmed them?

[John 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 11:22</span></span>

I know, that even now - She durst not ask so great a favor in direct
terms; she only intimated modestly that she knew he could do it.

[John 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 11:23</span></span>

Thy brother shall rise again - That is, directly; for it was by raising
him immediately from the dead that he intended to comfort her.

[John 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 11:24</span></span>

I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection - The doctrine of
the resurrection of the dead was then commonly received; and though it
was our Lord who fully exemplified it by his own resurrection, yet the
opinion was common, not only among God's people, but among all those who
believed in the God of Israel. The Jewish writings after the captivity
are full of this doctrine. See 2 Maccabees 7:9, 14, 23, 36; 12:43;
14:46; Wis. 5:1, 7, 17; 6:6, 7. See also Josephus and the Targums,
passim.

[John 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 11:25</span></span>

I am the resurrection, and the life - Thou sayest that thy brother shall
rise again in the resurrection at the last day; but by whom shall he
arise if not by Me, who am the author of the resurrection, and the
source of life? And is it not as easy for me to raise him now as to
raise him then? Thus our blessed Lord raises her hope, animates her
faith, and teaches her that he was not a mere man, but the essential
principle and author of existence.

Though he were dead - Every man who has believed or shall believe in me,
though his believing shall not prevent him from dying a natural death,
yet his body shall be re-animated, and he shall live with me in an
eternal glory. And every one who is now dead, dead to God, dead in
trespasses and sins, if he believe in me, trust on me as his sole
Savior, he shall live, shall be quickened by my Spirit, and live a life
of faith, working by love.

[John 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 11:26</span></span>

Shall never die - Or, Shall not die for ever. Though he die a temporal
death. he shall not continue under its power for ever; but shall have a
resurrection to life eternal.

Believest thou this? - God has determined to work in the behalf of men
only in proportion to their faith in him: it was necessary, therefore,
that these persons should be well instructed concerning his nature, that
they might find no obstacles to their faith. These sisters had
considered him only as a prophet hitherto; and it was necessary that
they should now be farther instructed, that, as God was to exert
himself, they might believe that God was there.

[John 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 11:27</span></span>

Yea, Lord: I believe - ΠεπιϚευκα, I have believed. Either meaning that
she had believed this for some time past, or that, since he began to
teach her, her faith had been considerable increased; but verbs preter,
in Greek, are often used to signify the present. Martha here
acknowledges Christ for the Messiah promised to their fathers; but her
faith goes no farther; and, having received some hope of her brother's
present resurrection, she waited for no farther instruction, but ran to
call her sister.

[John 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 11:28</span></span>

The Master is come - This was the appellation which he had in the
family; and from these words it appears that Christ had inquired for
Mary, desiring to have her present, that he might strengthen her faith,
previously to his raising her brother.

[John 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 11:30</span></span>

Jesus was not yet come into the town - As the Jewish burying places were
without their cities and villages, it appears that the place where our
Savior was, when Martha met him, was not far from the place where
Lazarus was buried. See the note on [Luk
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012).

[John 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 11:31</span></span>

She goeth unto the grave to weep there - It appears that it was the
custom for the nearest relatives of the deceased to go at times, during
the three days of weeping, accompanied by their friends and neighbors,
to mourn near the graves of the deceased. They supposed that the spirit
hovered about the place where the body was laid for three days, to see
whether it might be again permitted to enter, but, when it saw the face
change, it knew that all hope was now past. It was on this ground that
the seven days of lamentation succeeded the three days of weeping,
because all hope was now taken away. They had traditions that, in the
course of three days, persons who had died were raised again to life.
See Lightfoot.

Mr. Ward says: "I once saw some Mussulman women, near Calcutta, lying on
the new-made grave of a relation, weeping bitterly. In this manner the
Mussulman females weep and strew flowers over the graves of relations,
at the expiration of four days, and forty days, after the interment."

[John 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 11:33</span></span>

He groaned in the spirit, etc. - Here the blessed Jesus shows himself to
be truly man; and a man, too, who, notwithstanding his amazing dignity
and excellence, did not feel it beneath him to sympathize with the
distressed, and weep with those who wept. After this example of our
Lord, shall we say that it is weakness, folly, and sin to weep for the
loss of relatives? He who says so, and can act in a similar case to the
above according to his own doctrine, is a reproach to the name of man.
Such apathy never came from God: it is generally a bad scion, implanted
in a nature miserably depraved, deriving its nourishment from a
perverted spirit or a hardened heart; though in some cases it is the
effect of an erroneous, ascetic mode of discipline.

It is abolishing one of the finest traits in our Lord's human character
to say that he wept and mourned here because of sin and its
consequences. No: Jesus had humanity in its perfection, and humanity
unadulterated is generous and sympathetic. A particular friend of Jesus
was dead; and, as his friend, the affectionate soul of Christ was
troubled, and he mingled his sacred tears with those of the afflicted
relatives. Behold the man, in his deep, heart-felt trouble, and in his
flowing tears! But when he says, Lazarus, come forth! behold the God!
and the God too of infinite clemency, love, and power. Can such a Jesus
refuse to comfort the distressed, or save the lost? Can he restrain his
mercies from the penitent soul, or refuse to hear the yearnings of his
own bowels? Can such a character be inattentive to the welfare of his
creatures? Here is God manifested in the flesh! living in human nature,
feeling for the distressed, and suffering for the lost! Reader! ask thy
soul, ask thy heart, ask the bowels of thy compassions, if thou hast
any, could this Jesus unconditionally reprobate from eternity any soul
of man? Thou answerest, No! God repeats, No! Universal nature re-echoes,
No! and the tears and blood of Jesus eternally say, No!

[John 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 11:35</span></span>

Jesus wept - The least verse in the Bible, yet inferior to none. Some of
the ruthless ancients, improperly styled fathers of the Church, thought
that weeping was a degradation of the character of Christ; and
therefore, according to the testimony of Epiphanius, Anchorat. c. 13,
razed out of the Gospel of St. Luke the place ([Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041)) where Christ is said to have
wept over Jerusalem.

[John 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 11:36</span></span>

Behold how he loved him! - And when we see him pouring out his blood and
life upon the cross for mankind, we may with exultation and joy cry out,
Behold how he hath loved Us!

[John 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 11:37</span></span>

Could not this man, which opened the eyes, etc. - Through the
maliciousness of their hearts, these Jews considered the tears of Jesus
as a proof of his weakness. We may suppose them to have spoken thus: "If
he loved him so well, why did he not heal him? And if he could have
healed him, why did he not do it, seeing he testifies so much sorrow at
his death? Let none hereafter vaunt the miracle of the blind man's cure;
if he had been capable of doing that, he would not have permitted his
friend to die." Thus will men reason, or rather madden, concerning the
works and providence of God; till, by his farther miracles of mercy or
judgment, he converts or confounds them.

[John 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 11:38</span></span>

It was a cave, etc. - It is likely that several of the Jewish
burying-places were made in the sides of rocks; some were probably dug
down like a well from the upper surface, and then hollowed under into
niches, and a flat stone, laid down upon the top, would serve for a
door. Yet, from what the evangelist says, there seems to have been
something peculiar in the formation of this tomb. It might have been a
natural grotto, or dug in the side of a rock or hill, and the lower part
of the door level with the ground, or how could Lazarus have come forth,
as he is said to have done, [Joh
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)?

[John 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 11:39</span></span>

Take ye away the stone - He desired to convince all those who were at
the place, and especially those who took away the stone, that Lazarus
was not only dead, but that putrescency had already taken place, that it
might not be afterwards said that Lazarus had only fallen into a
lethargy; but that the greatness of the miracle might be fully evinced.

He stinketh - The body is in a state of putrefaction. The Greek word οζω
signifies simply to smell, whether the scent be good or bad; but the
circumstances of the case sufficiently show that the latter is its
meaning here. Our translators might have omitted the uncouth term in the
common text; but they chose literally to follow the Anglo-Saxon, and it
would be now useless to attempt any change, as the common reading would
perpetually recur, and cause all attempts at mending to sound even worse
than that in the text.

For he hath been dead four days - Τεταρταιος γαρ εστι, This is the
fourth day, i.e. since his interment. Christ himself was buried on the
same day on which he was crucified, see [Joh
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#042), and it is likely that Lazarus
was buried also on the same day on which he died. See on [Joh
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#017) (note).

[John 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 11:40</span></span>

If thou wouldest believe, etc. - So it appears that it is faith alone
that interests the miraculous and saving power of God in behalf of men.
Instead of δοξαν, the glory, one MS. reads δυναμιν, the miraculous
power.

[John 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 11:41</span></span>

Where the dead was laid - These words are wanting in BC\*DL, three
others; Syriac, Persic, Arabic, Sahidic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate,
Saxon, and in all the Itala. Griesbach leaves them out of the text.

Father, I thank thee - As it was a common opinion that great miracles
might be wrought by the power and in the name of the devil, Jesus lifted
up his eyes to heaven, and invoked the supreme God before these
unbelieving Jews, that they might see that it was by his power, and by
his only, that this miracle was done; that every hinderance to this
people's faith might be completely taken out of the way, and that their
faith might stand, not in the wisdom of man, but in the power of the
Most High. On this account our Lord says, he spoke because of the
multitude, that they might see there was no diabolic influence here, and
that God in his mercy had visited his people.

[John 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 11:43</span></span>

He cried with a loud voice - In [Joh
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025), our Lord had said, that the time
was coming, in which the dead should hear the voice of the Son of God,
and live. He now fulfils that prediction, and cries aloud, that the
people may take notice, and see that even death is subject to the
sovereign command of Christ.

Jesus Christ, says Quesnel, omitted nothing to save this dead person: he
underwent the fatigue of a journey, he wept, he prayed, he groaned, he
cried with a loud voice, and commanded the dead to come forth. What
ought not a minister to do in order to raise a soul, and especially a
soul long dead in trespasses and sins!

[John 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 11:44</span></span>

Bound hand and foot with grave-clothes - Swathed about with rollers -
κειριαις, from κειρω, I cut. These were long slips of linen a few inches
in breadth, with which the body and limbs of the dead were swathed, and
especially those who were embalmed, that the aromatics might be kept in
contact with the flesh. But as it is evident that Lazarus had not been
embalmed, it is probable that his limbs were not swathed together, as is
the constant case with those who are embalmed, but separately, so that
he could come out of the tomb at the command of Christ, though he could
not walk freely till the rollers were taken away. But some will have it
that he was swathed exactly like a mummy, and that his coming out in
that state was another miracle. But there is no need of multiplying
miracles in this case: there was one wrought which was a most sovereign
proof of the unlimited power and goodness of God. Several of the
primitive fathers have adduced this resurrection of Lazarus as the
model, type, proof, and pledge of the general resurrection of the dead.

Loose him, and let him go - He would have the disciples and those who
were at hand take part in this business, that the fullest conviction
might rest on every person's mind concerning the reality of what was
wrought. He whom the grace of Christ converts and restores to life comes
forth, at his call, from the dark, dismal grave of sin, in which his
soul has long been buried: he walks, according to the command of Christ,
in newness of life; and gives, by the holiness of his conduct, the
fullest proof to all his acquaintance that he is alive from the dead.

[John 11:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 11:45</span></span>

Many of the Jews - believed on him - They saw that the miracle was
incontestable; and they were determined to resist the truth no longer.
Their friendly visit to these distressed sisters became the means of
their conversion. How true is the saying of the wise man, It is better
to go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting! [Ecc
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002). God never permits men to do any
thing, through a principle of kindness to others, without making it
instrumental of good to themselves. He that watereth shall be watered
also himself, [Pro 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025). Therefore,
let no man withhold good, while it is in the power of his hand to do it.
[Pro 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#027).

[John 11:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 11:46</span></span>

But some of them went their ways - Astonishing! Some that had seen even
this miracle steeled their hearts against it; and not only so, but
conspired the destruction of this most humane, amiable, and glorious
Savior! Those who obstinately resist the truth of God are capable of
every thing that is base, perfidious, and cruel.

[John 11:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 11:47</span></span>

Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees a council - The
Pharisees, as such, had no power to assemble councils; and therefore
only those are meant who were scribes or elders of the people, in
conjunction with Annas and his son-in-law Caiaphas, who were the high
priests here mentioned. See [Joh
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013), [Joh
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024).

What do we? - This last miracle was so clear, plain, and incontestable,
that they were driven now to their wit's end. Their own spies had come
and borne testimony of it. They told them what they had seen, and on
their word, as being in league with themselves against Jesus, they could
confidently rely.

[John 11:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 11:48</span></span>

All men will believe on him - If we permit him to work but a few more
miracles like these two last (the cure of the blind man, and the
resurrection of Lazarus) he will be universally acknowledged for the
Messiah; the people will proclaim him king; and the Romans, who can
suffer no government here but their own, will be so irritated that they
will send their armies against us, and destroy our temple, and utterly
dissolve our civil and ecclesiastical existence. Thus, under the
pretense of the public good, these men of blood hide their hatred
against Christ, and resolve to put him to death. To get the people on
their side, they must give the alarm of destruction to the nation: if
this man be permitted to live, we shall be all destroyed! Their former
weapons will not now avail. On the subject of keeping the Sabbath, they
had been already confounded; and his last miracles were so incontestable
that they could no longer cry out, He is a deceiver.

Both our place and nation - Literally, this place, τον τοπον: but that
the temple only is understood is dear from [Act
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013), [Act
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#014); 2 Maccabees 1:14; 2:18; 3:18;
5:16, 17; 10:7; where it is uniformly called the place, or the holy
place, because they considered it the most glorious and excellent place
in the world. When men act in opposition to God's counsel, the very
evils which they expect thereby to avoid will come upon them. They said,
If we do not put Jesus to death, the Romans will destroy both our temple
and nation. Now, it was because they put him to death that the Romans
burnt and razed their temple to the ground, and put a final period to
their political existence. See [Mat
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007); and the notes on chap. 24.

[John 11:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 11:49</span></span>

Caiaphas being the high priest that same year - By the law of Moses,
[Exo 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#015), the office of high priest
was for life, and the son of Aaron's race always succeeded his father.
But at this time the high priesthood was almost annual: the Romans and
Herod put down and raised up whom they pleased, and when they pleased,
without attending to any other rule than merely that the person put in
this office should be of the sacerdotal race. According to Josephus,
Ant. xviii. c. 3, the proper name of this person was Joseph, and
Caiaphas was his surname. He possessed the high priesthood for eight or
nine years, and was deposed by Vitellius, governor of Judea. See on [Luk
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002) (note).

Ye know nothing - Of the perilous state in which ye stand.

[John 11:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 11:50</span></span>

Nor consider - Ye talk more at random than according to reason, and the
exigencies of the case. There is a various reading here in some MSS.
that should be noticed. Instead of ουδε διαλογιζεσθε, which we
translate, ye do not consider, and which properly conveys the idea of
conferring, or talking together, ουδε λογιζεσθε, neither do ye reason or
consider rightly, is the reading of ABDL, three others, and some of the
primitive fathers. Griesbach, by placing it in his inner margin, shows
that he thinks it bids fair to be the true reading. Dr. White thinks
that this reading is equal, and probably preferable, to that in the
text: Lectio aequalis, forsitan praeferenda receptae.

That one man should die for the people - In saying these remarkable
words, Caiaphas had no other intention than merely to state that it was
better to put Jesus to death than to expose the whole nation to ruin on
his account. His maxim was, it is better to sacrifice one man than a
whole nation. In politics nothing could be more just than this; but
there are two words to be spoken to it:

First, The religion of God says, we must not do evil that good may come:
[Rom 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008).

Secondly, It is not certain that Christ will be acknowledged as king by
all the people; nor that he will make any insurrection against the
Romans; nor that the Romans will, on his account, ruin the temple, the
city, and the nation. This Caiaphas should have considered. A person
should be always sure of his premises before he attempts to draw any
conclusion from them. See Calmet. This saying was proverbial among the
Jews: see several instances of it in Schoettgen.

[John 11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 11:51</span></span>

This spake he not of himself - Wicked and worthless as he was, God so
guided his tongue that, contrary to his intention, he pronounced a
prophecy of the death of Jesus Christ.

I have already remarked that the doctrine of a vicarious atonement had
gained, long before this time, universal credit in the world. Words
similar to these of Caiaphas are, by the prince of all the Roman poets,
put in the mouth of Neptune, when promising Venus that the fleet of
Aeneas should be preserved, and his whole crew should be saved, one only
excepted, whose death he speaks of in these remarkable words: -

"Unum pro multis dabitar caput."

"One life shall fall, that many may be saved."

Which victim the poet informs us was Palinurus, the pilot of Aeneas's
own ship, who was precipitated into the deep by a Divine influence. See
Virg. Aen. v. l. 815, etc.

There was no necessity for the poet to have introduced this account. It
was no historic fact, nor indeed does it tend to decorate the poem. It
even pains the reader's mind; for, after suffering so much in the
sufferings of the pious hero and his crew, he is at once relieved by the
interposition of a god, who promises to allay the storm, disperse the
clouds, preserve the fleet, and the lives of the men; but, - one must
perish! The reader is again distressed, and the book ominously closes
with the death of the generous Palinurus, who strove to the last to be
faithful to his trust, and to preserve the life of his master and his
friend. Why then did the poet introduce this? Merely, as it appears to
me, to have the opportunity of showing in a few words his religious
creed, on one of the most important doctrines in the world; and which
the sacrificial system of Jews and Gentiles proves that all the nations
of the earth credited.

As Caiaphas was high priest, his opinion was of most weight with the
council; therefore God put these words in his mouth rather than into the
mouth of any other of its members. It was a maxim among the Jews that no
prophet ever knew the purport of his own prophecy, Moses and Isaiah
excepted. They were in general organs by which God chose to speak.

[John 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">joh 11:52</span></span>

And not for that nation only, etc. - These, and the preceding words in
[Joh 11:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#051), are John's explication of
what was prophetic in the words of Caiaphas: as if John had said, He is
indeed to die for the sins of the Jewish nation, but not for theirs
alone, but for the sins of the whole world: see his own words
afterwards, [Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001), [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002).

Gather together in one - That he should collect into one body; - form
one Church out of the Jewish and Gentile believers.

Children of God that were scattered abroad - Probably John only meant
the Jews who were dispersed among all nations since the conquest of
Judea by the Romans; and these are called the dispersed, [Joh
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035), and [Jam
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001); and it is because he refers to
these only, that he terms them here, the children of God, which was an
ancient character of the Jewish people: see [Deu
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005); [Isa
43:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#006); [Isa
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011); [Jer
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001). Taking his words in this sense,
then his meaning is this: that Christ was to die, not only for the then
inhabitants of Judea, but for all the Jewish race wheresoever scattered;
and that the consequence would be, that they should be all collected
from their various dispersions, and made one body. This comports with
the predictions of St. Paul: Romans 11:1-32. This probably is the sense
of the passage; and though, according to this interpretation, the
apostle may seem to confine the benefits of Christ's death to the Jewish
people only, yet we find from the passage already quoted from his first
epistle, that his views of this subject were afterwards very much
extended; and that he saw that Jesus Christ was not only a propitiation
for their sins (the Jews) but for the sins of the whole world: see his
1st epistle, [Jo1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002). All the truths
of the Gospel were not revealed at once, even to the apostles
themselves.

[John 11:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">joh 11:53</span></span>

They took counsel together - Συνεβουλευσαντο, they were of one accord in
the business, and had fully made up their minds on the subject; and they
waited only for a proper opportunity to put him to death.

[John 11:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">joh 11:54</span></span>

Walked no more openly - Παρῥησιᾳ, He did not go as before through the
cities and villages, teaching, preaching, and healing the sick.

Near to the wilderness - Some MSS. add, of Samphourein, or Samphourim,
or Sapfurim.

A city called Ephraim - Variously written in the MSS., Ephraim, Ephrem,
Ephram, and Ephratha. This was a little village, situated in the
neighborhood of Bethel; for the scripture, [Ch2
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019), and Josephus, War, b. iv. c. 8.
s. 9, join them both together. Many believe that this city or village
was the same with that mentioned, 1 Maccabees 5:46; 2 Maccabees 12:27.
Joshua gave it to the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009); and Eusebius and Jerome say it
was about twenty miles north of Jerusalem.

And there continued - Calmet says, following Toynard, that he stayed
there two months, from the 24th of January till the 24th of March.

[John 11:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">joh 11:55</span></span>

The Jews' passover was nigh at hand - It is not necessary to suppose
that this verse has any particular connection with the preceding. Most
chronologists agree that our Lord spent at least two months in Ephraim.
This was the last passover which our Lord attended; and it was at this
one that he suffered death for the salvation of a lost world. As the
passover was nigh, many of the inhabitants of Ephraim and its
neighborhood went up to Jerusalem, some time (perhaps seven or eight
days, for so much time was required to purify those who had touched the
dead) before the feast, that they might purify themselves, and not eat
the passover otherwise than prescribed in the law. Many of the country
people, in the time of Hezekiah, committed a trespass by not attending
to this: see [Ch2 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018), [Ch2
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#019). Those mentioned in the text
wished to avoid this inconvenience.

[John 11:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">joh 11:56</span></span>

Then sought they for Jesus - Probably those of Ephraim, in whose company
Christ is supposed to have departed for the feast, but, having stayed
behind, perhaps at Jericho, or its vicinity, the others had not missed
him till they came to the temple, and then inquired among each other
whether he would not attend the feast. Or the persons mentioned in the
text might have been the agents of the high priest, etc., and hearing
that Christ had been at Ephraim, came and inquired among the people that
came from that quarter, whether Jesus would not attend the festival,
knowing that he was punctual in his attendance on all the Jewish
solemnities.

[John 11:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">joh 11:57</span></span>

Had given a commandment - Had given order; εντολην, positive order, or
injunction, and perhaps with a grievous penalty, that no one should keep
the place of his residence a secret. This was their hour, and the power
of darkness; and now they are fully determined to take away his life.
The order here spoken of was given in consequence of the determination
of the council, mentioned [Joh
11:48-53](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#048).

Christ's sympathy and tenderness, one of the principal subjects in this
chapter, have already been particularly noted on [Joh
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033). His eternal power and Godhead
are sufficiently manifested in the resurrection of Lazarus. The whole
chapter abounds with great and important truths, delivered in language
the most impressive and edifying. In the whole of our Lord's conduct in
the affair of Lazarus and his sisters, we find majesty, humanity,
friendship, and sublime devotion, blended in the most intimate manner,
and illustrating each other by their respective splendor and excellence.
In every act, in every word, we see God manifested in the Flesh: - Man
in all the amiableness and charities of his nature; God in the plenitude
of his power and goodness. How sublime is the lesson of instruction
conveyed by the words, Jesus wept! The heart that feels them not must be
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, and consequently lost
to every generous feeling.

On the quotation from Virgil, on the 50th verse, a learned friend has
sent me the following lines.

My dear Sir, - I have observed that in one part of your Commentary you
quote these words of Virgil, Unum pro multis dabitur caput; and you are
of opinion that Virgil here recognizes the doctrine of atonement. There
is a passage in Lucan where this doctrine is exhibited more clearly and
fully. It is in the second book, v. 306. Cato, in a speech to Brutus,
declares his intention of fighting under the standard of Pompey, and
then expresses the following sentiment: -

O utinam, coelique Deis Erebique liberet,

Hoc caput in cunctas damnatum exponere poenas!

Devotum hostiles Decium pressere catervae:

Me geminae figant acies, me barbara telis

Rheni turba petat: cunctis ego pervius hastis

Excipiam medius totius vulnera belli.

Hic redimat sanguis populos: hac caede luatur,

Quidquid Romani meruerunt pendere mores.

O, were the gods contented with my fall,

If Cato's life could answer for you all,

Like the devoted Decius would I go,

To force from either side the mortal blow,

And for my country's sake wish to be thought her foe.

To me, ye Romans, all your rage confine,

To me, ye nations from the barbarous Rhine,

Let all the wounds this war shall make be mine.

Open my vital streams, and let them run;

O, let the purple sacrifice atone,

For all the ills offending Rome hath done!

Rowe.

A little after, v. 377, Lucan portrays the character of Cato with a very
masterly hand; but he applies expressions to a mortal which are
applicable to Christ alone.

Uni quippe vacat, studiisque odiisque carenti,

Humanum lugere genus.

The golden mean unchanging to pursue;

Constant to keep the purposed end in view;

Religiously to follow nature's laws;

And die with pleasure in his country's cause,

To think he was not for himself design'd,

But born to be of use to all mankind.

Rowe.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 12](joh012)

</div>
