<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh002)  [Next](joh004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 3:0</span></span>

The conversation between Nicodemus and our Lord, about the new birth and
faith in his testimony, [Joh 3:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001).
The love of God, the source of human salvation, [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016). Who are condemned, and who are
approved, [Joh 3:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017). Jesus and his
disciples come to Judea, and baptize, [Joh
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022). John baptizes in Aenon, [Joh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023), [Joh
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024). The disciples of John and the
Pharisees dispute about purifying, [Joh
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025). The discourse between John and
his disciples about Christ, in which the excellence, perfection, and
privileges, of the Christian dispensation are pointed out, [Joh
3:26-36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026).

[John 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 3:1</span></span>

Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews - One of the members of the grand
Sanhedrin; for such were ordinarily styled rulers among the Jews. A
person of the name of Nicodemus, the son of Gorion, is mentioned in the
Jewish writings, who lived in the time of Vespasian, and was reputed to
be so rich that he could support all the inhabitants of Jerusalem for
ten years. But this is said in their usual extravagant mode of talking.

[John 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 3:2</span></span>

Came to Jesus by night - He had matters of the utmost importance, on
which he wished to consult Christ; and he chose the night season,
perhaps less through the fear of man than through a desire to have Jesus
alone, as he found him all the day encompassed with the multitude; so
that it was impossible for him to get an opportunity to speak fully on
those weighty affairs concerning which he intended to consult him.
However, we may take it for granted that he had no design at present to
become his disciple; as baptism and circumcision, which were the
initiating ordinances among the Jews, were never administered in the
night time. If any person received baptism by night, he was not
acknowledged for a proselyte. See Wetstein. But as Jews were not obliged
to be baptized, they being circumcised, and consequently in the
covenant, he, being a Jew, would not feel any necessity of submitting to
this rite.

Rabbi - My Master, or Teacher, a title of respect given to the Jewish
doctors, something like our Doctor of Divinity, i.e. teacher of Divine
things. But as there may be many found among us who, though they bear
the title, are no teachers, so it was among the Jews; and perhaps it was
in reference to this that Nicodemus uses the word διδασκαλος,
didaskalos, immediately after, by which, in [Joh
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038), St. John translates the word
rabbi. Rabbi, teacher, is often no more than a title of respect:
didaskolos signifies a person who not only has the name of teacher, but
who actually does teach.

We know that thou art a teacher come from God - We, all the members of
the grand Sanhedrin, and all the rulers of the people, who have paid
proper attention to thy doctrine and miracles. We are all convinced of
this, though we are not all candid enough to own it. It is possible,
however, that οιδαμεν, we know, signifies no more than, it is known, it
is generally acknowledged and allowed, that thou art a teacher come from
God.

No man can do these miracles - It is on the evidence of thy miracles
that I ground my opinion of thee. No man can do what thou dost, unless
the omnipotence of God be with him.

[John 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 3:3</span></span>

Jesus answered - Not in the language of compliment: - he saw the state
of Nicodemus's soul, and he immediately addressed himself to him on a
subject the most interesting and important. But what connection is there
between our Lord's reply, and the address of Nicodemus? Probably our
Lord saw that the object of his visit was to inquire about the Messiah's
kingdom; and in reference to this he immediately says, Except a man be
born again, etc.

The repetition of amen, or verily, verily, among the Jewish writers, was
considered of equal import with the most solemn oath.

Be born again - Or, from above: different to that new birth which the
Jews supposed every baptized proselyte enjoyed; for they held that the
Gentile, who became a proselyte, was like a child new born. This birth
was of water from below: the birth for which Christ contends is ανωθεν,
from above - by the agency of the Holy Spirit. Every man must have two
births, one from heaven, the other from earth - one of his body, the
other of his soul: without the first he cannot see nor enjoy this world,
without the last he can not see nor enjoy the kingdom of God. As there
is an absolute necessity that a child should be born into the world,
that he may see its light, contemplate its glories, and enjoy its good,
so there is an absolute necessity that the soul should be brought out of
its state of darkness and sin, through the light and power of the grace
of Christ, that it may be able to see, ιδειν, or, to discern, the
glories and excellencies of the kingdom of Christ here, and be prepared
for the enjoyment of the kingdom of glory hereafter. The Jews had some
general notion of the new birth; but, like many among Christians, they
put the acts of proselytism, baptism, etc., in the place of the Holy
Spirit and his influence: they acknowledged that a man must be born
again; but they made that new birth to consist in profession,
confession, and external washing. See on [Joh
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#010) (note).

The new birth which is here spoken of comprehends, not only what is
termed justification or pardon, but also sanctification or holiness. Sin
must be pardoned, and the impurity of the heart washed away, before any
soul can possibly enter into the kingdom of God. As this new birth
implies the renewing of the whole soul in righteousness and true
holiness, it is not a matter that may be dispensed with: heaven is a
place of holiness, and nothing but what is like itself can ever enter
into it.

[John 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 3:4</span></span>

How can a man be born when he is old? - It is probable that Nicodemus
was pretty far advanced in age at this time; and from his answer we may
plainly perceive that, like the rest of the Jews, and like multitudes of
Christians, he rested in the letter, without paying proper attention to
the spirit: the shadow, without the thing signified, had hitherto
satisfied him. Our Lord knew him to be in this state, and this was the
cause of his pointed address to him.

[John 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 3:5</span></span>

Of water and of the Spirit - To the baptism of water a man was admitted
when he became a proselyte to the Jewish religion; and, in this baptism,
he promised in the most solemn manner to renounce idolatry, to take the
God of Israel for his God, and to have his life conformed to the
precepts of the Divine law. But the water which was used on the occasion
was only an emblem of the Holy Spirit. The soul was considered as in a
state of defilement, because of past sin: now, as by that water the body
was washed, cleansed, and refreshed, so, by the influences of the Holy
Spirit, the soul was to be purified from its defilement, and
strengthened to walk in the way of truth and holiness.

When John came baptizing with water, he gave the Jews the plainest
intimations that this would not suffice; that it was only typical of
that baptism of the Holy Ghost, under the similitude of fire, which they
must all receive from Jesus Christ: see [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011). Therefore, our Lord asserts that
a man must be born of water and the Spirit, i.e. of the Holy Ghost,
which, represented under the similitude of water, cleanses, refreshes,
and purifies the soul. Reader, hast thou never had any other baptism
than that of water? If thou hast not had any other, take Jesus Christ's
word for it, thou canst not, in thy present state, enter into the
kingdom of God. I would not say to thee merely, read what it is to be
born of the Spirit: but pray, O pray to God incessantly, till he give
thee to feel what is implied in it! Remember, it is Jesus only who
baptizes with the Holy Ghost: see [Joh
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033). He who receives not this baptism
has neither right nor title to the kingdom of God; nor can he with any
propriety be termed a Christian, because that which essentially
distinguished the Christian dispensation from that of the Jews was, that
its author baptized all his followers with the Holy Ghost.

Though baptism by water, into the Christian faith, was necessary to
every Jew and Gentile that entered into the kingdom of the Messiah, it
is not necessary that by water and the Spirit (in this place) we should
understand two different things: it is probably only an elliptical form
of speech, for the Holy Spirit under the similitude of water; as, in
[Mat 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003), the Holy Ghost and fire, do
not mean two things, but one, viz. the Holy Ghost under the similitude
of fire - pervading every part, refining and purifying the whole.

[John 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 3:6</span></span>

That which is born of the flesh is flesh - This is the answer to the
objection made by Nicodemus in [Joh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004). Can a man enter the second time
into his mother's womb and be born? Our Lord here intimates that, were
even this possible, it would not answer the end; for the plant will ever
be of the nature of the seed that produces it - like will beget its
like. The kingdom of God is spiritual and holy; and that which is born
of the Spirit resembles the Spirit; for as he is who begat, so is he who
is begotten of him. Therefore, the spiritual regeneration is essentially
necessary, to prepare the soul for a holy and spiritual kingdom.

[John 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 3:8</span></span>

The wind bloweth - Though the manner in which this new birth is effected
by the Divine Spirit, be incomprehensible to us, yet we must not, on
this ground, suppose it to be impossible. The wind blows in a variety of
directions - we hear its sound, perceive its operation in the motion of
the trees, etc., and feel it on ourselves - but we cannot discern the
air itself; we only know that it exists by the effects which it
produces: so is every one who is born of the Spirit: the effects are as
discernible and as sensible as those of the wind; but itself we cannot
see. But he who is born of God knows that he is thus born: the Spirit
itself, the grand agent in this new birth, beareth witness with his
spirit, that he is born of God, [Rom
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016); for, he that believeth hath the
witness in himself, [Jo1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013); [Jo1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#010); [Gal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006). And so does this Spirit work in
and by him that others, though they see not the principle, can easily
discern the change produced; for whatsoever is born of God overcometh
the world, [Jo1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004).

[John 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 3:9</span></span>

How can these things be? - Our Lord had very plainly told him how these
things could be, and illustrated the new birth by one of the most proper
similes that could be chosen; but so intent was this great man an making
every thing submit to the testimony of his senses that he appears
unwilling to believe any thing, unless he can comprehend it. This is the
case with many - they profess to believe because they comprehend; but
they are impostors who speak thus: there is not a man in the universe
that can fully comprehend one operation, either of God or his instrument
nature; and yet they must believe, and do believe, though they never did
nor ever can fully comprehend, or account for, the objects of their
faith.

[John 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 3:10</span></span>

Art thou a master of Israel, etc. - Hast thou taken upon thee to guide
the blind into the way of truth; and yet knowest not that truth thyself?
Dost thou command proselytes to be baptized with water, as an emblem of
a new birth; and art thou unacquainted with the cause, necessity,
nature, and effects of that new birth? How many masters are there still
in Israel who are in this respect deplorably ignorant; and, strange to
tell, publish their ignorance and folly in the sight of the sun, by
writing and speaking against the thing itself! It is strange that such
people cannot keep their own secret.

"But water baptism is this new birth." No. Jesus tells you, a man must
be born of water and the Spirit; and the water, and its effects upon the
body, differ as much from this Spirit, which it is intended to
represent, and the effects produced in the soul, as real fire does from
painted flame.

"But I am taught to believe that this baptism is regeneration." Then you
are taught to believe a falsity. The Church of England, in which perhaps
you are a teacher or a member, asks the following questions, and returns
the subjoined answers.

"Q. How many sacraments hath Christ ordained in his Church?"

"A. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say,
baptism and the supper of the Lord."

"Q. How many parts are there in a sacrament?"

"A. Two. The outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace."

"Q. What is the outward visible sign, or form, in baptism?"

"A. Water, wherein the person is baptized, In the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost."

"Q. What is the inward and spiritual grace?"

"A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness; for being by
nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the
children of grace."

Now, I ask, Whereby are such persons made the children of grace? Not by
the water, but by the death unto sin, and the new birth unto
righteousness: i.e. through the agency of the Holy Ghost, sin is
destroyed, and the soul filled with holiness.

[John 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 3:11</span></span>

We speak that we do know - I and my disciples do not profess to teach a
religion which we do not understand, nor exemplify in our conduct. A
strong but delicate reproof to Nicodemus, who, though a master of
Israel, did not understand the very rudiments of the doctrine of
salvation. He was ignorant of the nature of the new birth. How wretched
is the lot of that minister, who, while he professes to recommend the
salvation of God to others, is all the while dealing in the meagre,
unfruitful traffic of an unfelt truth! Let such either acquire the
knowledge of the grace of God themselves, or cease to proclaim it.

Ye receive not our witness - It was deemed criminal among the Jews to
question or depart from the authority of their teachers. Nicodemus
grants that our Lord is a teacher come from God, and yet scruples to
receive his testimony relative to the new birth, and the spiritual
nature of the Messiah's kingdom.

[John 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 3:12</span></span>

If I have told you earthly things - If, after I have illustrated this
new birth by a most expressive metaphor taken from earthly things, and
after all you believe not; how can you believe, should I tell you of
heavenly things, in such language as angels use, where earthly images
and illustrations can have no place? Or, if you, a teacher in Israel, do
not understand the nature of such an earthly thing, or custom of the
kingdom established over the Jewish nation, as being born of baptism,
practised every day in the initiation of proselytes, how will you
understand such heavenly things as the initiation of my disciples by the
baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire from heaven, if I should proceed
farther on the subject?

[John 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 3:13</span></span>

No man hath ascended - This seems a figurative expression for, No man
hath known the mysteries of the kingdom of God; as in [Deu
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012); [Psa
73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017); [Pro
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004); [Rom
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#034). And the expression is founded
upon this generally received maxim: That to be perfectly acquainted with
the concerns of a place, it is necessary for a person to be on the spot.
But our Lord probably spoke to correct a false notion among the Jews,
viz. that Moses had ascended to heaven, in order to get the law. It is
not Moses who is to be heard now, but Jesus: Moses did not ascend to
heaven; but the Son of man is come down from heaven to reveal the Divine
will.

That came down - The incarnation of Christ is represented under the
notion of his coming down from heaven, to dwell upon earth.

Which is in heaven - Lest a wrong meaning should be taken from the
foregoing expression, and it should be imagined that, in order to
manifest himself upon earth he must necessarily leave heaven; our
blessed Lord qualifies it by adding, the Son of man who is in heaven;
pointing out, by this, the ubiquity or omnipresence of his nature: a
character essentially belonging to God; for no being can possibly exist
in more places than one at a time, but He who fills the heavens and the
earth.

[John 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 3:14</span></span>

As Moses lifted up - He shows the reason why he descended from heaven,
that he might be lifted up, i.e. crucified, for the salvation of man.
kind, and be, by the appointment of God, as certain a remedy for sinful
souls as the brazen serpent elevated on a pole, [Num
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009), was for the bodies of the
Israelites, which had been bitten by the fiery serpents in the
wilderness. It does not appear to me that the brazen serpent was ever
intended to be considered as a type of Christ. It is possible to draw
likenesses and resemblances out of any thing; but, in such matters as
these, we should take heed that we go no farther than we can say, Thus
it is written. Among the Jews, the brazen serpent was considered a type
of the resurrection - through it the dying lived; and so, by the voice
of God, they that were dead shall be raised to life. As the serpent was
raised up, so shall Christ be lifted up: as they who were stung by the
fiery serpents were restored by looking up to the brazen serpent, so
those who are infected with and dying through sin are healed and saved,
by looking up to and believing in Christ crucified. These are all the
analogies which we can legitimately trace between the lifting up of the
brazen serpent, and the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. The lifting up of
the Son of man may refer to his mediatorial office at the right hand of
God. See the note on [Num 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#009).

[John 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 3:15</span></span>

That whosoever believeth - Bp. Pearce supposes that this verse is only
the conclusion of the 16th, and that it has been inserted in this place
by mistake. The words contain the reason of the subject in the following
verse, and seem to break in upon our Lord's argument before he had fully
stated it. The words, μη αποληται αλλα, may not perish but, are omitted
by some very ancient MSS. and versions.

[John 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 3:16</span></span>

For God so loved the world - Such a love as that which induced God to
give his only begotten son to die for the world could not be described:
Jesus Christ does not attempt it. He has put an eternity of meaning in
the particle οὑτω, so, and left a subject for everlasting contemplation,
wonder, and praise, to angels and to men. The same evangelist uses a
similar mode of expression, [Jo1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#001) :
Behold, What Manner of love, ποταπην αγαπην, the Father hath bestowed
upon us.

From the subject before him, let the reader attend to the following
particulars.

First, The world was in a ruinous, condemned state, about to perish
everlastingly; and was utterly without power to rescue itself from
destruction.

Secondly, That God, through the impulse of his eternal love, provided
for its rescue and salvation, by giving his Son to die for it.

Thirdly, That the sacrifice of Jesus was the only mean by which the
redemption of man could be effected, and that it is absolutely
sufficient to accomplish this gracious design: for it would have been
inconsistent with the wisdom of God, to have appointed a sacrifice
greater in itself, or less in its merit, than what the urgent
necessities of the case required.

Fourthly, That sin must be an indescribable evil, when it required no
less a sacrifice, to make atonement for it, than God manifested in the
flesh.

Fifthly, That no man is saved through this sacrifice, but he that
believes, i.e. who credits what God has spoken concerning Christ, his
sacrifice, the end for which it was offered, and the way in which it is
to be applied in order to become effectual.

Sixthly, That those who believe receive a double benefit:

1\. They are exempted from eternal perdition - that they may not perish.

2\. They are brought to eternal glory - that they may have everlasting
life. These two benefits point out tacitly the state of man: he is
guilty, and therefore exposed to punishment: he is impure, and therefore
unfit for glory.

They point out also the two grand operations of grace, by which the
salvation of man is effected.

1\. Justification, by which the guilt of sin is removed, and
consequently the person is no longer obnoxious to perdition.

2\. Sanctification, or the purification of his nature, by which he is
properly fitted for the kingdom of glory.

[John 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 3:17</span></span>

For God sent not, etc. - It was the opinion of the Jews that the
Gentiles, whom they often term the world, עלמה olmah, and אומות העולם
omoth haolam, nations of the world, were to be destroyed in the days of
the Messiah. Christ corrects this false opinion; and teaches here a
contrary doctrine. God, by giving his Son, and publishing his design in
giving him, shows that he purposes the salvation, not the destruction,
of the world - the Gentile people: nevertheless, those who will not
receive the salvation he had provided for them, whether Jews or
Gentiles, must necessarily perish; for this plain reason, There is but
one remedy, and they refuse to apply it.

[John 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 3:18</span></span>

He that believeth - As stated before on [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016).

Is not condemned - For past sin, that being forgiven on his believing in
Christ.

But he that believeth not - When the Gospel is preached to him, and the
way of salvation made plain.

Is condemned already - Continues under the condemnation which Divine
justice has passed upon all sinners; and has this superadded, He hath
not believed on the name of the only begotten Son of God, and therefore
is guilty of the grossest insult to the Divine majesty, in neglecting,
slighting, and despising the salvation which the infinite mercy of God
had provided for him.

[John 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 3:19</span></span>

This is the condemnation - That is, this is the reason why any shall be
found finally to perish, not that they came into the world with a
perverted and corrupt nature, which is true; nor that they lived many
years in the practice of sin, which is also true; but because they
refused to receive the salvation which God sent to them.

Light is come - That is, Jesus, the Sun of righteousness, the fountain
of light and life; diffusing his benign influences every where, and
favoring men with a clear and full revelation of the Divine will.

Men loved darkness - Have preferred sin to holiness, Belial to Christ,
and hell to heaven. חשך chashac, darkness, is frequently used by the
Jewish writers for the angel of death, and for the devil. See many
examples in Schoettgen.

Because their deeds were evil - An allusion to robbers and cut-throats,
who practice their abominations in the night season, for fear of being
detected. The sun is a common blessing to the human race - it shines to
all, envies none, and calls all to necessary labor. If any one choose
rather to sleep by day, that he may rob and murder in the night season,
he does this to his own peril, and has no excuse: - his punishment is
the necessary consequence of his own unconstrained actions. So will the
punishment of ungodly men be. There was light - they refused to walk in
it. They chose to walk in the darkness, that they might do the works of
darkness - they broke the Divine law, refused the mercy offered to them,
are arrested by Divine justice, convicted, condemned, and punished.
Whence, then, does their damnation proceed? From Themselves.

[John 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 3:20</span></span>

For every one that doeth evil hateth the light - He who doth vile or
abominable things: alluding to the subject mentioned in the preceding
verse.

The word φαυλος, evil or vile, is supposed by some to come from the
Hebrew פלס phalas, to roll, and so cover oneself in dust or ashes, which
was practised in token of humiliation and grief, not only by the more
eastern nations, see [Job 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006), but
also by the Greeks and Trojans, as appears from Homer, Iliad xviii. l.
26; xxii. l. 414; xxiv. l. 640; compare Virgil, Aen. x. l. 844; and
Ovid, Metam. lib. viii. l. 528. From the above Hebrew word, it is likely
that the Saxon ful, the English foul, the Latin vilis, and the English
vile, are derived. See Parkhurst under φαυλος.

Lest his deeds should be reproved - Or discovered. To manifest or
discover, is one sense of the original word, ελεγχω, in the best Greek
writers; and it is evidently its meaning in this place.

[John 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 3:21</span></span>

Wrought in God - In his presence, and through his assistance. This is
the end of our Lord's discourse to Nicodemus; and though we are not
informed here of any good effects produced by it, yet we learn from
other scriptures that it had produced the most blessed effects in his
mind, and that from this time he became a disciple of Christ. He
publicly defended our Lord in the Sanhedrin, of which he was probably a
member, [Joh 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050), and, with Joseph of
Arimathea, gave him an honorable funeral, [Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039), when all his bosom friends had
deserted him. See Dodd.

[John 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 3:22</span></span>

Came - into the land of Judea - Jerusalem itself, where Christ held the
preceding discourse with Nicodemus, was in Judea; but the evangelist
means that our Lord quitted the city and its suburbs, and went into the
country parts. The same distinction between Jerusalem and Judea is made,
[Act 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008); [Act
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#039); and in 1 Maccabees 3:34; and in
2 Maccabees 1:1, 10. See Bp. Pearce.

And baptized - It is not clear that Christ did baptize any with water,
but his disciples did - [Joh 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002); and
what they did, by his authority and command, is attributed to himself.
It is a common custom, in all countries and in all languages, to
attribute the operations of those who are under the government and
direction of another to him by whom they are directed and governed. Some
however suppose that Christ at first did baptize; but, when he got
disciples, he left this work to them: and thus these two places are to
be understood: -

1\. this place, of Christ's baptizing before he called the twelve
disciples; and

2\. [Joh 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002), of the baptism
administered by the disciples, after they had been called to the work by
Christ.

[John 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 3:23</span></span>

In Aenon - This place was eight miles southward from Scythopolis,
between Salim and Jordan.

There was much water - And this was equally necessary, where such
multitudes were baptized, whether the ceremony were performed either by
dipping or sprinkling. But as the Jewish custom required the persons to
stand in the water, and, having been instructed, and entered into a
covenant to renounce all idolatry, and take the God of Israel for their
God, then plunge themselves under the water, it is probable that the
rite was thus performed at Aenon. The consideration that they dipped
themselves, tends to remove the difficulty expressed in the note on [Mat
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006). See the observations at the end
of Mark.

[John 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 3:25</span></span>

John's disciples and the Jews - Instead of Ιουδαιων, Jews, ABELS. M. BV,
nearly 100 others, some versions and fathers, read Ιουδαιου, a Jew,
which Griesbach has admitted into the text. The person here spoken of
was probably one who had been baptized by the disciples of our Lord; and
the subject of debate seems to have been, whether the baptism of John,
or that of Christ, was the most efficacious towards purifying.

[John 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 3:26</span></span>

And they came unto John - That he might decide the question.

[John 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 3:27</span></span>

A man can receive nothing, etc. - Or, A man can receive nothing from
heaven, unless it be given him. I have received, not only my commission,
but the power also by which I have executed it, from above. As I took it
up at God's command, so I am ready to lay it down when he pleases. I
have told you from the beginning that I was only the forerunner of the
Messiah, and was sent, not to form a separate party, but to point out to
men that Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world: [Joh
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#028).

[John 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 3:29</span></span>

He that hath the bride - The congregation of believers.

Is the bridegroom - The Lord Jesus - the Head of the Church. See [Mat
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002), etc., where the parable of the
marriage feast is explained.

The friend of the bridegroom - The person whom the Greeks called the
paranymph - there were two at each wedding: one waited on the bride, the
other on the bridegroom: their business was to serve them, to inspect
the concerns of the bridechamber, and afterwards to reconcile
differences between husband and wife, when any took place. John
considers himself as standing in this relation to the Lord Jesus, while
espousing human nature, and converting souls to himself: this is the
meaning of standeth by, i.e. ready to serve. See the observations at the
end of the chapter.

[John 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 3:30</span></span>

He must increase - His present success is but the beginning of a most
glorious and universal spread of righteousness, peace, truth, and good
will among men.

I must decrease - My baptism and teaching, as pointing out the coming
Messiah, must cease; because the Messiah is now come, and has entered
publicly on the work of his glorious ministry.

[John 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 3:31</span></span>

Is above all - This blessed bridegroom, who has descended from heaven,
[Joh 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013), is above all, superior to
Moses, the prophets, and me.

He that is of the earth - John himself, who was born in the common way
of man.

Speaketh of the earth - Cannot speak of heavenly things as Christ can
do; and only represents Divine matters by these earthly ordinances; for
the spirit and meaning of which, you must all go to the Messiah himself.

[John 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 3:32</span></span>

And no man receiveth his testimony - Or, And this his testimony no man
taketh up. That is, the testimony which John had borne to the Jews, that
Jesus was the promised Messiah. No man taketh up. - No person is found
to tread in my steps, and to publish to the Jews that this is the
Christ, the Savior of the world. See this sense of the original fully
proved and vindicated by Kypke in loc.

[John 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 3:33</span></span>

Hath set to his seal - That is hath hereby confirmed the truth of the
testimony which he has borne; as a testator sets his seal to an
instrument in order to confirm it, and such instrument is considered as
fully confirmed by having the testator's seal affixed to it, so I, by
taking up this testimony of Christ, and proclaiming it to the Jews, have
fully confirmed it, as I know it to be a truth; which knowledge I have
from the immediate inspiration of the Holy Spirit. See [Joh
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033), [Joh
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034).

[John 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 3:34</span></span>

For God giveth not the Spirit by measure - He is the most perfect of all
teachers, as having received the Holy Spirit as none before him ever
did. Without measure - not for a particular time, people, purpose, etc.,
but for the whole compass of time, and in reference to all eternity.
Former dispensations of the Holy Spirit made partial discoveries of
infinite justice and mercy; but now the sum of justice, in requiring
such a sacrifice, and the plenitude of mercy, in providing it, shall, by
that Spirit with which he baptizes, be made manifest to all the children
of men. It is worthy of remark that this was fully done after the
outpouring of the Spirit on the day of pentecost, [Act
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001), etc., as may be clearly seen in
all the apostolic epistles. The Jews observe, that the Holy Spirit was
given only in certain measures to the prophets; some writing only one
book, others two. So Rab. Acba.

[John 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 3:35</span></span>

All things into his hand - See on [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027) (note). A principal design of
John is, to show that Christ was infinitely above every teacher,
prophet, and Divine messenger that had ever yet appeared. The prophets
had various gifts: some had visions, others dreams; some had the gift of
teaching, others of comforting, etc.; but none possessed all these
gifts: Christ alone possessed their plenitude, and is all things in all.

[John 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 3:36</span></span>

Hath everlasting life - He has already the seed of this life in his
soul, having been made a partaker of the grace and spirit of him in whom
he has believed. See on [Joh 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)
(note).

He that believeth not - Or, obeyeth not - απειθων: from α, negative, and
πειθω, to persuade, or πειθομαι, to obey - the want of the obedience of
faith. The person who will not be persuaded, in consequence, does not
believe; and, not having believed, he cannot obey.

Shall not see life - Shall never enjoy it: there being no way to the
kingdom of God, but through Christ Jesus, [Act
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012). And none can expect to enter
into this kingdom but those who obey him; for to such only he is the
author of eternal salvation, [Heb 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009).

But the wrath of God abideth on him - Οργη, the displeasure of God. I
should prefer displeasure to wrath, because the common acceptation of
the latter (fury, rage) is not properly applicable here. Perhaps the
original word is used in the same sense here as in [Rom
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005); [Rom
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005); [Rom
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004), [Rom
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005); [Eph
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006); [Th1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010); [Th1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#009); where it evidently means
punishment, which is the effect of irritated justice. Taken in this
sense, we may consider the phrase as a Hebraism: punishment of God, i.e.
the most heavy and awful of all punishments; such as sin deserves, and
such as it becomes Divine justice to inflict. And this abideth on him -
endures as long as his unbelief and disobedience remain! And how shall
these be removed in a hell of fire! Reader! pray God that thou mayest
never know what this continuing punishment means!

There are many very important topics brought forward in this chapter;
the principal of which have been already illustrated in the notes: the
subject in the 29th verse is of great consequence, and requires some
farther explanation.

The friend of the bridegroom is the person called among the Jews שושבי
shoshabin; and παρανυμφος, paranymph, among the Greeks. Several matters
are found in the Jewish writings relative to these, which may serve to
throw light, not only on the discourse of John, but also on other
passages of Scripture.

1\. There were generally two shoshabinim; one for the bride, another for
the bridegroom: though in many instances we find the shoshabin of the
bride only mentioned.

2\. These officers were chosen out of the most intimate and particular
friends of the parties: - a brother might be shoshabin or paranymph to
his brother.

3\. Though it is probable that such persons were not always found in
ordinary weddings, yet they were never absent from the marriages of
kings, princes, and persons of distinction.

4\. The Jews believe that this was an ordinance appointed by God; and
that he himself was shoshabin to Adam. But in Bereshith Rabba it is
said, that God took the cup of blessing and blessed the first pair; and
that Michael and Gabriel were shoshabins to Adam.

5\. So important was this office esteemed among them, that it wag
reckoned one of the indispensable works of charity: much depending on
the proper discharge of it, as we shall afterwards find.

6\. Those who were engaged in this office, were excused, for the time,
from some of the severer duties of religion, because they had so much to
do about the new-married pair, especially during the seven days of the
marriage feast.

These shoshabinan had a threefold office to fulfill, viz. before, at,
and after the marriage: of each of these in order.

I. Before the marriage: it was the business of the shoshabin: -

1\. To procure a husband for the virgin, to guard her, and to bear
testimony to her corporeal and mental endowments; and it was upon this
testimony of this friend that the bridegroom chose his bride.

2\. He was the internuncio between her and her spouse elect; carrying
all messages from her to him, and from him to her: for before marriage
young women were very strictly guarded at home with their parents or
friends.

II\. At the wedding: it was the business of the shoshabin, if necessary:
-

1\. To vindicate the character of the bride.

2\. To sleep in an apartment contiguous to the new-married pair, to
prevent the bride from receiving injury.

3\. It was his office to see that neither the bride nor bridegroom
should be imposed on by each other; and therefore it was his business to
examine and exhibit the tokens of the bride's purity, according to the
law, [Deu 22:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#013). Of their office,
in this case, the rabbins thus speak: Olim in Judea paranymphi
perscrutati sunt locum (lectum) sponsi et sponsae - ad scrutandum et
officiose observandum ea, quae sponsi illa nocte fecerint: ne scilicet
alter alteri dolo damnum inferat: ne sponsus sanguinem virginitatis
agnoscat, illum celet aut tollat: et ne sponsa pannum sanguine tinctum
secum inferat.

4\. When they found that their friend had got a pure and chaste virgin,
they exulted greatly; as their own character and the happiness of their
friend, were at stake. To this the Baptist alludes, [Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029), This my joy is fulfilled.

5\. They distributed gifts to the new-married couple, which, on their
marriage, were repaid either by their friend, or by his father. The same
thing is done at what are called the biddings, at marriages in Wales, to
the present day.

6\. They continued with the bride and bridegroom the seven days of the
marriage, and contributed variously to the festivity and hilarity of the
occasion.

III\. After marriage.

1\. The shoshabin was considered the patron and advocate of the wife,
and in some sort her guardian, to which the apostle alludes, [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002). He was generally called in to
compose any differences which might happen between her and her husband,
and reconcile them when they had been at variance.

2\. They appear to have had the keeping of the marriage contract, which
in certain cases they tore; when they had reason to suspect infidelity
on the part of the woman, by which the marriage was dissolved; and thus
the suspected person was prevented from suffering capitally. Schoettgen
produces a case like this from R. Bechai, in legem, fol. 114. "A king
visited foreign parts, and left his queen with her maids: they raised an
evil report on her, and the king purposed to put her to death. The
shoshabin hearing of it, tore the matrimonial contract, that he might
have it to say, the marriage is dissolved. The king, having investigated
the case, found the queen innocent: she was immediately reconciled to
her husband, and the shoshabin was directed to write another contract."

3\. Schoettgen very modestly hazards a conjecture, that, if the husband
had either abandoned or divorced his wife, the shoshabin took her, and
acted to her as a brother-in-law; which is probable from the place to
which he refers, [Jdg 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#020) : But
Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his
friend: or, as both the Syriac and the Targum have it, she was given,
שושביניה shoshebeeneyah, to his paranymph; which is agreeable to the
Alexandrian copy of the Septuagint, Και συνῳκησεν ἡ γυνη Σαμψων τῳ
Νυμφαγωγῳ αυτου, ὁς ην ἑταιρος αυτου. And Samson's wife dwelt (or
cohabited) with his paranymph, who had been his companion. The same
reading is found in the Complutensian Polyglott.

From the preceding particulars, collated with the speech of John in [Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029), and with the words of St. Paul,
[Co2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002), it is plain that Christ is
represented as the Bridegroom: the Church, or his genuine disciples, the
Bride: the ministers of the Gospel, the שושבינים Shoshbeenim, whose
great and important duty it is to present to the bridegroom a pure,
uncontaminated virgin, i.e. a Church without spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing, [Eph 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027), alluding
evidently to the office of the paranymph, on whom the bridegroom
depended to procure him, for wife, a chaste and pure virgin. Hence that
saying of St. Paul, who considered himself the paranymph to Jesus
Christ: I am jealous over you with godly jealousy: for I have espoused
you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ,
[Co2 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002).

From all these particulars, we see that the office of the shoshabin, or
paranymph, was a very important one among the Jews; and that, to it,
some interesting references are made in the New Testament, the force and
true meaning of which passages cannot be discerned without considering
the character and office of the Jewish paranymph. See several good
observations on this in Lightfoot's notes on [Joh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001), and Schoettgen, on [Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029).

As the Christian Church was now to take place of the Jewish, and the
latter was about to be cast off because it was polluted, John, by using
the simile of the bride, bridegroom, and paranymph, or friend of the
bridegroom, points out, as it were prophetically, of what kind the
Christian Church must be: it must be as holy and pure as an
uncontaminated virgin, because it is to be the bride or spouse of our
Lord Jesus Christ: and God honors the Baptist by making him the
paranymph; and indeed his whole preaching and baptism were excellently
calculated to produce this great effect, as be strongly proclaimed the
necessity of a total reformation of heart and manners, among all classes
of the people. See the notes on [Mat
3:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008) (note), and on [Luk
3:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#010) (note). He heard the
bridegroom's voice - he faithfully communicated what he had received
from heaven, [Joh 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#027), and he
rejoiced exceedingly to find that he had got a people prepared for the
Lord. The success of John's preaching greatly contributed to the success
of that of Christ and his disciples. For this purpose he was endued with
power from on high, and chosen to be the paranymph of the heavenly
bridegroom.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 4](joh004)

</div>
