<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh012)  [Next](joh014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 13:0</span></span>

Christ washes the feet of his disciples, and gives them instructions
concerning humility and charity, vv. 1-17. He tells them that one of
themselves will betray him, [Joh
13:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018). The disciples doubting of
whom he spoke, Peter desires John to ask him, [Joh
13:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021). Jesus shows that it is Judas
Iscariot, [Joh 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026). Satan enters
into Judas, and he rises up and leaves the company, [Joh
13:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027). Christ shows his approaching
death, and commands his disciples to love one another, [Joh
13:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031). Peter, professing strong
attachment to Christ, is informed of his denial, [Joh
13:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036).

[John 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 13:1</span></span>

Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew, etc. - Or, as
some translate, Now Jesus having known, before the feast of the
passover, that his hour was come, etc. The supper mentioned in [Joh
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002) is supposed to have been that on
the Thursday evening, when the feast of the passover began; and though,
in our common translation, this passage seems to place the supper before
that feast, yet, according to the amended translation, what is here said
is consistent with what we read in the other evangelists. See [Mat
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002); [Joh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001).

Having loved his own - His disciples.

Which were in the world - Who were to continue longer in its troubles
and difficulties.

He loved them unto the end - Continued his fervent affection towards
them to his latest breath, and gave them that convincing proof of it
which is mentioned [Joh 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005). That the
disciples alone are meant here every man must see.

[John 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 13:2</span></span>

And supper being ended - Rather, δειπνου γενομενου, while supper was
preparing. To support this new translation of the words, it may be
remarked that, from [Joh 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026), [Joh
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030), it appears that the supper was
not then ended: nay, it is probable that it was not then begun; because
the washing of feet ([Joh 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005)) was
usually practised by the Jews before they entered upon their meals, as
may be gathered from [Luk 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#044), and
from the reason of the custom. I think that John wrote, not γενομενου,
but γινομενου, as in BL. Cant. and Origen, which latter reading is
approved by several eminent critics, and should be translated as above.
By the supper I suppose to be meant, not only the eating of it, but the
preparing and dressing of it, and doing all things necessary previously
to the eating of it. The devil had, before this time of the supper, put
it into Judas's heart to betray his Master. See [Mat
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014), etc.; [Mar
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#010), [Mar
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#011); and [Luk
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#003), etc. See also Bishop Pearce,
from whose judicious commentary the preceding notes are principally
taken.

Calmet observes that John, designing only to supply what was omitted by
the other evangelists, passes over all the transactions of the Tuesday,
Wednesday, and Thursday, before the passion, and at once goes from
Monday evening to Thursday evening. It is remarkable that St. John says
nothing about the institution of the holy sacrament, which Matthew, [Mat
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#026), etc., Mark, [Mar
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#022), etc., and Luke, [Luk
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#019), etc., describe so particularly.
No other reason can be assigned for this than that he found it
completely done by the others, and that he only designed to supply their
defects.

The devil having now put it into the heart - Judas formed his plot six
days before this, on occasion of what happened at the house of Simon the
leper: see [Mat 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#014). Calmet.

[John 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 13:3</span></span>

Knowing that the Father had given, etc. - Our Lord, seeing himself
almost at the end of his race, and being about to leave his apostles,
thought it necessary to leave them a lesson of humility exemplified by
himself, to deliver them from the bad influence of those false ideas
which they formed concerning the nature of his kingdom. On all occasions
previously to this, the disciples had shown too much attachment to
worldly honors and dignities: if this ambition had not been removed, the
consequences of it would have been dreadful in the establishment of the
religion of Christ; as after his death, it would have divided and
infallibly dispersed them. It was necessary therefore to restrain this
dangerous passion, and to confirm by a remarkable example what he had so
often told them, - that true greatness consisted in the depth of
humility, and that those who were the willing servants of all should be
the highest in the account of God.

[John 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 13:4</span></span>

He riseth from supper - Not from eating, as Bishop Pearce has well
observed, but from his place at table; probably the dishes were not as
yet laid down, though the guests were seated. According to the custom of
the Jews and other Asiatics, this washing must have taken place before
the supper. See on [Joh 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002) (note).

Laid aside his garments - That is, his gown or upper coat, with the
girdle wherewith it was girded close to his tunic or under coat; and,
instead of this girdle, he tied a towel about him:

1\. that he might appear in the character of a servant; and

2\. that he might have it in readiness to dry their feet after he had
washed them.

[John 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 13:5</span></span>

Poureth water into a bason, etc. - This was the office of the meanest
slaves. When David sent to Abigail, to inform her that he had chosen her
for wife, she arose and said: Behold, let thy handmaid be a Servant, to
Wash the Feet of the Servants of my lord, [Sa1
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#041). Some of the ancients have
supposed that our Lord began with washing the feet of Judas, to inspire
him with sentiments of compunction and remorse, to melt him down with
kindness, and to show all his disciples how they should act towards
their enemies. Dr. Lightfoot supposes he washed the feet of Peter,
James, and John only; but this is not likely: the verb αρχεσθαι in the
sacred writings, signifies, not only to commence, but to finish an act,
[Act 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001); and in the Septuagint, [Gen
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003). There is every reason to believe
that he washed the feet of all the twelve. See on [Joh
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#009) (note).

[John 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 13:6</span></span>

Lord, dost Thou wash My feet? - Every word here is exceedingly emphatic.
Peter had often seen the great humility of his Lord, but never saw his
condescension so particularly marked as in this instance.

[John 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 13:7</span></span>

What I do thou knowest not now, etc. - As if our Lord had said, Permit
me to do it now, and I will shortly explain to you the nature of this
action, and my motives for doing it.

Thou shalt know hereafter - Μετα ταυτα, after this business is finished.
And so we find he explained the whole to them, as soon as he had
finished the washing: see [Joh
13:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012). I cannot think that this
refers to any particular instruction received on this head after the day
of pentecost, as some have conjectured.

[John 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 13:8</span></span>

If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me - Thou canst not be my
disciple unless I wash thee. It is certain Christ did not mean to
exclude him from the apostolic office, if he should persist, through the
deepest reverence for his Master, to refuse to let him wash his feet:
this act of his was emblematical of something spiritual; of something
that concerned the salvation of Peter; and without which washing he
could neither be an apostle or be finally saved; therefore our Lord
said, If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me. There is a mystical
washing by the blood of Christ, [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007); and by his Spirit, [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011); [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005), [Tit
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#006). It was the common custom of our
Lord to pass from sensible and temporal things to those which were
spiritual and eternal; and to take occasion from every thing that
presented itself, to instruct his disciples, and to raise their souls to
God. If the discourse was of bread, water, leaven, father, mother,
riches, etc., he immediately changed the literal sense, and under the
figure of these things, spoke of matters altogether spiritual and
Divine. I have met with many good persons who have attempted to imitate
our blessed Lord in this, but I never knew one to succeed in it. The
reason is, it requires not only very deep piety, but sound sense,
together with an accurate knowledge of the nature and properties of the
subjects which, in this way, the person wishes to illustrate; and very
few can be found who have such deep, philosophical knowledge as such
cases require. The large folio which a good-intentioned man printed on
the metaphors is, alas! a standing proof how little mere piety can do in
matters of this kind, where the sciences, and especially practical
philosophy, are totally wanting. Jesus Christ was a consummate
philosopher: every subject appears grand and noble in his hands. See an
ample proof in the preceding chapter, [Joh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024) (note).

[John 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 13:9</span></span>

Lord, not my feet only, etc. - It appears that Peter entered into our
Lord's meaning, and saw that this was emblematical of a spiritual
cleansing: therefore he wishes to be completely washed.

[John 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 13:10</span></span>

He that is washed - That is, he who has been in the bath, as probably
all the apostles had lately been, in order to prepare themselves the
better for the paschal solemnity; for on that occasion, it was the
custom of the Jews to bathe twice.

Needeth not save to wash his feet - To cleanse them from any dirt or
dust that might have adhered to them, in consequence of walking from the
bath to the place of supper. The washing, therefore, of the feet of such
persons was all that was necessary, previously to their sitting down to
table; The Hindoos walk home from bathing barefoot, and, on entering the
house wash their feet again. To this custom our Lord evidently alludes.

If these last words of our Lord had any spiritual reference, it is not
easy to say what it was. A common opinion is the following: He who is
washed - who is justified through the blood of the Lamb, needeth only to
wash his feet - to regulate all his affections and desires; and to get,
by faith, his conscience cleansed from any fresh guilt, which he may
have contracted since his justification.

Ye are clean, but not all - Eleven of you are upright and sincere; the
twelfth is a traitor. So it appears he had washed the feet of all the
twelve; but as no external ablutions can purify a hypocrite or a
traitor, therefore Judas still remained unclean.

[John 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 13:12</span></span>

Know ye what I have done - Our Lord had told Peter, in the presence of
the rest, [Joh 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#007), that he should
afterwards know what was the intent and meaning of this washing; and now
he begins to fulfill his promise; therefore I think it more likely that
he gives a command, here, than asks a question, as he knew himself that
they did not comprehend his design. On this account γινωσκετε might be
translated in the imperative mood, Consider what I have done.

[John 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 13:13</span></span>

Ye call me Master and Lord - Ὁ διδασκαλος και ὁ κυριος, similar to רבי
Rabbi, and מר Mar, titles very common among the Jewish doctors, as may
be seen in Schoettgen. This double title was not given except to the
most accredited teachers, רבי ומורי Rabbi vemore, my master, my lord!

[John 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 13:14</span></span>

Ye also ought to wash one another feet - That is, ye should be ready,
after my example, to condescend to all the weakness of your brethren; to
be willing to do the meanest offices for them, and to prefer the least
of them in honor to yourselves.

[John 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 13:16</span></span>

The servant is not greater than his lord - Christ has ennobled the acts
of humility by practising them himself. The true glory of a Christian
consists in being, in his measure, as humble as his Lord.

Neither he that is sent - Ουδε αποϚολος Nor an apostle. As I think these
words were intended for the suppression of all worldly ambition and
lordly conduct in the apostles and their successors in the ministry,
therefore I think the original word αποϚολος, should be translated
apostle, rather than he that is sent, because the former rendering
ascertains and determines the meaning better.

[John 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 13:17</span></span>

If ye know these things, happy, etc. - True happiness consists in the
knowledge of God, and in obedience to him. A man is not happy because he
knows much; but because he receives much of the Divine nature, and is,
in all his conduct, conformed to the Divine will. "They who have read
many books (says Menu) are more exalted than such as have seldom
studied; they who retain what they have read, than forgetful readers;
they who fully understand, than such as only remember; and they who
perform their known duty, than such as barely know it. Sacred knowledge
and devotedness to God are the means by which a man can arrive at
beatitude." See Institutes of Menu, c. xii. Inst. 103, 104. For a
heathen this saying is very remarkable.

[John 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 13:18</span></span>

I speak not of you all - This is a continuation of that discourse which
was left off at the tenth verse. The preceding verses may be read in a
parenthesis.

I know whom I have chosen - I am not deceived in my choice; I perfectly
foresaw every thing that has happened, or can happen. I have chosen
Judas, not as a wicked man, nor that he should become such; but I
plainly foresaw that he would abuse my bounty, give way to iniquity,
deliver me into the hands of my enemies, and bring ruin upon himself.

That the scripture may be fulfilled - Or, thus the scripture is
fulfilled. Christ applies to Judas what David had said of his rebellious
son Absalom, [Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009), who was one of
the most express emblems of this traitor. See on [Joh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038), [Joh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#039) (note).

He that eateth bread with me - That is, he who was in habits of the
utmost intimacy with me.

Hath lifted up his heel - An allusion to a restive, ill-natured horse,
that sometimes kicks even the person who feeds and takes care of him.

[John 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 13:19</span></span>

That - ye may believe - These frequent predictions of his death, so
circumstantial in themselves, had the most direct tendency to confirm
the disciples, not only in the belief of his being the Messiah, but also
in that of his omniscience.

[John 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 13:20</span></span>

He that received whomsoever I send - See similar words, [Mat
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040), etc. Our Lord spoke this to
comfort his disciples: he showed them that, although they should be
rejected by many, they would be received by several; and that whoever
received them should reap the utmost benefit by it.

[John 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 13:21</span></span>

Was troubled in spirit - See the note on [Joh
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033).

And testified - Spoke with great earnestness.

Shall betray me - Παραδωσει με, Will deliver me up. Judas had already
betrayed our blessed Lord, and he was now on the point of delivering him
up into the hands of the chief priests. By all these warnings, did not
our Lord intend that Judas should be benefited? - that he should repent
of his iniquity, and turn and find mercy?

[John 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 13:22</span></span>

Looked one on another doubting of whom he spake - See the notes on [Mat
26:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#020) (note). Every one but Judas,
conscious of his own innocence, looked about upon all the rest,
wondering who in that company could be such a traitor! Even Judas
himself is not suspected. Is not this a proof that his general conduct
had been such as to subject him to no suspicion?

[John 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 13:23</span></span>

Now there was leaning on Jesus' bosom - The Jews of those days, at their
suppers, reclined, supported by their left arm, on couches placed round
the table, as the Greeks and Romans did. On each couch there were two or
three persons; and the head of one of them came near to the bosom of him
who reclined above him on the same couch. The person here mentioned was
John, the writer of this history, who, being more tenderly loved by
Christ than the rest, had always that place at table which was nearest
to his Lord.

[John 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 13:25</span></span>

He then lying on Jesus' breast - Επιπεσων, laying his head against the
breast of Christ, in a loving, respectful manner. As the expressions in
the text are different here from those in the preceding verse, it shows
that John altered his position at table, in order to ask the question
which Peter suggested, which he probably did by whispering to our Lord;
for, from [Joh 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#028), we may learn
that the other disciples had not heard what John said; and it is likely
that the following words - It is he to whom I shall give the morsel when
I have dipped it, were whispered back by Christ to John.

[John 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 13:26</span></span>

And when he had dipped the sop - Dr. Lightfoot observes that it was no
unusual thing to dip a sop and give it to any person; and it is probable
that the rest of the disciples considered it as given to Judas that he
might hurry to do some work on which he wished to employ him, and not
wait to finish his supper in a regular manner. They did not hear the
question that John asked, nor our Lord's answer; but they no doubt heard
the words, That thou doest do quickly - and might understand them as
above.

[John 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 13:27</span></span>

Satan entered into him - He had entered into him before, and now he
enters again, to strengthen him in his purpose of delivering up his
Master. But the morsel was not the cause of this entering in; the giving
of it only marks the time in which the devil confirmed Judas in his
traitorous purpose. Some have thought that this morsel was the sacrament
of the Lord's Supper: but this is an utter mistake.

That thou doest, do quickly - As if he had said: "Thou art past all
counsel; thou hast filled up the measure of thy iniquity, and hast
wholly abandoned thyself to Satan; I will not force thee to turn from
thy purpose, and without this thou wilt not. Thy designs are all known
to me; what thou art determined to do, and I to permit, do directly;
delay not, I am ready."

[John 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 13:29</span></span>

Buy those things that we have need of against the feast - Calmet's
observation here has weight so it. "The disciples who thought that our
Lord had said this to Judas, knew well that on the day of the passover
there was neither buying nor selling in Jerusalem. This, therefore, did
not happen on the paschal evening; for the feast, according to the
common opinion, must have begun the preceding evening, and Jesus have
eaten the passover with his disciples the night before his death; but it
appears to me, by the whole text of St. John, that the passover did not
begin till the time in which our Lord expired upon the cross. It was
then that they were sacrificing the paschal lambs in the temple. It is
therefore probable that the apostles believed that Judas went to
purchase a lamb, and the other necessary things for the evening, and for
the day of the Passover." On this subject the reader is requested to
consult the observations at the end of Matthew 26, where the subject is
considered at large.

Give something to the poor - It is well known that our Lord and his
disciples lived on public charity; and yet they gave alms out of what
they had thus received. From this we learn that even those who live on
charity themselves are expected to divide a little with those who are in
deeper distress and want.

[John 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 13:30</span></span>

He - went immediately out: and it was night - He set off to Jerusalem
from Bethany, which was about two miles distant; and, under the conduct
of the prince of darkness, and in the time of darkness, he did this work
of darkness.

[John 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 13:31</span></span>

Now is the Son of man glorified - Νυν εδοξασθη, Hath been glorified. Now
it fully appears that I am the person appointed to redeem a lost world
by my blood. I have already been glorified by this appointment, and am
about to be farther glorified by my death, resurrection, and ascension.

[John 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 13:32</span></span>

And shall straightway glorify him - Or, glorify him, ευθυς, immediately;
"he did, not only in the miracles wrought at his death, but also in that
remarkable case mentioned, [Joh 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006),
when the whole crowd that came to seize him were driven back with a word
of his mouth, and fell to the ground.

[John 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 13:33</span></span>

Little children - Or, rather, beloved children. Τεκνια, a word
frequently used by this apostle in his epistles. It is an expression
which implies great tenderness and affection, and such as a fond mother
uses to her most beloved babes. Now that Judas was gone out, he could
use this epithet without any restriction of meaning.

Yet a little while - The end of my life is at hand; Judas is gone to
consummate his treason; I have but a few hours to be with you, and you
shall be by and by scattered.

Ye shall seek me - For a few days ye shall feel great distress because
of my absence.

Whither I go, ye cannot come - Your time is not up. The Jews shall die
in their sins, martyrs to their infidelity; but ye shall die in the
truth, martyrs for your Lord.

[John 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 13:34</span></span>

A new commandment I give unto you - In what sense are we to understand
that this was a new commandment? Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself, was a positive precept of the law, [Lev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018), and it is the very same that
Christ repeats here; how then was it new? Our Lord answers this
question, Even As I have loved you. Now Christ more than fulfilled the
Mosaic precept; he not only loved his neighbor As himself, but he loved
him More than himself, for he laid down his life for men. In this he
calls upon the disciples to imitate him; to be ready on all occasions to
lay down their lives for each other. This was, strictly, a new
commandment: no system of morality ever prescribed any thing so pure and
disinterested as this. Our blessed Lord has outdone all the moral
systems in the universe in two words:

1\. Love your enemies;

2\. Lay down your lives for each other.

[John 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 13:35</span></span>

By this shall all men know, etc. - From this time forward, this mutual
and disinterested love shall become the essential and distinctive mark
of all my disciples. When they love one another with pure hearts,
fervently, even unto death, then shall it fully appear that they are
disciples of that person who laid down his life for his sheep, and who
became, by dying, a ransom for all.

The disciples of different teachers were known by their habits, or some
particular creed or rite, or point of austerity, which they had adopted;
but the disciples of Christ were known by this love which they bore to
each other. The primitive Christians were particularly known by this
among the Gentiles. Tertullian, in his Apology, gives us their very
words: Vide, inquiunt, ut se diligunt; et pro alterutro mori parati
sunt. "See, said they, how they love one another, and are ready to lay
down their lives for each other."

[John 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 13:36</span></span>

Thou canst not follow me now - Thou hast not faith strong enough to die
for me, nor is thy work yet done; but hereafter thou shalt suffer for my
sake, and die in defense of my truth. See [Joh
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018).

[John 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 13:37</span></span>

Why cannot I follow thee now? - Peter probably thought that our Lord
intended to go some long journey, which would necessarily subject him to
many inconveniences and fatigue; and he felt quite disposed to follow
him in this supposed journey, at all hazards. He saw no reason, because
he did not see our Lord's meaning, why he could not follow him now.

I will lay down my life for thy sake - Poor Peter! thou wast sincere,
but thou didst not know thy own strength. Thou wast at this time willing
to die, but when the time cams wast not able. Christ must first die for
Peter, before Peter can die for him. Let no man think he can do any
thing good, without the immediate assistance of God. Peter's denial
should be an eternal warning to all self-confident persons: though there
be sincerity and good will at the bottom, yet in the trial these cannot
perform that office which belongs to the power of God. We should will,
and then look to God for power to execute: without him we can do
nothing.

[John 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 13:38</span></span>

The cock shall not crow, etc. - See on [Mat
26:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#034) (note). Dr. Lightfoot has very
properly remarked that we must not understand these words, as if the
cock should not crow at all before Peter had thrice denied his Master;
but we must understand them thus: "The cock shall not have finished his
crowing before thou wilt thrice deny me. When the time was near, the
very night in which this was to happen, Christ said, This very night the
cock shall not crow his second time, etc. But here, two days before that
time, he says, the cock shall not crow; that is, shall not have done his
crowing. The Jews, and some other nations, divided the cock-crowing into
the first, the second, and the third times."

1\. On Peter's denial of our Lord much has been written: by one class he
has been incautiously excused, and by another rashly censured. Peter was
self-confident, but he was certainly sincere, and, had he trusted more
in God and less in himself, he would not have miscarried. He did not
look to his Maker for strength, and therefore he fell. He was surprised,
and found unarmed. It is a well-known fact that circumstances have
occurred in which persons of the most bold, intrepid, and adventurous
minds have proved mere cowards, and acted to their own disgrace and
ruin. Facts of this kind occur in the naval and military history of this
and every other country. No man is master of himself at all times;
therefore prudence and caution should ever be united to courage. Peter
had courage, but he had not caution: he felt a powerful and determined
will; but the trial was above his own strength, and he did not look to
God for power from on high. He was warned by this miscarriage, but he
dearly bought his experience. Let him that readeth understand.

2\. A fact which occurs in the English Martyrology will serve to
illustrate the history of Peter's denial and fall. In the reign of Queen
Mary, when the Papists of this kingdom burned all the Protestants they
could convict of denying the doctrine of transubstantiation, a poor man
who had received the truth in theory, but had not as yet felt its power,
was convicted and sentenced by their bloody tribunal to be burned alive.
While they were drawing him to the place of execution, he was very
pensive and melancholy; and when he came within sight of the stake,
etc., he was overpowered with fear and terror, and exclaimed, O! I can't
burn! I can't burn! Some of the attending priests, supposing that he
wished to recant, spoke to him to that effect. The poor man still
believed the truth - felt no disposition to deny it - but did not feel
such an evidence of his Maker's approbation in his own soul as could
enable him to burn for it! He continued in great agony, feeling all the
bitterness of death, and calling on God to reveal himself through the
Son of his love. While thus engaged, God broke in upon his soul and he
was filled with peace and joy in believing. He then clapped his hands,
and exclaimed with a powerful voice, I can burn! I can burn! He was
bound to the stake, and burned gloriously, triumphing in God through
whom he had received the atonement. This was a case in point. The man
was convinced of the truth, and was willing to burn for the truth; but
had not as yet power, because he had not yet received an evidence of his
acceptance with God. He pleaded for this with strong crying and tears,
and God answered him to the joy of his soul; and then he was as able as
he was willing to go to prison and to death. Without the power and
consolation of the Spirit of God, who could be a martyr, even for Divine
truth? We see now plainly how the case lies: no man is expected to do a
supernatural work by his own strength; if left to that, in a case of
this kind, his failure must be inevitable. But, in all spiritual
matters, assistance is to be sought from God; he that seeks shall find,
and he that finds Divine strength shall be equal to the task he is
called to fulfill. Peter was incautious and off his guard: the trial
came - he looked not for power from on high, and he fell: not merely
because he was weak - not because God withheld the necessary assistance
- but because he did not depend on and seek it. In no part of this
business can Peter be excused - he is every where blamable, and yet,
through the whole, an object of pity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 14](joh014)

</div>
