<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon001)  [Next](jon003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 2:0</span></span>

This chapter (except the first verse and the last, which make a part of
the narrative) contains a beautiful prayer or hymn, formed of those
devout thoughts which Jonah had in the belly of the great fish, with a
thanksgiving for his miraculous deliverance.

[Jonah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 2:1</span></span>

Then Jonah prayed - out of the fish's belly - This verse makes the first
of the second chapter in the Hebrew text.

It may be asked, "How could Jonah either pray or breathe in the stomach
of the fish?" Very easily, if God so willed it. And let the reader keep
this constantly in view; the whole is a miracle, from Jonah's being
swallowed by the fish till he was cast ashore by the same animal. It was
God that had prepared the great fish. It was the Lord that spake to the
fish, and caused it to vomit Jonah upon the dry land. All is miracle.

[Jonah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jon 2:2</span></span>

Out of the belly of hell - Among the Hebrews שאול sheol means the grave,
any deep pit, the place of separate spirits, etc. Here the prophet
represents himself as in the bottom of the sea; for so sheol must be
understood in this place.

[Jonah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jon 2:3</span></span>

All thy billows and thy waves passed over me - This may be understood
literally; while the fish, in whose belly he was, sought its pleasure or
sustenance in the paths of the deep, the waves and billows of the sea
were rolling above. This line seems borrowed from [Psa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007).

[Jonah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jon 2:4</span></span>

I am cast out of thy sight - See [Psa
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022).

Thy holy temple - Then Jerusalem was not yet destroyed, for the temple
was standing.

[Jonah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 2:5</span></span>

The waters compassed me about even to the soul - So as to seem to
deprive me of life. I had no hope left.

The weeds were wrapped about my head - This may be understood literally
also. He found himself in the fish's stomach, together with sea weeds,
and such like marine substances, which the fish had taken for its
aliment.

[Jonah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jon 2:6</span></span>

I went down to the bottoms of the mountains - This also may be literally
understood. The fish followed the slanting base of the mountains, till
they terminated in a plain at the bottom of the great deep.

The earth with her bars - He represents himself as a prisoner in a
dungeon, closed in with bars which he could not remove, and which at
first appeared to be for ever, i.e., the place where his life must
terminate.

Yet hast thou brought up my life - The substance of this poetic prayer
was composed while in the fish's belly; but afterwards the prophet
appears to have thrown it into its present poetic form, and to have
added some circumstances, such as that before us; for he now speaks of
his deliverance from this imminent danger of death. "Thou hast brought
up my life from corruption."

[Jonah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jon 2:7</span></span>

When my soul fainted - When I had given up all hope of life.

My prayer came in unto thee - Here prayer is personified, and is
represented as a messenger going from the distressed, and entering into
the temple of God, and standing before him. This is a very fine and
delicate image. This clause is one of those which I suppose the prophet
to have added when he penned this prayer.

[Jonah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jon 2:8</span></span>

They that observe lying vanities - They that trust in idols, follow vain
predictions, permit themselves to be influenced with foolish fears, so
as to induce them to leave the path of obvious duty, forsake their own
mercy. In leaving that God who is the Fountain of mercy, they abandon
that measure of mercy which he had treasured up for them.

[Jonah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jon 2:9</span></span>

But I will sacrifice unto thee - I will make a sincere vow, which, as
soon as my circumstances will permit, I will faithfully execute; and
therefore he adds, "I will pay that which I have vowed."

Salvation is of the Lord - All deliverance from danger, preservation of
life, recovery from sickness, and redemption of the soul from the power,
guilt, and pollution of sin, is from Jehovah. He alone is the Savior, he
alone is the Deliverer; for all salvation is from the Lord.

[Jonah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 2:10</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto the fish - That is, by his influence the fish
swam to shore, and cast Jonah on the dry land. So the whole was a
miracle from the beginning to the end; and we need not perplex ourselves
to find out literal interpretations; such as, "When Jonah was thrown
overboard he swam for his life, earnestly praying God to preserve him
from drowning; and by his providence he was thrown into a place of fish
- a fishing cove, where he was for a time entangled among the weeds, and
hardly escaped with his life; and when safe, he composed this poetic
prayer, in metaphorical language, which some have wrongly interpreted,
by supposing that he was swallowed by a fish; when דג dag should have
been understood, as a place of fish, or fishing creek," etc. Now I say
the original has no such meaning in the Bible: and this gloss is plainly
contrary to the letter of the text; to all sober and rational modes of
interpretation; and to the express purpose for which God appears to have
wrought this miracle, and to which Jesus Christ himself applies it. For
as Jonah was intended for a sign to the Jews of the resurrection of
Christ, they were to have the proof of this semiosis, in his lying as
long in the heart of the earth as the prophet was in the belly of the
fish, and all interpretations of this kind go to deny both the sign and
the thing signified. Some men, because they cannot work a miracle
themselves, can hardly be persuaded that God can do it.

The text, and the use made of it by Christ, most plainly teach us that
the prophet was literally swallowed by a fish, by the order of God; and
that by the Divine power he was preserved alive, for what is called
three days and three nights, in the stomach of the fish; and at the
conclusion of the above time that same fish was led by the unseen power
of God to the shore, and there compelled to eject the prey that he could
neither kill nor digest. And how easy is all this to the almighty power
of the Author and Sustainer of life, who has a sovereign, omnipresent,
and energetic sway in the heavens and in the earth. But foolish man will
affect to be wise; though, in such cases, he appears as the recently
born, stupid offspring of the wild ass. It is bad to follow fancy, where
there is so much at stake. Both ancients and moderns have grievously
trifled with this prophet's narrative; merely because they could not
rationally account for the thing, and were unwilling (and why?) to allow
any miraculous interference.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 3](jon003)

</div>
