<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos022)  [Next](jos024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 23:0</span></span>

Joshua, being old, calls for the rulers and different heads of the
Israelites, [Jos 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001), [Jos
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#002), to whom he relates how God had
put them in possession of the promised land, [Jos
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#003), [Jos
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#004); from which all their remaining
enemies should be expelled, [Jos 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#005).
Exhorts them to be faithful to God, and to avoid all connections with
the idolatrous nations, [Jos 23:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#006).
Encourages them with the strongest promises, that no enemy should ever
be able to prevail against them, if they continued to love the Lord
their God, [Jos 23:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#009). Lays also
before them the consequences of disobedience, [Jos
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012), [Jos
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013). Shows them that as all God's
promises had been fulfilled to them while they were obedient, so his
threatening should be fulfilled own them if they revolted from his
service; and that if they did so, they should be utterly destroyed from
off the good land, [Jos 23:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#014).

[Joshua 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 23:1</span></span>

A long time after that the Lord had given rest - This is supposed to
have been in the last or one hundred and tenth year of the life of
Joshua, about thirteen or fourteen years after the conquest of Canaan,
and seven after the division of the land among the tribes.

[Joshua 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 23:2</span></span>

Joshua called for all Israel - There are four degrees of civil
distinction mentioned here:

1\. זקנים zekenim, the elders or senate, the Princes of the tribes.

2\. ראשים rashim or rashey aboth, the Chiefs or Heads of families.

3\. שפטים shophetim, the Judges who interpreted and decided according to
the law.

4\. שטרים shoterim, the Officers, serjeants, etc., who executed the
decisions of the judges.

Whether this assembly was held at Timnath-serah, where Joshua lived, or
at Shiloh, where the ark was, or at Shechem, as in [Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001), we cannot tell. Some think that
the meaning here, and that mentioned in [Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001), were the same, and if so,
Shechem was the place of assembling; but it is more likely that the two
chapters treat of two distinct assemblies, whether held at the same
place or not.

[Joshua 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 23:3</span></span>

For the Lord your God is he that hath fought for you - There is much
both of piety and modesty in this address. It was natural for the
Israelites to look on their veteran, worn-out general, who had led them
on from conquest to conquest, with profound respect; and to be ready to
say, "Had we not had such a commander, we had never got possession of
this good land." Joshua corrects this opinion, and shows them that all
their enemies had been defeated, because the Lord their God had fought
for them. That the battle was the Lord's, and not his; and that God
alone should have the glory.

[Joshua 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 23:4</span></span>

I have divided - these nations that remain - The whole of the promised
land had been portioned out, as well those parts which had not yet been
conquered, as those from which the ancient inhabitants had been
expelled. The Canaanitish armies had long ago been broken in pieces, so
that they could make no head against the Israelites, but in many
districts the old inhabitants remained, more through the supineness of
the Israelites, than through their own bravery.

From Jordan - unto the great sea - All the land that lay between the
river Jordan, from Phiala, where it rose, to the southern extremity of
the Dead Sea, and to the Mediterranean Sea, through the whole extent of
its coast, opposite to Jordan.

[Joshua 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 23:5</span></span>

And drive them - out - and ye shall possess - The same Hebrew word ירש
yarash is used here to signify to expel from an inheritance, and to
succeed those thus expelled. Ye shall disinherit them from your sight,
and ye shall inherit their land.

[Joshua 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 23:6</span></span>

Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do, etc. - It requires no
small courage to keep a sound creed in the midst of scoffers, and not
less to maintain a godly practice among the profane and profligate.

That is written in the book - By the word of God alone his followers are
bound. Nothing is to be received as an article of faith which God has
not spoken.

[Joshua 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 23:7</span></span>

Come not among these nations - Have no civil or social contracts with
them, (see [Jos 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012)), as these will
infallibly lead to spiritual affinities, in consequence of which ye will
make honorable mention of the name of their gods, swear by them as the
judges of your motives and actions, serve them in their abominable
rites, and bow yourselves unto them as your creators and preservers;
thus giving the whole worship of God to idols: and all this will follow
from simply coming among them. He who walks in the counsel of the
ungodly will soon stand in the way of sinners, and shortly sit in the
seat of the scornful. Nemo repente fuit turpissimus. "No man rises to
the highest stages of iniquity but by degrees." Nero himself, under the
instructions of Seneca, was a promising youth.

[Joshua 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 23:10</span></span>

One man of you shall chase a thousand - Do not remain inactive on the
supposition that you must be much more numerous before you can drive out
your enemies, for it is the Lord that shall drive out nations great and
strong; and under his direction and influence one of you shall chase a
thousand.

[Joshua 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 23:11</span></span>

Take good heed - unto yourselves that ye love the Lord - לנפשתיכם
lenaphshotheychem, Take heed To Your Souls, literally; but נפש nephesh
and nefs, both in Hebrew and Arabic, signify the whole self, as well as
soul and life; both soul and body must be joined in this work, for it is
written, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soul,
mind, and strength.

[Joshua 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 23:12</span></span>

Else if ye do - go back - The soldier who draws back when going to meet
the enemy, forfeits his life. These were the Lord's soldiers, and if
they drew back they drew back unto perdition, their lives being
forfeited by their infidelity.

[Joshua 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 23:13</span></span>

They shall be snares - לפח lephach, a net or gin, set by the artful
fowler to catch heedless birds.

And traps - מוקש mokesh, any snare, toil, or trap, placed on the ground
to catch the unwary traveler or wild beast by the foot.

Scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes - Nothing can be
conceived more vexatious and distressing than a continual goad in the
side, or thorn in the eye. They will drive you into obedience to their
false gods, and put out the eyes of your understandings by their
idolatries. And God will preserve them merely to distress and punish
you.

[Joshua 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 23:14</span></span>

The way of all the earth - I am about to die; I am going into the grave.

Not one thing hath failed, etc. - God had so remarkably and literally
fulfilled his promises, that not one of his enemies could state that
even the smallest of them had not had its most literal accomplishment:
this all Israel could testify.

[Joshua 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 23:15</span></span>

So shall the Lord bring upon you all evil things - His faithfulness in
fulfilling his promises is a proof that he will as faithfully accomplish
his threatenings, for the veracity of God is equally pledged for both.

[Joshua 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 23:16</span></span>

Ye shall perish quickly from off the good land - The following note from
Mr. John Trapp is very judicious: "This judgment Joshua inculcates [Jos
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013), [Jos
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#015), and here, because he knew it
would be a very grievous thing to them to forego so goodly a land, so
lately gotten, and so short a while enjoyed. In the beginning of a
speech τα ηθη, the milder affections, suit best; but towards the end τα
παθη, passionate and piercing passages; according to the orator. This
rule Joshua observes, being Ex utroque Caesar; no less an orator than a
warrior."

In all this exhortation we see how closely Joshua copies the example of
his great master Moses. See [Lev 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#007),
[Lev 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#008), [Lev
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#014), etc.; [Deu
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#007); [Deu
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030). He was tenderly concerned for
the welfare of the people, and with a deeply affected heart he spoke to
their hearts. No people ever were more fairly and fully warned, and no
people profited less by it. The threatenings pronounced here were
accomplished in the Babylonish captivity, but more fully in their
general dispersion since the crucifixion of our Lord. And should not
every Christian fear when he reads, If God spared not the natural
branches, take heed that he spare not thee? Surely a worldly, carnal,
and godless Christian has no more reason to expect indulgence from the
justice of God than a profligate Jew. We have a goodly land, but the
justice of God can decree a captivity from it, or a state of bondage in
it. The privileges that are abused are thereby forfeited. And this is as
applicable to the individual as to the whole system.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 24](jos024)

</div>
