<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos012)  [Next](jos014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 13:0</span></span>

Joshua being old, the Lord informs him of the land yet remaining to be
possessed, [Jos 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001). Of the
unconquered land among the Philistines, [Jos
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#002), [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003). Among the Canaanites, Sidonians,
and Amorites, [Jos 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#004), [Jos
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005). The inhabitants of the hill
country and the Sidonians to be driven out, [Jos
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006). The land on the east side of
Jordan, that was to be divided among the tribes of Reuben and Gad, and
the half tribe of Manasseh, [Jos
13:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#007). The Geshurites and the
Maachathites not expelled, [Jos 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#013).
The tribe of Levi receive no inheritance, [Jos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#014). The possessions of Reuben
described, [Jos 13:15-23](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#015). The
possessions of Gad, [Jos 13:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#024). The
possessions of the half tribe of Manasseh, [Jos
13:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#029). Recapitulation of the
subjects contained in this chapter, [Jos
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#032), [Jos
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#033).

[Joshua 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 13:1</span></span>

Joshua was old - He is generally reputed to have been at this time about
a hundred years of age: he had spent about seven years in the conquest
of the land, and is supposed to have employed about one year in dividing
it; and he died about ten years after, aged one hundred and ten years.
It is very likely that he intended to subdue the whole land before he
made the division of it among the tribes; but God did not think proper
to have this done. So unfaithful were the Israelites that he appears to
have purposed that some of the ancient inhabitants should still remain
to keep them in check, and that the respective tribes should have some
labor to drive out from their allotted borders the remains of the
Canaanitish nations.

There remaineth yet very much land to be possessed - That is, very much
when compared with that on the other side Jordan, which was all that
could as yet be said to be in the hands of the Israelites.

[Joshua 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 13:2</span></span>

The borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri - The borders of the
Philistines may mean the land which they possessed on the sea-coast,
southwest of the land of Canaan. There were several places named
Geshuri, but that spoken of here was probably the region on the south of
Canaan, towards Arabia, or towards Egypt. - Calmet. Cellarius supposes
it to have been a country in the vicinity of the Amalekites.

[Joshua 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 13:3</span></span>

From Sihor, which is before Egypt - Supposed by some to be the Pelusiac
branch of the Nile, near to the Arabian Desert; called also the river of
Egypt, [Num 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#005); [Jer
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018). On this subject an intelligent
friend favors me with the following opinion: - "The river Sihor is
supposed by some to be the Nile, or a branch of it. Others think it the
same as what is frequently called the river of Egypt, which lay before
or towards the borders of Egypt; which arose out of the mountains of
Paran, and ran westward, falling into that bay of the Mediterranean
which lies south of the land of the Philistines. This river is often
mentioned as the boundary of the Israelites to the southwest, as
Euphrates, the great river, was on the northeast. "There was a desert of
considerable distance between what is called the river of Egypt and the
isthmus of Suez. Solomon reigned to the borders of Egypt, i.e., to this
desert; but not in Egypt, nor to the river Nile. "Upon the whole,
(though there are difficulties in the matter), I incline to think that
the river in question was not the Nile. Sihor (black) might, from some
circumstances, be applied to another river as well as the Nile; though
some places in Isaiah and Jeremiah seem to restrict it to the Nile." -
J. C.

Ekron northward - Ekron was one of the five lordships of the
Philistines, and the most northern of all the districts they possessed.
Baal-zebub, its idol, is famous in Scripture; see [Kg2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002), etc. The five lordships of the
Philistines were Gaza, Ashdod, Askalon, Gath, and Ekron. There is no
proof that ever the Israelites possessed Ekron; though, from [Jos
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#011), some think it was originally
given to Judah, but the text does not say so; it only states that the
border of the tribe of Judah went out Unto the Side of Ekron. From [Jos
19:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#043), we learn that it was a part of
the lot of Dan, but it does not appear to have been possessed by any of
those tribes.

Counted to the Canaanite - It is generally allowed that the original
possessors of this country were the descendants of Canaan, the youngest
son of Ham. The Philistines sprang from Mizraim, the second son of Ham,
and, having dispossessed the Avim from the places they held in this
land, dwelt in their stead. See [Gen
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013), [Gen
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014).

Five lords of the Philistines - These dynasties are famous in the
Scriptures for their successful wars against the Israelites, of whom
they were almost the perpetual scourge.

Also the Avites - These must not be confounded with the Hivites. The
Avites seem to have been a very inconsiderable tribe, who dwelt in some
of the skirts of Palestine. They had been originally deprived of their
country by the Caphtorim; and though they lived as a distinct people,
they had never afterwards arrived to any authority.

[Joshua 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 13:4</span></span>

The land of the Canaanites - This lay on the south of the country of the
Philistines, towards the sea-coast.

Mearah - Supposed to be the city Maratha, on the Mediterranean Sea. -
Calmet. Or the river Majora, which falls into the Mediterranean Sea,
between Sidon and Berytus. See Pliny, Hist. Nat. lib. v., c. 20.

Aphek - See on [Jos 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#018) (note).

To the borders of the Amorites - Though the term Amorite is sometimes
used to designate the inhabitants in general of the land of Canaan, yet
it must be considered in a much more restricted sense in this place. As
no Amorites are known to have dwelt in this quarter, Calmet supposes we
should read Aramites or Syrians. Joshua, says he, proceeds from Sidon to
Aphek, a city of Syria, between Heliopolis and Babylon where was the
temple of the Venus of Aphek, and which is spoken of in [Kg1
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#026); [Kg2
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#017), as the capital of the kings of
Syria. From this Joshua passes on to the frontiers of the Syrians,
towards Gebal or Gabala, which, according to Ptolemy, was situated in
Phoenicia. This conjecture of Calmet is not supported by any authority
either from the ancient versions or MSS. Houbigant, however, approves of
it: the emendation is simple as it consists in the interchange of only
two letters in the same word, הארמי haarammi, for האמרי haemori.

[Joshua 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 13:5</span></span>

The land of the Giblites - This people dwelt beyond the precincts of the
land of Canaan, on the east of Tyre and Sidon. See [Eze
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009); [Psa
83:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#007); their capital was named Gebal.
See Dodd.

All Lebanon - See on [Jos 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017)
(note).

[Joshua 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 13:6</span></span>

Misrephoth-maim - See on [Jos 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#007)
(note).

These will I drive out - That is, if the Israelites continued to be
obedient; but they did not, and therefore they never fully possessed the
whole of that land which, on this condition alone, God had promised
them: the Sidonians were never expelled by the Israelites, and were only
brought into a state of comparative subjection in the days of David and
Solomon. Some have taken upon them to deny the authenticity of Divine
revelation relative to this business, "because," say they, "God is
stated to have absolutely promised that Joshua should conquer the whole
land, and put the Israelites in possession of it." This is a total
mistake.

1\. God never absolutely, i.e., unconditionally, promised to put them in
possession of this land. The promise of their possessing the whole was
suspended on their fidelity to God. They were not faithful, and
therefore God was not bound by his promise to give them any part of the
land, after their first act of national defection from his worship.

2\. God never said that Joshua should conquer the whole land, and give
it to them; the promise was simply this: "Thou shalt bring them into the
land, and thou shalt divide it among them:" both of which he did, and
procured them footing by his conquests, sufficient to have enabled them
to establish themselves in it for ever.

3\. It was never said, Thou shalt conquer it all, and then divide it;
no. Several of the tribes, after their quota was allotted them, were
obliged to drive out the ancient inhabitants. See on [Jos
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#018) (note).

[Joshua 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 13:7</span></span>

The nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh - The other half tribe
of Manasseh, and the two tribes of Reuben and Gad, had got their
inheritance on the other side of Jordan, in the land formerly belonging
to Og king of Bashan, and Sihon king of the Amorites.

[Joshua 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 13:9</span></span>

From Aroer - See on [Jos 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#002) (note).

[Joshua 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 13:11</span></span>

Border of the Geshurites - See on [Jos
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#005) (note).

[Joshua 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 13:17</span></span>

Bamoth-baal - The high places of Baal, probably so called from altars
erected on hills for the impure worship of this Canaanitish Priapus.

[Joshua 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 13:18</span></span>

Jahaza - A city near Medeba and Dibon. It was given to the Levites, [Ch1
6:78](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#078).

Kedemoth - Mentioned [Deu 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#026);
supposed to have been situated beyond the river Arnon.

Mephaath - Situated on the frontiers of Moab, on the eastern part of the
desert. It was given to the Levites, [Jos
21:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#037).

[Joshua 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 13:19</span></span>

Kirjathaim - This city, according to Eusebius, was nine miles distant
from Medeba, towards the east. It passed from the Emim to the Moabites,
from the Moabites to the Amorites, and from the Amorites to the
Israelites, [Gen 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006); [Deu
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#020). Calmet supposes the Reubenites
possessed it till the time they were carried away by the Assyrians; and
then the Moabites appear to have taken possession of it anew, as he
collects from [Jer 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001) etc., and [Eze
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#009) etc.

Sibmah - A place remarkable for its vines. See [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008), [Isa
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009), [Jer
48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032).

Zareth-shahar, in the mount of the valley - This probably means a town
situated on or near to a hill in some flat country.

[Joshua 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 13:20</span></span>

Beth-peor - The house or temple of Peor, situated at the foot of the
mountain of the same name. See [Num
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#003).

[Joshua 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 13:21</span></span>

The princes of Midian - See the history of this war, [Num
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001), etc.; and from that place this
and the following verse seem to be borrowed, for the introduction of the
death of Balaam here seems quite irrelevant.

[Joshua 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 13:23</span></span>

The cities and the villages - By villages, חצרים chatserim, it is likely
that moveable villages or tents are meant, such as are in use among the
Bedouin Arabs; places where they were accustomed to feed and pen their
cattle.

[Joshua 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 13:25</span></span>

Half the land on the children of Ammon - This probably was land which
had been taken from the Ammonites by Sihon, king of the Amorites, and
which the Israelites possessed by right of conquest. For although the
Israelites were forbidden to take the land of the Ammonites, [Deu
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#037), yet this part, as having been
united to the territories of Sihon, they might possess when they
defeated that king and subdued his kingdom.

[Joshua 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 13:26</span></span>

Ramath-mizpeh - The same as Ramoth-gilead. It was one of the cities of
refuge, [Jos 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008); [Deu
4:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#047).

Mahanaim - Or the two camps. Situated on the northern side of the brook
Jabbok, celebrated for the vision of the two camps of angels which Jacob
had there; see [Gen 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002).

[Joshua 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 13:27</span></span>

Beth-aram - This city was rebuilt by Herod, and called Livias, in honor
of Livia, the wife of Augustus. Josephus calls it Julias, Julia being
the name which the Greeks commonly give to Livia. - Calmet.

Succoth - A place between Jabbok and Jordan where Jacob pitched his
tents, from which circumstance it obtained its name, see [Gen
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017).

[Joshua 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 13:29</span></span>

The half tribe of Manasseh - When the tribes of Reuben and Gad requested
to have their settlement on the east side of Jordan, it does not appear
that any part of the tribe of Manasseh requested to be settled in the
same place. But as this tribe was numerous, and had much cattle, Moses
thought proper to appoint one half of it to remain on the east of
Jordan, and the other to go over and settle on the west side of that
river.

[Joshua 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 13:30</span></span>

The towns of Jair - These were sixty cities; they are mentioned
afterwards, and in [Ch1 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#021), etc.
They are the same with the Havoth-jair mentioned [Num
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041). Jair was son of Segub, grandson
of Esron or Hezron, and great-grandson of Machir by his grandmother's
side, who married Hezron of the tribe of Judah. See his genealogy, [Ch1
2:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#021).

[Joshua 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 13:32</span></span>

Which Moses did distribute - Moses had settled every thing relative to
these tribes before his death, having appointed them to possess the
territories of Og king of Bashan, and Sihon king of the Amorites. For
particulars on this chapter, the reader, if he judge it of consequence,
may consult Calmet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 14](jos014)

</div>
