<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos006)  [Next](jos008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 7:0</span></span>

The trespass of the Israelites, [Jos
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001). Joshua sends men to view the
state of Ai, [Jos 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002). They return
with a favorable report, [Jos 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#003).
Three thousand men are sent against it, who are defeated, and thirty-six
killed, [Jos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004), [Jos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005). Joshua is greatly distressed,
prostrates himself, and inquires of the Lord the reason why he has
abandoned Israel to their enemies, [Jos
7:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006). The Lord raises him, and
informs him that, contrary to the command, some of the people had
secreted some of the spoils of Jericho, [Jos
7:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010). He is directed how to
discover the delinquent, [Jos 7:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#013).
Joshua inquires in what Tribe the guilt is found, and finds it to be in
the tribe of Judah; in what Family, and finds it to be among the
Zarhites; in what Household, and finds it to be in that of Zabdi; in
what Individual, and finds it to be Achan son of Carmi, son of Zabdi,
[Jos 7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016). Joshua exhorts him to
confess his sin, [Jos 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019). He does
so, and gives a circumstantial account, [Jos
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#020), [Jos
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021). Joshua sends for the stolen
articles, [Jos 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#022), [Jos
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#023). And Achan and all that belonged
to him are brought to the valley of Achor, stoned and burnt, [Jos
7:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#022).

[Joshua 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 7:1</span></span>

The children of Israel committed a trespass - It is certain that one
only was guilty; and yet the trespass is imputed here to the whole
congregation; and the whole congregation soon suffered shame and
disgrace on the account, as their armies were defeated, thirty-six
persons slain, and general terror spread through the whole camp. Being
one body, God attributes the crime of the individual to the whole till
the trespass was discovered, and by a public act of justice inflicted on
the culprit the congregation had purged itself of the iniquity. This was
done to render every man extremely cautious, and to make the people
watchful over each other, that sin might be no where tolerated or
connived at, as one transgression might bring down the wrath of God upon
the whole camp. See on [Jos 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#012)
(note).

The accursed thing - A portion of the spoils of the city of Jericho, the
whole of which God had commanded to be destroyed.

For Achan, the son of Carmi, etc. - Judah had two sons by Tamar: Pharez
and Zarah. Zarah was father of Zabdi, and Zabdi of Carmi, the father of
Achan. These five persons extend through a period of 265 years; and
hence Calmet concludes that they could not have had children before they
were fifty or fifty-five years of age. This Achan, son of Zabdi, is
called, in [Ch1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006), Achar, son of
Zimrie; but this reading is corrected into Achan by some MSS. in the
place above cited.

[Joshua 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 7:2</span></span>

Sent men from Jericho to Ai - This is the place called Hai, [Gen
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008). It was in the east of Beth-el,
north of Jericho, from which it was distant about ten or twelve miles.
From [Jos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004), [Jos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005) it appears to have been situated
upon a hill, and belonged to the Amorites, as we learn from [Jos
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#007). It is very likely that it was a
strong place, as it chose to risk a siege, notwithstanding the
extraordinary destruction of Jericho which it had lately witnessed.

[Joshua 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 7:4</span></span>

About three thousand men - The spies sent to reconnoitre the place ([Jos
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#003)) reported that the town was meanly
garrisoned, and that two or three thousand men would be sufficient to
take it. These were accordingly sent up, and were repulsed by the
Amorites.

[Joshua 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 7:5</span></span>

They chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim - They seem to
have presumed that the men of Ai would have immediately opened their
gates to them, and therefore they marched up with confidence; but the
enemy appearing, they were put to flight, their ranks utterly broken,
and thirty-six of them killed. שברים Shebarim signifies breaches or
broken places, and may here apply to the ranks of the Israelites, which
were broken by the men of Ai; for the people were totally routed, though
there were but few slain. They were panic-struck, and fled in the utmost
confusion.

The hearts of the people melted - They were utterly discouraged; and by
this gave an ample proof that without the supernatural assistance of God
they could never have conquered the land.

[Joshua 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 7:6</span></span>

Joshua rent his clothes, etc. - It was not in consequence of this slight
discomfiture, simply considered in itself, that Joshua laid this
business so much to heart; but

1\. Because the people melted, and became as water, and there was little
hope that they would make any stand against the enemy; and

2\. Because this defeat evidently showed that God had turned his hand
against them. Had it not been so, their enemies could not have
prevailed.

Put dust upon their heads - Rending the clothes, beating the breast,
tearing the hair, putting dust upon the head, and falling down
prostrate, were the usual marks of deep affliction and distress. Most
nations have expressed their sorrow in a similar way. The example of the
distressed family of King Latinus, so affectingly related by Virgil, may
be adduced in illustration of many passages in the history of the
patriarchs, prophets, apostles, etc.

Regina ut testis venientem prospicit hostem -

Purpureos moritura manu discindit amictus -

Filia prima manu flavos Lavinia crines,

Et roseas laniata genas. -

It scissa veste Latinus -

Canitiem immundo perfusam pulvere turpans.

Aen. lib. xii., ver. 594.

"The queen, who saw the foes invade the town,

And brands on tops of burning houses thrown,

She raves against the gods, she beats her breast,

And tears, with both her hands, her purple vest.

The sad Lavinia rends her yellow hair,

And rosy cheeks; the rest her sorrow share.

Latinus tears his garments as he goes,

Both for his public and his private woes;

With filth his venerable beard besmears,

And sordid dust deforms his silver hairs."

Dryden.

[Joshua 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 7:7</span></span>

Alas, O Lord God - Particles of exclamations and distress, or what are
called interjections, are nearly the same in all languages: and the
reason is because they are the simple voice of nature. The Hebrew word
which we translate alas is אהה ahah. The complaint of Joshua in this and
the following verses seems principally to have arisen from his deep
concern for the glory of God, and the affecting interest he took in
behalf of the people: he felt for the thousands of Israel, whom he
considered as abandoned to destruction: and he felt for the glory of
God, for he knew should Israel be destroyed God's name would be
blasphemed among the heathen; and his expostulations with his Maker,
which have been too hastily blamed by some, as savouring of too great
freedom and impatience are founded on God's own words, [Deu
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026), [Deu
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027), and on the practice of Moses
himself, who had used similar expressions on a similar occasion; see
[Exo 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#022), [Exo
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#023); [Num
14:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#013).

[Joshua 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 7:10</span></span>

Wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face? - It is plain there was nothing
in Joshua's prayer or complaint that was offensive to God, for here
there is no reprehension: Why liest thou thus? this is no time for
complaint; something else is indispensably necessary to be done.

[Joshua 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 7:11</span></span>

Israel hath sinned - It is impossible that God should turn against his
people, if they had not turned away from him. They have taken of the
accursed thing, notwithstanding my severe prohibition. They have also
stolen, supposing, if not seen by their brethren, I should either not
see or not regard it. They have dissembled - pretended to have kept
strictly the command I gave them; and have put it among their own stuff
- considered it now as a part of their own property.

[Joshua 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 7:12</span></span>

Because they were accursed - From this verse it appears that the nature
of the execration or anathema was such, that those who took of the thing
doomed to destruction fell immediately under the same condemnation. The
inhabitants of Jericho and all that they had were accursed: therefore
they and all their substance were to be destroyed. The Israelites took
of the accursed thing, and therefore became accursed with it. This was
certainly understood when the curse was pronounced: Every man who
touches this property shall be involved in the same execration. Achan
therefore was sufficiently aware of the risk he ran in taking any part
of the anathematized thing; and when viewed in this light, the
punishment inflicted on him will appear to be perfectly just and proper.

[Joshua 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 7:13</span></span>

Up, sanctify the people - Joshua, all the time that God spake, lay
prostrate before the ark: he is now commanded to get up, and sanctify
the people, i.e., cause them to wash themselves, and get into a proper
disposition to hear the judgment of the Lord relative to the late
transactions.

[Joshua 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 7:14</span></span>

Ye shall be brought according to your tribes - It has been a subject of
serious inquiry in what manner and by what means the culpable tribe,
family, household, and individual, were discovered. The Jews have many
conceits on the subject; the most rational is, that the tribes being, in
their representatives, brought before the high priest, the stone on the
breastplate gave immediate intimation by suddenly losing its lustre.
According to them, this is what is termed consulting God by Urim and
Thummim. It is however most probable that the whole was determined by
the lot; and that God chose this method to detect the guilty tribe, next
the family, thirdly the household, and lastly the individual. This was
nearly the plan pursued in the election of Saul by Samuel. "Now
therefore," says he, "present yourselves before the Lord by your tribes,
and by your thousands. And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of
Israel to come near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken. When he had caused
the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their families, the family of
Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken," [Sa1
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#019), [Sa1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#020). If the lot was used in the one
case it was doubtless used in the other also, as the procedure in the
main was entirely similar. The same mode was used to find out who it was
that transgressed the king's command, when it was found that Jonathan
had eaten a little honey, [Sa1
14:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#040). It is well known that the
promised land was divided by lot among the Israelites; (see [Num
26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055); [Num
33:54](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#054); [Deu
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#038), etc.); and that the courses of
the priests were regulated by lot in the days of David, [Ch1
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#005), etc. That this was a frequent
mode of determining difficult questions, and appointed by God himself,
is evident from [Lev 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#008); [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018); [Pro
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033); [Pro
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018); [Act
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026).

[Joshua 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 7:17</span></span>

And he brought the family of Judah - Dr. Kennicott observes, "All Israel
came near by Tribes, and one tribe was fixed on; then that tribe came by
its Families, and one family was fixed on; then came that family by its
Households, and one household was fixed on, and then that household,
coming Man by Man, one man was fixed on. Yet according to the present
text, in the execution of this command, all Israel came, and the tribe
of Judah was fixed on; secondly came the families of Judah, and the
family of the Zarhites was fixed on; thirdly came the family of the
Zarhites Man by Man, and Zabdi was fixed on; and fourthly came the
household of Zabdi Man by Man, and Achan was fixed on. So that in the
third article the word for by households is most certainly left out; and
the fourth article, man by man, is improperly expressed twice. Instead
of לגברים laggebarim, Man by Man, in [Jos
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#017), the true word לבתים labbottim,
by Households, is preserved in six Hebrew copies, and the Syriac
version. By this method was discovered Achan, as he is here five times
called, though the valley in which he was stoned is called Achor. He is
also called Achar in the text, and in all the versions, in [Ch1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#007). He is called Achar in the five
places of Joshua in the Syrian version; also in all five in the Greek of
the Vatican MS., and twice in the Alexandrian MS., and so in Josephus."
- Kennicott's Observat.

[Joshua 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 7:19</span></span>

My son, give - glory to the Lord God - The person being now detected,
Joshua wishes him to acknowledge the omniscience of God, and confess his
crime. And doubtless this was designed, not only for the edification of
the people, and a vindication of the righteous judgment of God, but in
reference to his own salvation; for as his life was now become forfeited
to the law, there was the utmost necessity of humiliation before God
that his soul might be saved. Give glory to God signifies the same as,
Make a thorough confession as in the presence of God, and disguise no
part of the truth. In this way and in these very words the Jews adjured
the man who had been born blind that he would truly tell who had healed
him; for they pretended to believe that Christ was such a sinner that
God would not work a miracle by him. [Joh
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024).

[Joshua 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 7:20</span></span>

I have sinned against the Lord God - This seems a very honest and hearty
confession, and there is hope that this poor culprit escaped perdition.

[Joshua 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 7:21</span></span>

A goodly Babylonish garment - אדרת שנער addereth shinar, a splendid or
costly robe of Shinar; but as Babylon or Babel was built in the plain of
Shinar, the word has in general been translated Babylon in this place.
It is very probable that this was the robe of the king of Jericho, for
the same word is used, [Jon 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006), to
express the royal robe, of the king of Nineveh which he laid aside in
order to humble himself before God. Bochart and Calmet have shown at
large that Babylonish robes were very splendid, and in high reputation.
"They are," says Calmet, "generally allowed to have been of various
colors, though some suppose they were woven thus; others, that they were
embroidered with the needle; and others, that they were painted. Silius
Italicus appears to think they were woven thus: -

Vestis spirantes referens subtemine vultus,

Quos radio caelat Babylon.

Punic. lib. xiv., ver. 667.

Martial seems to say they were embroidered with the needle: -

Non ego praetulerim Babylonia Picta superbe

Textra, Semiramia quae variantur Acu.

Lib. viii., E. 28, ver. 17.

Pliny (lib. viii., c. 48) and Apuleius (Florid. lib. i). speak of them
as if painted: "Colores diversos picturae intexere Babylon maxime
celebravit, et nomen imposuit." Thus far Calmet: but it may be observed
that the clothes woven of divers colors at Babylon, which were so
greatly celebrated, and hence called Babylonish garments, appear rather
to have had the pictures woven or embroidered in them than painted on
them, as Calmet supposes, though it is most likely the figures referred
to were the work of the needle after the cloth came from the loom.
Aquila translates the original, אדרת שנער addereth shinar, by στολην
βαβυλονικην, a Babylonish robe; Symmachus, ενδυμα συναρ, a robe of
Synar; the Septuagint, ψιλην ποικιλην, a fine garment of different
colors; and the Vulgate, pallium coccineum, a scarlet cloak. There is no
doubt it was both beautiful and costly, and on these grounds it was
coveted by Achan.

Two hundred shekels of silver - At three shillings per shekel, amount to
about 30l. sterling.

A wedge of gold - A tongue of gold, לשון זהב leshon zahab what we
commonly call an ingot of gold, a corruption of the word lingot,
signifying a little tongue, of fifty shekels weight. These fifty
shekels, in weight 29 oz. 15 15/31 gr., at 2l. 5s. 2 1/2 42/93d. per
shekel, would be worth about 113l. 0s. 10 3/4d. This verse gives us a
notable instance of the progress of sin. It

1\. enters by the eye;

2\. sinks into the heart;

3\. actuates the hand; and,

4\. leads to secrecy and dissimulation.

I saw, etc, I coveted, etc. I took and hid them in the earth. Thus says
St. James: "When lust (evil desire) is conceived it bringeth forth sin;
and when sin is finished it bringeth forth death," [Jos
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#015).

[Joshua 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 7:24</span></span>

Joshua - took Achan - and all that he had - He and his cattle and
substance were brought to the valley to be consumed; his sons and his
daughters, probably, to witness the judgments of God inflicted on their
disobedient parent. See [Jos 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025).

[Joshua 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 7:25</span></span>

Why hast thou troubled us? - Here is a reference to the meaning of
Achan's or Achar's name, מה עכרתנו meh Achar-tanu; and as עכר achar is
used here, and not עכן achan, and the valley is called the valley of
Achor, and not the valley of Achan, hence some have supposed that Achar
was his proper name, as it is read [Ch1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#007), and in some MSS., and ancient
versions. See the note on [Jos 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#017).

And all Israel stoned him with stones, and burned them with fire, after
they had stoned them with stones - With great deference to the judgment
of others, I ask, Can it be fairly proved from the text that the sons
and daughters of Achan were stoned to death and burnt as well as their
father? The text certainly leaves it doubtful, but seems rather to
intimate that Achan alone was stoned, and that his substance was burnt
with fire. The reading of the present Hebrew text is, They stoned Him
with stones, and burnt Them with fire, after they had stoned Them with
stones. The singular number being used in the first clause of the verse,
and the plural in the last, leaves the matter doubtful. The Vulgate is
very clear: Lapidavitque Eum omnis Israel; et cuncta quae illius erant,
igne consumpta sunt, "All Israel stoned him; and all that he had was
consumed with fire." The Septuagint add this and the first clause of the
next verse together: Και ελιθοβολησαν αυτον λιθοις πας Ισραηλ, και
επεστησαν αυτῳ σωρον λιθων μεγαν: And all Israel stoned Him with stones,
and raised over Him a great heap of stones. The Syriac says simply, They
stoned Him with stones, and burned what pertained to Him with fire. The
Targum is the same as the Hebrew. The Anglo-Saxon seems to refer the
whole to Achan and his Goods: And Him they stoned there, and burnt his
goods. The Arabic version alone says, They stoned Him and his Children,
and his goods. Instead of burnt Them, אתם otham, two of De Rossi's MSS.
read אתו otho, Him; which reading, if genuine, would make the different
members of the verse agree better. It is possible that Achan, his oxen,
asses, sheep, tent, and all his household goods, were destroyed, but his
sons and daughters left uninjured. But it may be asked, Why are they
brought out into the valley with the rest? Why, that they might see and
fear, and be for ever deterred by their father's punishment from
imitating his example. I have gone thus far into this important
transaction, in which the justice and mercy of God are so much
concerned, that I might be able to assign to each its due. That Achan's
life was forfeited to justice by his transgression, no one doubts: he
sinned against a known and positive law. His children could not suffer
with him, because of the law, [Deu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016), unless they had been
accomplices in his guilt: of this there is no evidence; and the text in
question, which speaks of Achan's punishment, is extremely dubious, as
far as it relates to this point. One circumstance that strengthens the
supposition that the children were not included, is the command of the
Lord, [Jos 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#015) : "He that is taken
with the accursed thing, shall be burnt with fire; he, and all that he
hath." Now, all that he hath may certainly refer to his goods, and not
to his children; and his punishment, and the destruction of his property
would answer every purpose of public justice, both as a punishment and
preventive of the crime; and both mercy and justice require that the
innocent shall not suffer with the guilty, unless in very extraordinary
cases, where God may permit the righteous or the innocent to be involved
in those public calamities by which the ungodly are swept away from the
face of the earth: but in the case before us, no necessity of this kind
urged it, and therefore I conclude that Achan alone suffered, and that
his repentance and confession were genuine and sincere; and that, while
Justice required his life, Mercy was extended to the salvation of his
soul.

[Joshua 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 7:26</span></span>

They raised over him a great heap of stones - The burial-places, both of
heroes and eminent culprits, were anciently thus distinguished; and
transactions of this kind gave rise to those great piles of stones
called cairns, that are so frequently to be met with, especially in
northern countries. From the whole of this account we may see the
exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the great danger of not withstanding
its first approaches. By covetousness many lives and many souls have
been destroyed, and yet the living lay it not to heart! Who fears the
love of money, provided he can get riches? Through the intensity of this
desire, every part of the surface of the earth, and as far as possible
its bowels, are ransacked in order to get wealth; and God alone can
tell, who sees all things, to how many private crimes, frauds, and
dissimulations, this gives birth; by which the wrath of God is brought
down upon the community at large! Who is an enemy to his country? The
sinner against his God. An open foe may be resisted and repelled,
because he is known; but the covetous man, who, as far as his personal
safety will admit, is outraging all the requisitions of justice, is an
unseen pestilence, sowing the seeds of desolation and ruin in society.
Achan's covetousness, which led him to break the law of God, had nearly
proved the destruction of the Israelitish camp, nor would the Lord turn
away from his displeasure till the evil was detected, and the criminal
punished. Reader, is the face of God turned against thee, because of
some private transgression? Are not thy circumstances and family
suffering in consequence of something in thy private life? O search and
try thy ways, return to God, and humble thyself before him lest thy
iniquity instantly find thee out.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 8](jos008)

</div>
