<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos010)  [Next](jos012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 11:0</span></span>

The Kings of Hazor, Madon, Shimron, and Achshaph, with those of the
mountains, plains, etc., and various chiefs of the Canaanites and
Amorites, confederate against Israel, [Jos
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001). They pitch their tents at the
waters of Merom, [Jos 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#004), [Jos
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#005). The Lord encourages Joshua, [Jos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006). He attacks and discomfits them,
[Jos 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#007), [Jos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#008). Houghs all their horses, and
burns all their chariots, [Jos 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#009).
Takes and burns several of their cities, [Jos
11:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010). The Israelites take the
spoils, [Jos 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#014), [Jos
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#015). An account of the country taken
by Joshua, [Jos 11:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016). The
Gibeonites only make peace with Israel, [Jos
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019). All the rest resist and are
overcome, [Jos 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#020). Joshua cuts off
the Anakim, [Jos 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021), [Jos
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022). The conquered lands are given
to Israel, and the war is concluded, [Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023).

[Joshua 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 11:1</span></span>

Jabin king of Hazor - It is probable that Jabin was the common name of
all the kings of Hazor. That king, by whom the Israelites were kept in a
state of slavery for twenty years, and who was defeated by Deborah and
Barak, was called by this name; see [Jdg
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#002), [Jdg
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003), [Jdg
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#023). The name signifies wise or
intelligent. The city of Hazor was situated above the Lake Semechon, in
Upper Galilee, according to Josephus, Antiq. lib. v., c. 6. It was given
to the tribe of Naphtali, [Jos 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#036),
who it appears did not possess it long; for though it was burnt by
Joshua, [Jos 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#011), it is likely that
the Canaanites rebuilt it, and restored the ancient government, as we
find a powerful king there about one hundred and thirty years after the
death of Joshua, [Jdg 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001). It is the
same that was taken by Tiglath-pileser, together with Kadesh, to which
it is contiguous; see [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029). It
is supposed to have given name to the Valley or Plain of Hazor or Nasor,
situated between it and Kadesh, where Jonathan and Mattathias defeated
the armies of Demetrius, and slew three thousand of their men, 1
Maccabees 11:63-74. It was in ancient times the metropolitan city of all
that district, and a number of petty kings or chieftains were subject to
its king, see [Jos 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010); and it is
likely that it was those tributary kings who were summoned to attend the
king of Hazor on this occasion; for Joshua having conquered the southern
part of the promised land, the northern parts seeing themselves exposed
made now a common interest, and, joining with Jabin, endeavored to put a
stop to the progress of the Israelites. See Calmet

Jobab king of Madon - This royal city is nowhere else mentioned in
Scripture except in [Jos 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#019). The
Vatican copy of the Septuagint reads Μαρων, Maron, which, if legitimate,
Calmet thinks may mean Maronia or Merath in Phoenicia, to the north of
Mount Libanus. The Hebrew text reads מרון Meron, [Jos
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#020), after Shimron, which is
probably the same with מדון Madon, [Jos
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019), the word having casually
dropped out of the preceding place into the latter, and the ר resh and ד
daleth being interchanged, which might have easily happened from the
great similarity of the letters. Hence Calmet conjectures that it may be
the same place with מרוז Meroz, [Jdg
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023), the ז zain and final ן nun being
interchanged, which they might easily, as they are so very similar.

King of Shimron - This city is supposed to be the same with Symira, in
Coelosyria, joined to Maron or Marath, by Pliny and Pomponius Mela. It
cannot be Samaria, as that had its name long after by Omri king of
Israel. See [Kg1 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024).

King of Achshaph - Calmet supposes this to have been the city of
Ecdippe, mentioned by Pliny, Ptolemy, Josephus, and Eusebius. The latter
places it within ten miles of Ptolemais, on the road to Tyre. It fell to
the tribe of Asher. See [Jos 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#026).

[Joshua 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 11:2</span></span>

On the north of the mountains - Or the mountain, probably Hermon, or
some mountain not far from the lake of Gennesareth.

And of the plains - That is, the valleys of the above mountains, which
had the sea of Chinneroth or Gennesareth on the south.

Chinneroth - This city is supposed by St. Jerome and several others
since his time, to be the same as was afterwards called Tiberias. From
this city or village the sea of Chinneroth or Gennesareth probably had
its name.

And in the borders of Dor - Calmet supposes this to mean the champaign
country of the higher and lower Galilee, on to the Mediterranean Sea,
and to the village or city of Dor, which was the farthermost city of
Phoenicia. Dor was in the lot of the half tribe of Manasseh, and was
situated on the Mediterranean Sea, three leagues from Caesarea, and
seven from Ptolemais.

[Joshua 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 11:3</span></span>

The Canaanite on the east, etc. - Those who dwelt on the borders of
Jordan, south of the sea of Tiberias.

On the west - Those were the Phoenicians who dwelt on the coast of the
Mediterranean Sea, from Dor northwards, on the way to Mount Libanus. -
Calmet.

The Hivite under Hermon - Mount Hermon was to the east of Libanus and
the fountains of Jordan; it is the same with Syrion and Baal Hermon in
Scripture.

The land of Mizpeh - There were several cities of this name: one in the
tribe of Judah, ([Jos 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#038)); a second
in the tribe of Benjamin, ([Jos
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026)); a third beyond Jordan, in the
tribe of Gad; and a fourth beyond Jordan, in the tribe of Manasseh,
which is that mentioned in the text. See Wells's Geography. Calmet
supposes this Mizpeh to be the place where Laban and Jacob made their
covenant, and from which circumstance it took its name. See [Gen
31:48](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#048), [Gen
31:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#049).

[Joshua 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 11:4</span></span>

Much people, even as the sand - This form of speech, by some called a
hyperbole, conveys simply the idea of a vast or unusual number - a
number of which no regular estimate could be easily formed. Josephus,
who seldom finds difficulties in such cases, and makes no scruple of
often speaking without book, tells us that the allied armies amounted to
300,000 foot 10,000 horse, and 20,000 chariots of war. Antiq. lib. v.,
c. 1. That chariots were frequently used in war, all the records of
antiquity prove; but it is generally supposed that among the Canaanites
they were armed with iron scythes fastened to their poles and to the
naves of their wheels. Terrible things are spoken of these, and the
havoc made by them when furiously driven among the ranks of infantry. Of
what sort the cavalry was, we know not; but from the account here given
we may see what great advantages these allies possessed over the
Israelites, whose armies consisted of infantry only.

[Joshua 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 11:5</span></span>

The waters of Merom - Where these waters were, interpreters are not
agreed. Whether they were the waters of the Lake Semechon, or the waters
of Megiddo, mentioned [Jdg 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019),
cannot be easily determined. The latter is the more probable opinion.

[Joshua 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 11:6</span></span>

Be not afraid - of them - To meet such a formidable host so well
equipped, in their own country, furnished with all that was necessary to
supply a numerous army, required more than ordinary encouragement in
Joshua's circumstances. This communication from God was highly
necessary, in order to prevent the people from desponding on the eve of
a conflict, in which their all was at stake.

[Joshua 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 11:7</span></span>

By the waters of Merom suddenly - Joshua, being apprised of this grand
confederation, lost no time, but marched to meet them; and before they
could have supposed him at hand, fell suddenly upon them, and put them
to the rout.

[Joshua 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 11:8</span></span>

Great Zidon - If this were the same with the Sidon of the ancients, it
was illustrious long before the Trojan war; and both it and its
inhabitants are frequently mentioned by Homer as excelling in works of
skill and utility, and abounding in wealth: -

Ενθ' εσαν οἱ πεπλοι παμποικιλοι, εογα γυναικων

Σιδονιων.

Iliad, lib. vi., ver. 289.

"There lay the ventures of no vulgar art,

Sidonian maids embroidered every part."

Pope.

Αργυρεον κρητηρα τετυγμενον· ἑξ δ' αρα μετρα

Χανδανεν, αυταρ καλλει ενικα πασαν επ' αιαν

Πολλον, επι Σιδονες πολυδαιδαλοι ευ ησκησαν.

Iliad, lib. xxiii., ver. 741.

"A silver urn that full six measures held,

By none in weight or workmanship excell'd;

Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine,

Elaborate with artifice divine."

Pope.

Εκ μεν Σιδωνος πολυχαλκου ευχομαι ειναι.

Odyss. xv. 424.

"I am of Sidon, famous for her wealth."

The art of making glass is attributed by Pliny to this city: Sidon
artifex vitri, Hist. Nat. l. v., c. 19.

Misrephoth-maim - Or, Misrephoth of the waters. What this place was is
unknown, but Calmet conjectures it to be the same with Sarepta, a city
of Phoenicia, contiguous to Sidon. The word signifies the burning of the
waters, or inflammation; probably it was a place noted for its hot
springs: this idea seems to have struck Luther, as he translates it, die
warme wasser, the hot waters.

[Joshua 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 11:9</span></span>

He houghed their horses - The Hebrew word עקר akar, which we render to
hough or hamstring, signifies to wound, cut, or lop off. It is very
likely that it means here, not only an act by which they were rendered
useless, but by which they were destroyed; as God had purposed that his
people should not possess any cattle of this kind, that a warlike and
enterprising spirit might not be cultivated among them; and that, when
obliged to defend themselves and their country, they might be led to
depend upon God for protection and victory. On the same ground, God had
forbidden the kings of Israel to multiply horses, [Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016) (note). See the note there
containing the reasons on which this prohibition was founded.

Burnt their chariots - As these could have been of no use without the
horses.

[Joshua 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 11:10</span></span>

Took Hazor - See on [Jos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001) (note).

[Joshua 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 11:13</span></span>

The cities that stood still in their strength - The word תלם tillam,
which we translate their strength, and the margin, their heap, has been
understood two ways.

1\. As signifying those cities which had made peace with the Israelites,
when conditions of peace were offered according to the command of the
law; and consequently were not destroyed. Such as the cities of the
Hivites; see [Jos 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019).

2\. The cities which were situated upon hills and mountains, which, when
taken, might be retained with little difficulty. In this sense the place
is understood by the Vulgate, as pointing out the cities quae erant in
collibus et tumulis sitae, "which were situated on hills and eminences."
As the cities of the plain might be easily attacked and carried, Joshua
destroyed them; but as those on mountains, hills, or other eminences,
might be retained with little trouble, prudence would dictate their
preservation, as places of refuge in any insurrection of the people, or
invasion of their adversaries. The passage in Jeremiah, [Jer
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018), Jerusalem shall be builded on
her own heap, תלה tillah, if understood as above, conveys an easy and
clear sense: Jerusalem shall be re-established on her Own Hill.

[Joshua 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 11:14</span></span>

All the spoil of these cities - Israel took - With the exception of
those things which had been employed for idolatrous purposes; see [Deu
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025).

[Joshua 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 11:16</span></span>

The mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same - This place has
given considerable trouble to commentators; and it is not easy to assign
such a meaning to the place as may appear in all respects satisfactory.

1\. If we consider this verse and the 21st to have been added after the
times in which the kingdoms of Israel and Judah were divided, the
difficulty is at once removed.

2\. The difficulty will be removed if we consider that mountain and
valley are put here for mountains and valleys, and that these include
all mountains and valleys which were not in the lot that fell to the
tribe of Judah. Or,

3\. If by mountain of Israel we understand Beth-el, where God appeared
to Jacob, afterwards called Israel, and promised him the land of Canaan,
a part of the difficulty will be removed. But the first opinion seems
best founded; for there is incontestable evidence that several notes
have been added to this book since the days of Joshua. See the preface.

[Joshua 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 11:17</span></span>

From the mount Halak - All the mountainous country that extends from the
south of the land of Canaan towards Seir unto Baal-gad, which lies at
the foot of Mount Libanus or Hermon, called by some the mountains of
Separation, which serve as a limit between the land of Canaan and that
of Seir; see [Jos 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#007).

The valley of Lebanon - The whole extent of the plain which is on the
south, and probably north, of Mount Libanus. Calmet conjectures that
Coelesyria is here meant.

[Joshua 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 11:18</span></span>

Joshua made war a long time - The whole of these conquests were not
effected in one campaign: they probably required six or seven years.
There are some chronological notices in this book, and in Deuteronomy,
by which the exact time may be nearly ascertained. Caleb was forty years
old when he was sent from Kadesh-barnea by Moses to search out the land,
about A.M. 2514; and at the end of this war he was eighty-five years
old; (compare [Jos 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010) with Numbers
13, and Deuteronomy 1); consequently the war ended in 2559, which had
begun, by the passage of Jordan, on the tenth day of the first month of
the year 2554. From this date to the end of 2559 we find exactly six
years; the first of which Joshua seems to have employed in the conquest
of the south part of the land of Canaan, and the other five in the
conquest of all the territories situated on the north of that country.
See Dodd. Calmet computes this differently, and allows the term of seven
years for the conquest of the whole land. "Caleb was forty years old
when sent from Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land. At the conclusion of
the war he was eighty-five years old, as himself says, [Jos
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010). From this sum of eighty-five
subtract forty, his age when he went from Kadesh-barnea, and the
thirty-eight years which he spent in the wilderness after his return,
and there will remain the sum of seven years, which was the time spent
in the conquest of the land."

1\. By protracting the war the Canaanites had time to repent, having
sufficient opportunity to discern the hand of Jehovah.

2\. Agriculture was carried on, and thus provision was made even for the
support of the conquerors, for had the land been subdued and wasted at
once, tillage must have stopped, and famine would have ensued.

3\. Wild beasts would have multiplied upon them, and the land have been
desolated by their means.

4\. Had these conquests been more rapid the people of Israel would have
been less affected, and less instructed by miracles that had passed in
such quick succession before their eyes; and, as in this case they would
have obtained the dominion with comparatively little exertion, they
might have felt themselves less interested in the preservation of an
inheritance, to obtain which they had been but at little trouble and
little expense.

What we labor under the Divine blessing to acquire we are careful to
retain; but what comes lightly generally goes lightly. God obliged them
to put forth their own strength in this work, and only blessed and
prospered them while they were workers together with him. See the note
on [Jos 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006).

[Joshua 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 11:20</span></span>

It was of the Lord to harden their hearts - They had sinned against all
the light they had received, and God left them justly to the hardness,
obstinacy, and pride of their own hearts; for as they chose to retain
their idolatry, God was determined that they should be cut off. For as
no city made peace with the Israelites but Gibeon and some others of the
Hivites, [Jos 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#019), it became
therefore necessary to destroy them; for their refusal to make peace was
the proof that they wilfully persisted in their idolatry.

[Joshua 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 11:21</span></span>

Cut off the Anakims - from Hebron, from Debir - This is evidently a
recapitulation of the military operations detailed [Jos
10:36-41](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#036).

Destroyed - their cities - That is, those of the Anakims; for from [Jos
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#013) we learn that Joshua preserved
certain other cities.

[Joshua 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 11:22</span></span>

In Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod - The whole race of the Anakims was
extirpated in this war, except those who had taken refuge in the above
cities, which belonged to the Philistines; and in which some of the
descendants of Anak were found even in the days of David.

[Joshua 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 11:23</span></span>

So Joshua took the whole land - All the country described here and in
the preceding chapter. Besides the multitudes that perished in this war,
many of the Canaanites took refuge in the confines of the land, and in
the neighboring nations. Some suppose that a party of these fugitive
Canaanites made themselves masters of Lower Egypt, and founded a dynasty
there known by the name of the shepherd kings; but it is more probable
that the shepherds occupied Egypt long before the time that Jacob went
thither to sojourn. It is said they founded Tingris or Tangier, where,
according to Procopius, they erected two white pillars with an
inscription in the Phoenician language, of which this is the
translation: We Are the Persons Who Have Fled from the Face of Joshua
the Plunderer, the Son of Nave or Nun. See Bochart, Phaleg and Canaan,
lib. i., c. xxiv., col. 476. Many, no doubt, settled in different parts
of Africa, in Asia Minor, in Greece, and in the different islands of the
Aegean and Mediterranean Sea: it is supposed also that colonies of this
people were spread over different parts of Germany and Sclavonia, etc.,
but their descendants are now so confounded with the nations of the
earth, as no longer to retain their original names, or to be
discernible.

And Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel - He claimed no
peculiar jurisdiction over it; his own family had no peculiar share of
it, and himself only the ruined city of Timnath-serah, in the tribe of
Ephraim, which he was obliged to rebuild. See [Jos
19:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#049), [Jos
19:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#050), and see his character at the
end of the book, [Jos 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#033) (note).

And the land rested from war - The whole territory being now conquered,
which God designed the Israelites should possess at this time. According
to the apostle, [Heb 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008), etc., Joshua
himself was a type of Christ; the promised land, of the kingdom of
heaven, the victories which he gained, of the victory and triumph of
Christ; and the rest he procured for Israel, of the state of
blessedness, at the right hand of God. In this light we should view the
whole history, in order to derive those advantages from it which, as a
portion of the revelation of God, it was intended to convey. Those who
finally reign with Christ are they who, through his grace, conquer the
world, the devil, and the flesh; for it is only of those who thus
overcome that he says, "They shall sit with me on my throne, as I have
overcome, and am set down with the Father on the Father's throne;" [Rev
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#021). Reader, art thou a conqueror?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 12](jos012)

</div>
