<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos016)  [Next](jos018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 17:0</span></span>

The lot of the half tribe of Manasseh, [Jos
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001.md), [Jos
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#002.md). Case of the daughters of
Zelophehad, [Jos 17:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#003.md). The borders
of Manasseh described, [Jos 17:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#007.md).
The Canaanites dwell among them, but are laid under tribute, [Jos
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#012.md), [Jos
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#013.md). The children of Joseph complain
of the scantiness of their lot, [Jos
17:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014.md). Joshua authorizes them to
possess the mountainous wood country of the Perizzites, and gives them
encouragement to expel them, though they were strong and had chariots of
iron, [Jos 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#017.md), [Jos
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#018.md).

[Joshua 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 17:1</span></span>

There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh - It was necessary to
mark this because Jacob, in his blessing, ([Gen
48:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#019.md), [Gen
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#020).md), did in a certain sense set
Ephraim before Manasseh, though the latter was the first-born; but the
place here shows that this preference did not affect the rights of
primogeniture.

For Machir - because he was a man of war - It is not likely that Machir
himself was now alive; if he were, he must have been nearly 200 years
old: It is therefore probable that what is spoken here is spoken of his
children, who now possessed the lot that was originally designed for
their father, who it appears had signalized himself as a man of skill
and valor in some of the former wars, though the circumstances are not
marked. His descendants, being of a warlike, intrepid spirit, were well
qualified to defend a frontier country, which would be naturally exposed
to invasion.

[Joshua 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 17:2</span></span>

The rest of the children of Manasseh - That is, his grandchildren; for
it is contended that Manasseh had no other son than Machir; and these
were very probably the children of Gilead, the son of Machir.

[Joshua 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 17:3</span></span>

Zelophehad - had no sons, but daughters - See this case considered at
large in the notes on [Num 27:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001.md)
(note); [Num 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001) (note.md), etc.

[Joshua 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 17:5</span></span>

There fell ten portions to Manasseh - The Hebrew word חבלי chabley,
which we translate portions, signifies literally cords or cables, and
intimates that by means of a cord, cable, or what we call a chain, the
land was divided. We have but little account of the arts and sciences of
the Hebrews, yet from the sketches which we find in different parts of
the Old Testament it appears that their minds were in many respects well
cultivated; nor could the division, which is mentioned in this book,
have been made without such a measure of geographical knowledge, as we
find it difficult to grant them. Suppose even in this case, the land was
not measured with a chain, which in some cases would have been
impracticable, because the ancient inhabitants still occupied the places
which were allotted to certain tribes or families; yet the allusion to
this mode of measurement shows that it was well known among them. As
there were six sons and five daughters, among whom this division was to
be made, there should be eleven portions; but Zelophehad, son of Hepher,
having left five daughters in his place, neither he nor Hepher is
reckoned. The lot of Manasseh therefore was divided into ten parts; five
for the five sons of Gilead, who were Abiezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem,
and Shemida; and five for the five daughters of Zelophehad, viz.,
Mahlah, Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah. Calmet.

[Joshua 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 17:9</span></span>

Unto the river Kanah - Literally, the river or valley of the reeds,
translated by the Vulgate, vallis arundintei. The tribe of Manasseh
appears to have been bounded on the north by this torrent or valley, and
on the south by the Mediterranean Sea.

[Joshua 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 17:10</span></span>

They met together in Asher on the north - The tribe of Asher extended
from the Mediterranean Sea to Mount Carmel, [Jos
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#026.md), and the tribe of Manasseh
extended to Dor and her towns, (see the following verse, [Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011) (note).md), which were in the
vicinity of Carmel; and thus it appears that these two tribes formed a
junction at the Mediterranean Sea. This may serve to remove the
difficulties in this verse; but still it does appear that in several
cases the tribes were intermingled; for Manasseh had several towns, both
in Issachar and in Asher, see [Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011.md). In like manner, Judah had towns
in Dan and Simeon; and Simeon had towns in Judah; and what is spoken of
the boundaries of the tribes, may be sometimes understood of those towns
which certain tribes had within the limits of others. For, in several
cases, towns seem to be interchanged, or purchased, by mutual consent,
so that in some instances the possessions were intermingled, without any
confusion of the tribes or families.

[Joshua 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 17:11</span></span>

Beth-shean - Called afterwards Scythopolis; the city of the Scythians or
Cuthites, those who were sent into the different Samaritan cities by the
kings of Assyria.

Dor - On the Mediterranean Sea, about eight miles from Caesarea, on the
road to Tyre.

En-dor - The well or fountain of Dor, the place where Saul went to
consult the witch; [Sa1 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007.md), etc.

[Joshua 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 17:12</span></span>

Could not drive out, etc. - They had neither grace nor courage to go
against their enemies, and chose rather to share their territories with
those whom the justice of God had proscribed, than exert themselves to
expel them. But some commentators give a different turn to this
expression, and translate the passage thus: But the children of Manasseh
could not (resolve) to destroy those cities, but the Canaanites
consented to dwell in the land. And as they were willing to pay tribute,
and the others chose to tolerate them on those terms, they agreed to
dwell together: but this paying of tribute seems not to have taken place
till some time after, when the children of Israel were waxen strong,
etc.

[Joshua 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 17:15</span></span>

If thou be a great people - Joshua takes them at their own word; they
said, [Jos 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014.md), that they were a
great people; then said he, If thou be a great people or seeing thou art
a great people, go to the wood country, and clear away for thyself.
Joshua would not reverse the decision of the lot; but as there was much
woodland country, he gave them permission to clear away as much of it as
they found necessary to extend themselves as far as they pleased.

[Joshua 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 17:16</span></span>

The hill is not enough for us - The mountain of Gilboa being that which
had fallen to them by lot.

Chariots of iron - We cannot possess the plain country, because that is
occupied by the Canaanites; and we cannot conquer them, because they
have chariots of iron, that is, very strong chariots, and armed with
scythes, as is generally supposed.

[Joshua 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 17:18</span></span>

The outgoings of it shall be thine - Clear away the wood, occupy the
mountain, and you shall soon be able to command all the valleys; and,
possessing all the defiles of the country, you shall drive out the
Canaanites, though they have chariots of iron: your situation will be
advantageous, your numbers very respectable, and the hand of God will be
upon you for good.

1\. From the whole history of the Israelites we find that it was
difficult to please them; they had a dissatisfied mind, and hence were
rarely contented. From the above account we learn that the children of
Joseph were much inclined to quarrel with Joshua, because they had not
such a lot as they wished; though they could not be ignorant that their
lot, as that of the others, had been determined by the especial
providence of God.

2\. Joshua treats them with great firmness; he would not attempt to
alter the appointment of God, and he saw no reason to reverse or change
the grant already made. They were both numerous and strong, and if they
put forth their strength under the direction of even the ordinary
providence of God, they had every reason to expect success.

3\. Slothfulness is natural to man; it requires much training to induce
him to labor for his daily bread; if God should miraculously send it he
will wonder and eat it, and that is the whole. Strive to enter in at the
strait gate is an ungracious word to many; they profess to trust in
God's mercy, but labor not to enter into that rest: God will not reverse
his purpose to meet their slothfulness; they alone who overcome shall
sit with Jesus upon his throne. Reader, take unto thee the whole armor
of God, that thou mayest be able to stand in the evil day, and having
done all - to Stand. And remember, that he only who endures to the end
shall be saved.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 18](jos018.md)

</div>
