<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos005)  [Next](jos007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 6:0</span></span>

The inhabitants of Jericho close their gates, [Jos
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001). Continuation of the discourse
between the captain of the Lord's host and Joshua. He commands the
people to march round the city six days, the seven priests blowing with
their trumpets; and to give a general shout, while marching round it on
the seventh, and promises that then the walls of the city shall fall
down, [Jos 6:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002). Joshua delivers
these directions to the priests and to the people, [Jos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#006), [Jos
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#007). The priests and people obey; the
order of their procession, [Jos
6:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#008). He commands them to spare the
house of Rahab, [Jos 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017), and not to
touch any part of the property of the city, the whole of which God had
devoted to destruction, [Jos 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#018),
[Jos 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#019). On the seventh day the
walls fall down, and the Israelites take the city, [Jos
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#020), [Jos
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#021). The spies are ordered to take
care of Rahab and her family - the city is burnt, but the silver, gold,
brass, and iron, are put into the treasury of the house of the Lord,
[Jos 6:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#022). Rahab dwells among the
Israelites, [Jos 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025); and the city is
laid under a curse, [Jos 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026).

[Joshua 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 6:1</span></span>

Now Jericho was straitly shut up - The king of Jericho, finding that the
spies had escaped, though the city was always kept shut by night, took
the most proper precaution to prevent every thing of the kind in future,
by keeping the city shut both day and night, having, no doubt, laid in a
sufficiency of provisions to stand a siege, being determined to defend
himself to the uttermost.

[Joshua 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 6:2</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Joshua - This is the same person who in the
preceding chapter is called the captain or prince of the Lord's host,
the discourse being here continued that was begun at the conclusion of
the preceding chapter, from which the first verses of this are
unnaturally divided.

I have given into thine hand Jericho, etc. - From [Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011), it seems as if there had been
persons of all the seven Canaanitish nations then in Jericho, who might
have come together at this time to help the king of Jericho against the
invading Israelites. The Targum intimates that the place was very
strong, having "gates of iron and bars of brass; and was shut up so
closely that none came out, either to combat or make offers of peace."

[Joshua 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 6:3</span></span>

Ye shall compass the city - In what order the people marched round the
city does not exactly appear from the text. Some think they observed the
same order as in their ordinary marches in the desert; (see the note on
[Num 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#014), and see the plans, [Num
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002) (note)); others think that the
soldiers marched first, then the priests who blew the trumpets, then
those who carried the ark, and lastly the people.

[Joshua 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 6:4</span></span>

Seven trumpets of rams' horns - The Hebrew word יובלים yobelim does not
signify rams' horns; (see the note on [Lev
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#011)); nor do any of the ancient
versions, the Chaldee excepted, give it this meaning. The instruments
used on this occasion were evidently of the same kind with those used on
the jubilee, and were probably made of horn or of silver; and the text
in this place may be translated, And seven priests shall bear before the
ark the seven jubilee trumpets, for they appear to have been the same
kind as those used on the jubilee.

Seven times - The time was thus lengthened out that the besiegers and
the besieged might be the more deeply impressed with that supernatural
power by which alone the walls fell.

[Joshua 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 6:5</span></span>

The wall of the city shall fall down flat - Several commentators, both
Jews and Christians, have supposed that the ground under the foundation
of the walls opened, and the wall sunk into the chasm, so that there
remained nothing but plain ground for the Israelites to walk over. Of
this the text says nothing: - ונפלה חומת העיר תחתיה venaphelah chomath
hair tachteyha, literally translated, is, The wall of the city shall
fall down Under Itself; which appears to mean no more than, The wall
shall fall down From Its Very Foundations. And this probably was the
case in every part, though large breaches in different places might be
amply sufficient to admit the armed men first, after whom the whole host
might enter, in order to destroy the city.

[Joshua 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 6:9</span></span>

The rereward came after the ark - The word מאסף measseph, from אסף
asaph, to collect or gather up, may signify either the rereward, as our
translation understands it, or the people who carried the baggage of the
army; for on the seventh day this was necessary, as much fighting might
be naturally expected in the assault, and they would need a supply of
arms, darts, etc., as well as conveniences for those who might happen to
be wounded: or the persons here intended might be such as carried the
sacred articles belonging to the ark, or merely such people as might
follow in the procession, without observing any particular order. The
Jews think the division of Dan is meant, which always brought up the
rear. See [Num 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#025).

[Joshua 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 6:14</span></span>

So they did six days - It is not likely that the whole Israelitish host
went each day round the city. This would have been utterly impossible:
the fighting men alone amounted to nearly 600,000, independently of the
people, who must have amounted at least to two or three millions; we may
therefore safely assert that only a select number, such as was deemed
necessary for the occasion, were employed. Jericho could not have been a
large city: and to reduce it could not have required a hundredth part of
the armed force under the command of Joshua.

[Joshua 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 6:15</span></span>

The seventh day - they rose early - Because on this day they had to
encompass the city seven times; a proof that the city could not have
been very extensive, else this going round it seven times, and having
time sufficient left to sack and destroy it, would have been impossible.
It is evident that in the course of these seven days there must have
been a Sabbath, and that on this Sabbath the host must have encompassed
the city as on the other days: the Jews themselves allow this, and Rab.
De Kimchi says "He who had ordained the observance of the Sabbath
commanded it to be broken for the destruction of Jericho." But it does
not appear that there could be any breach in the Sabbath by the people
simply going round the city, the ark in company, and the priests
sounding the sacred trumpets. This was a mere religious procession,
performed at the command of God, in which no servile work was done.
Therefore Marcion's objection, that the God of the Hebrews showed a
changeableness of disposition in commanding the Sabbath to be kept
sacred at one time, and then to be broken at another, is without
foundation; for I must contend that no breach took place on this
occasion, unless it could be made to appear that the day on which
Jericho was taken was the Sabbath which is very unlikely, and which none
can prove. But if even this were to be conceded, it is a sufficient
answer to all such cavils, that the God who commanded the Sabbath to be
set apart for rest and religious purposes, has always authority to
suspend for a season the operation of merely ceremonial laws, or to
abrogate them entirely, when the purpose of their institution is
fulfilled. The Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath.

[Joshua 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 6:17</span></span>

The city shall be accursed - That is, it shall be devoted to
destruction; ye shall take no spoils, and put all that resist to the
sword. Though this may be the meaning of the word חרם cherem in some
places, see the note on [Lev 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#029),
yet here it seems to imply the total destruction of all the inhabitants,
see [Jos 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#021); but it is likely that
peace was offered to this city, and that the extermination of the
inhabitants was in consequence of the rejection of this offer.

[Joshua 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 6:19</span></span>

But all the silver, and gold - shall come into the treasury - The
Brahmins will receive from any caste, however degraded, gold, silver,
etc.: but to receive from Shoodras food, garments, etc., would be
considered a great degradation. - Ward.

[Joshua 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 6:20</span></span>

The people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down - There
has been much learned labor spent to prove that the shouting of the
people might be the natural cause that the wall fell down! To wait here,
either to detail or refute any such arguments, would be lost time:
enough of them may be seen in Scheuchzer. The whole relation evidently
supposes it to have been a supernatural interference, as the blowing of
the trumpets, and the shouting of the people, were too contemptible to
be used even as instruments in this work, with the expectation of
accomplishing it in a natural way.

[Joshua 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 6:21</span></span>

They utterly destroyed - both man, and woman, etc. - As this act was
ordered by God himself, who is the Maker and Judge of all men, it must
be right: for the Judge of all the earth cannot do wrong. Nothing that
breathed was permitted to live; hence the oxen, sheep, and asses, were
destroyed, as well as the inhabitants.

[Joshua 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 6:23</span></span>

Brought out Rahab, and her father, etc. - Rahab having been faithful to
her vow of secrecy, the Israelites were bound by the oath of the spies,
who acted as their representatives in this business, to preserve her and
her family alive.

And left them without the camp - They were considered as persons
unclean, and consequently left without the camp; (see [Lev
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#046); [Num
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014)). When they had abjured
heathenism, were purified, and the males had received circumcision, they
were doubtless admitted into the camp, and became incorporated with
Israel.

[Joshua 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 6:24</span></span>

Only the silver, and the gold - they put into the treasury, etc. - The
people were to have no share of the spoils, because they had no hand in
the conquest. God alone overthrew the city; and into his treasury only
the spoils were brought. This is one proof that the agitation of the
air, by the sound of the people's voice, was not the cause of the fall
of the city walls.

Vessels of brass and of iron - Instead of כלי keley, Vessels, the
Septuagint, in the Alexandrian copy, evidently have read כל col, All,
with the omission of the י yod; for in [Jos
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#019) they translate πας χαλκος και
σιδηρος, All the brass and iron: but this reading does not appear in any
of Kennicott's or De Rossi's MSS.

[Joshua 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 6:25</span></span>

And she dwelleth in Israel even unto this day - This is one proof that
the book was written in the time to which it is commonly referred; and
certainly might have been done by the hand of Joshua himself, though
doubtless many marginal notes may have since crept into the text, which,
to superficial observers, give it the appearance of having been written
after the days of Joshua. See the preface to this book.

[Joshua 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 6:26</span></span>

And Joshua adjured them at that time - It appears that he had received
intimations from God that this idolatrous city should continue a
monument of the Divine displeasure: and having convened the princes and
elders of the people, he bound them by an oath that they should never
rebuild it; and then, in their presence, pronounced a curse upon the
person who should attempt it. The ruins of this city continuing would be
a permanent proof, not only of God's displeasure against idolatry, but
of the miracle which he had wrought in behalf of the Israelites; and for
these reasons God willed that it should not be rebuilt: nevertheless, he
left men to the operation of their own free will, and recorded the
penalty which those must pay who should disobey him.

He shall lay the foundation thereof, etc. - This is a strange
execration; but it may rather be considered in the light of a
prediction. It seems to intimate that he who should attempt to rebuild
this city, should lose all his children in the interim, from laying the
foundation to the completion of the walls; which the author of [Kg1
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034) says was accomplished in Hiel
the Beth-elite, who rebuilt Jericho under the reign of Ahab, and laid
the foundation of it in Abiram, his first-born, and set up its gates in
his youngest son Segub: this was 550 years after Joshua pronounced the
curse. But we are not sure that this means that the children either died
a natural or violent death on this occasion for we may understand the
history as relating to the slow progress of the work. Hiel having begun
the work at the birth of his first-born, was not able to conclude before
the birth of his last child, who was born many years after: and as their
names are mentioned, it is very likely that the distance of time between
the birth of each was well known when this history was written; and that
the extraordinary length of time spent in the work, in which a multitude
of vexatious delays had taken place, is that to which the prophetic
execration relates. Yet the first opinion is the most probable. We must
not suppose that Jericho had been wholly neglected from its overthrow by
Joshua to the days of Hiel; if it be the same with the city of palm
trees, mentioned [Deu 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#003). We find it
mentioned as an inhabited place in the beginning of [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016), a short time after the death of
Joshua: And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father-in-law, went up
out of the city of palm trees, with the children of Judah, etc.; and
this said city (if the same with the city of palm trees) was taken from
the Israelites by Eglon king of Moab, [Jdg
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013). The ambassadors of David, who
were disgracefully treated by Hanun king of the Ammonites, were
commanded to tarry at Jericho till their beards should grow, [Sa2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#004), [Sa2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#005). It appears, therefore, that
there was a city which went under this name long before the time of
Hiel, unless we can suppose that the city of palm trees was a different
place from Jericho, or that the name Jericho was given to some part of
the circumjacent country after the city was destroyed, which is very
probable. After Hiel had rebuilt this city, it became of considerable
consequence in the land of Judea: the courses of priests lodged there,
who served in their turns at the temple; see [Luk
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030). There was a school of the
prophets there, which was visited by Elijah and Elisha, [Kg2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#004), [Kg2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#005), [Kg2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#018); and it was at this city that our
Lord miraculously healed blind Bartimeus, [Mar
10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046); [Luk
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035), etc. At present, Jericho is
almost entirely deserted, having but thirty or forty miserable cabins in
it, which serve for a place of refuge to some wretched Moors and Arabs,
who live there like beasts. The plain of Jericho, formerly so celebrated
for its fertility, is at present uncultivated, producing nothing but a
few wild trees, and some very indifferent fruits. See Calmet.

[Joshua 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 6:27</span></span>

So the Lord was with Joshua - Giving him miraculous assistance in all
his enterprises; and this was what he was naturally led to expect from
the communication made to him by the captain of the Lord's host, [Jos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#014), etc.

1\. Many attempts have been made either to deny the miracle in the fall
of Jericho, or to account for it on natural causes. Reference has
already been made to some of these in the note on [Jos
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#020). But to those who believe the
Divine authenticity of the New Testament, every objection of this kind
is removed by the authority of the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
[Heb 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#030); By Faith the walls of
Jericho fell down, after they had been compassed about seven days. Hence
we find that it was a miraculous interference; and that Joshua's faith
in the promise made to him by the captain of the Lord's host, was the
instrument which God chose to employ in the accomplishment of this
important purpose.

2\. The same is said of Rahab: By Faith the harlot Rahab perished not
with them that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace,
[Heb 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031). She believed that the true
God was on the side of the Hebrews, and that all opposition to them must
be in vain; and this faith led her to put herself under the Divine
protection, and in virtue of it she escaped the destruction that fell on
her countrymen. Thus God has ever chosen to put honor on faith, as the
instrument by which he will perform his greatest miracles of justice and
mercy. God, who cannot lie, has given the promise; he that believes
shall have it accomplished; for with God nothing shall be impossible,
and all things are possible to him that believes. These are Scriptural
maxims, and God cannot deny himself.

3\. On the curse pronounced by Joshua on those who should rebuild
Jericho, it may be necessary to make a few remarks. In ancient history
we have many instances of execrations against those who should rebuild
those cities which had been destroyed in war, the revival of whose power
and influence was dreaded; especially such cities as had been remarkable
for oppression, insolence, or perfidy. Strabo observes, lib. xiii., p.
898, ed. 1707, that Agamemnon pronounced execrations on those who should
rebuild Troy, as Croesus did against those who should rebuild Sidena, in
which the tyrant Glaucias had taken refuge; and this mode of execrating
cities, according to Strabo, was an ancient custom - Ειτε και
καταρασαμενου του Αγαμεμνονος κατα παλαιον εθος· καθαπερ και ὁ Κροισος
εξελων την Σιδηνην, εις ἡν ὁ τυραννος κατεφυγε Γλαυκιας, αρας εθετο κατα
των τειχιουντων παλιν τον τοπον. The Romans made a decree full of
execrations against those who should rebuild Carthage, which had been
the rival of their empire; and which, from its advantageous situation,
might again become formidable should it be rebuilt. See Zonaras, Anal.
The Ionians, according to Isocrates, pronounced the most awful
execrations on those who should rebuild the temples destroyed by the
Persians, that they might remain to posterity an endless monument of the
impiety of those barbarians; and that none might put confidence in a
people who were so wicked as to make war on the gods themselves. The
other Greeks who had suffered by the Persians acted in the same way,
leaving the desolated temples as a public monument of the enmity that
should ever subsist between the two nations. See Calmet, and see the
notes on [Num 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 7](jos007)

</div>
