<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos019)  [Next](jos021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 20:0</span></span>

Joshua is commanded to appoint cities of refuge, [Jos
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#001.md), [Jos
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#002.md). The purpose of their
institution, [Jos 20:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#003.md). Three cities
are appointed in the promised land, [Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007.md); and three on the east side of
Jordan, [Jos 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008.md), [Jos
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#009.md).

[Joshua 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 20:2</span></span>

Cities of refuge - An institution of this kind was essentially necessary
wherever the patriarchal law relative to the right of redemption and the
avenging of blood was in force; we have already seen that the nearest of
kin to a deceased person had not only the right of redeeming an
inheritance that had been forfeited or alienated, but had also authority
to slay on the spot the person who had slain his relative. Now, as a man
might casually kill another against whom he had no ill-will, and with
whom he had no quarrel, and might have his life taken away by him who
was called the avenger of blood, though he had not forfeited his life to
the law; therefore these privileged cities were appointed, where the
person might have protection till the cause had been fully heard by the
magistrates, who certainly had authority to deliver him up to the
avenger, if they found, on examination, that he was not entitled to this
protection. On this subject see the notes on [Num
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011.md) to the end.

[Joshua 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 20:7</span></span>

They appointed Kedesh in Galilee - The cities of refuge were distributed
through the land at proper distances from each other that they might be
convenient to every part of the land; and it is said they were situated
on eminences, that they might be easily seen at a distance, the roads
leading to them being broad, even, and always kept in good repair. In
the concluding note on [Num 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033.md) it
has been stated that these cities were a type of our blessed Lord, and
that the apostle refers to them as such, [Heb
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017.md), [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018.md). Hence their names have been
considered as descriptive of some character or office of Christ. I shall
give each and its signification, and leave the application to others.

1\. קדש Kedesh, from kadash, to separate or set apart, because it
implies the consecration of a person or thing to the worship or service
of God alone; hence to make or be holy, and hence Kedesh, holiness, the
full consecration of a person to God.

2\. שכם Shechem, from shacham, to be ready, forward, and diligent; hence
Shechem, the shoulder, because of its readiness to bear burdens, prop
up, sustain, etc., and from this ideal meaning it has the metaphorical
one of Government.

3\. חברון chebron; Hebron, from חבר chabar, to associate, join, conjoin,
unite as friends; and hence chebron, fellowship, friendly association,
or with the diminutive nun, the little fellow-ship or association.

4\. בצר Bezer, from batsar, to restrain, enclose, shut up, or encompass
with a wall; and hence the goods or treasure thus secured, and hence a
fortified place, a fortress.

5\. ראמות Ramoth, from ראם raam, to be raised, made high or exalted, and
hence Ramoth, high places, eminences.

6\. גולן Golan, from גלה galah, to remove, transmigrate, or pass away;
hence Golan, a transmigration or passage. Some derive it from גל gal, to
rejoice, hence Golan, rejoicing or exultation.

A person of the spirit and turn of Origen could preach the whole Gospel
from these particulars. Kedesh and Hebron were at the two extremities of
the promised land; one was in Galilee, the other in the tribe of Judah,
both in mountainous countries; and Shechem was in the tribe of Ephraim,
nearly in the middle, between both. Bezer was on the east side of
Jordan, in the plain, opposite to Jericho. Ramoth was about the midst of
the country occupied by the two tribes and a half, about the middle of
the mountains of Gilead. Golan was the capital of a district called
Gaulonitis, in the land of Bashan, towards the southern extremity of the
lot of Manasseh.

[Joshua 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 20:9</span></span>

For all the children of Israel, and for the stranger - As these typified
the great provision which God was making for the salvation of both Jews
and Gentiles, hence the stranger as well as the Israelite had the same
right to the benefits of these cities of refuge. Is He the God of the
Jews only? Is He not also the God of the Gentiles?

Until he stood before the congregation - The judges and elders of the
people, in trying civil and criminal causes, always sat; the persons who
came for judgment, or who were tried, always stood; hence the
expressions so frequent in Scripture, Standing before the Lord, the
judges, the elders, etc. It is worthy of remark that the cities of
refuge were given to the Levites; see the following chapter, Joshua 21
(note). The sacrificial system alone afforded refuge; and while the
suspected person was excluded from his family, etc., he had the
advantage of being with those whose business it was to instruct the
ignorant, and comfort the disconsolate. Thus he had the means constantly
at hand, by a careful use of which he might grow wiser and better;
secure the favor of his God, and a lot of blessedness in a better world.
How wise, equal, and beneficent are all the institutions of God!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 21](jos021.md)

</div>
