<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos007)  [Next](jos009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 8:0</span></span>

The Lord encourages Joshua, and promises to deliver Ai into his hands,
and instructs him how he is to proceed against it, [Jos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001), [Jos
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#002). Joshua takes thirty thousand of
his best troops, and gives them instructions concerning his intention of
taking Ai by stratagem, [Jos 8:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003).
The men dispose themselves according to these directions, [Jos
8:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#009). The king of Ai attacks the
Israelites, who, feigning to be beaten, fly before him, in consequence
of which all the troops of Ai issue out, and pursue the Israelites, [Jos
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#014). Joshua, at the command of
God, stretches out his spear towards Ai, and then five thousand men that
he had placed in ambush in the valley rise up, enter the city, and set
it on fire, [Jos 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018), [Jos
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#019). Then Joshua and his men turned
against the men of Ai, and, at the same time, those who had taken the
city sallied forth and attacked them in the rear; thus the men of Ai
were defeated, their king taken prisoner, the city sacked, and twelve
thousand persons slain, [Jos 8:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#020).
The Israelites take the spoils, and hang the king of Ai, [Jos
8:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#027). Joshua builds an altar to God
on Mount Ebal, and writes on it a copy of the law of Moses, [Jos
8:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030). The elders, officers, and
judges, stand on each side of the ark, one half over against Mount
Gerizim, and the other against Mount Ebal, and read all the blessings
and curses of the law, according to the command of Moses, [Jos
8:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033).

[Joshua 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 8:1</span></span>

Fear not - The iniquity being now purged away, because of which God had
turned his hand against Israel, there was now no cause to dread any
other disaster, and therefore Joshua is ordered to take courage.

Take all the people of war with thee - From the letter of this verse it
appears that all that were capable of carrying arms were to march out of
the camp on this occasion: thirty thousand chosen men formed an
ambuscade in one place; five thousand he placed in another, who had all
gained their positions in the night season: with the rest of the army he
appeared the next morning before Ai, which the men of that city would
naturally suppose were the whole of the Israelitish forces; and
consequently be the more emboldened to come out and attack them. But
some think that thirty thousand men were the whole that were employed on
this occasion; five thousand of whom were placed as an ambuscade on the
west side of the city between Beth-el and Ai, [Jos
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#012), and with the rest he appeared
before the city in the morning. The king of Ai seeing but about
twenty-five thousand coming against him, and being determined to defend
his city and crown to the last extremity, though he had but twelve
thousand persons in the whole city, [Jos
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#025), scarcely one half of whom we can
suppose to be effective men, he was determined to risk a battle; and
accordingly issued out, and was defeated by the stratagem mentioned in
the preceding part of this chapter. Several eminent commentators are of
opinion that the whole Israelitish force was employed on this occasion,
because of what is said in the first verse; but this is not at all
likely.

1\. It appears that but thirty thousand were chosen out of the whole
camp for this expedition, the rest being drawn up in readiness should
their co-operation be necessary. See [Jos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003), [Jos
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#010).

2\. That all the people were mustered in order to make this selection,
[Jos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001).

3\. That these thirty thousand were sent off by night, [Jos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003), Joshua himself continuing in the
camp a part of that night, [Jos 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#009),
with the design of putting himself at the head of the army next morning.

4\. That of the thirty thousand men five thousand were directed to lie
in ambush between Beth-el and Ai, on the west side of the city, [Jos
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#012); the twenty-five thousand having
taken a position on the north side of the city, [Jos
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#011).

5\. That the whole of the troops employed against Ai on this occasion
were those on the north and west, [Jos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#013), which we know from the preceding
verses were composed of thirty thousand chosen men.

6\. That Joshua went in the course of the night, probably before
daybreak, into the valley between Beth-el and Ai, where the ambuscade of
five thousand men was placed, [Jos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#013), and gave them the proper
directions how they were to proceed, and agreed on the sign he was to
give them at the moment he wished them to act, see [Jos
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018) : and that, after having done so,
he put himself at the head of the twenty-five thousand men on the north
side of the city: for we find him among them when the men of Ai issued
out, [Jos 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#015), though he was the
night before in the valley on the west side, where the ambuscade lay,
[Jos 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#013).

7\. That as Ai was but a small city, containing only twelve thousand
inhabitants, it would have been absurd to have employed an army of
several hundred thousand men against them.

8\. This is confirmed by the opinion of the spies, [Jos
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#003), who, from the smallness of the
place, the fewness of its inhabitants, and the panic-struck state in
which they found them, judged that three thousand troops would be quite
sufficient to reduce the place.

9\. That it appears this judgment was correctly enough formed, as the
whole population of the place amounted only to twelve thousand persons,
as we have already seen, [Jos 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#025).

10\. That even a less force might have been sufficient for the reduction
of this place, had they been supplied with battering-rams, and such like
instruments, which it does not appear the Israelites possessed.

11\. That this is the reason why Joshua employed the stratagems detailed
in this chapter: having no proper instruments or machines by means of
which he might hope to take the city by assault, (and to reduce it by
famine, which was quite possible, would have consumed too much time), he
used the feigned flight, [Jos 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#019), to
draw the inhabitants from the city, that the ambush, [Jos
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#012), [Jos
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#015), might then enter, and take
possession of it.

12\. That had he advanced with a greater force against the city the
inhabitants would have had no confidence in risking a battle, and
consequently would have kept within their walls, which would have
defeated the design of the Israelites, which was to get them to issue
from their city.

13\. That, all these circumstances considered thirty thousand men,
disposed as above, were amply sufficient for the reduction of the city,
and were the whole of the Israelitish troops which were employed on the
occasion.

[Joshua 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 8:8</span></span>

Ye shall set the city on fire - Probably this means no more than that
they should kindle a fire in the city, the smoke of which should be an
indication that they had taken it. For as the spoils of the city were to
be divided among the people, had they at this time set fire to the city
itself, all the property must have been consumed, for the five thousand
men did not wait to save any thing, as they immediately issued out to
attack the men of Ai in the rear.

[Joshua 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 8:10</span></span>

Numbered the people - ויפקד את העם vaiyiphkod eth haam, he visited the
people - inspected their ranks to see whether every thing was in perfect
readiness, that in case they should be needed they might be led on to
the attack. There is no doubt that Joshua had left the rest of the army
so disposed and ready, part of it having probably advanced towards Ai,
that he might easily receive reinforcements in case of any disaster to
the thirty thousand which had advanced against the city; and this
consideration will serve to remove a part of the difficulty which arises
from [Jos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001), [Jos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003), [Jos
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#010), collated with other parts of
this chapter. Had he brought all his troops in sight, the people of Ai
would not have attempted to risk a battle, and would consequently have
kept within their walls, from which it was the object of Joshua to decoy
them. See the preceding observations, particularly [Jos
8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#010) (note).

[Joshua 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 8:17</span></span>

There was not a man left in Ai or Beth-el - It is very likely that the
principal strength of Beth-el had been previously brought into Ai, as
the strongest place to make a stand in; Beth-el being but about three
miles distant from Ai, and probably not greatly fortified. Therefore Ai
contained on this occasion all the men of Beth-el - all the warriors of
that city, as well as its own troops and inhabitants. Others think that
the Beth-elites, seeing the Israelites fly, sallied out of their city as
against a common enemy; but that, finding the men of Ai discomfited, and
the city taken, they returned to Beth-el, which Joshua did not think
proper to attack at this time. From [Jdg
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#024) we find that Beth-el was then a
walled city, in the hands of the Canaanites, and was taken by the house
of Joseph.

[Joshua 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 8:18</span></span>

Stretch out the spear - It is very probable that Joshua had a flag or
ensign at the end of his spear, which might be easily seen at a
considerable distance; and that the unfurling or waving of this was the
sign agreed on between him and the ambush. (see [Jos
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#013), and the preceding observations
on [Jos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001) (note), observation 6);
and on seeing this flag or ensign unfurled, the men who lay in ambush
arose and entered the city, making the fire previously agreed on. See
[Jos 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#008).

[Joshua 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 8:19</span></span>

Set the city on fire - See on [Jos 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#008)
(note).

[Joshua 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 8:20</span></span>

They had no power to flee this way or that way - They were in utter
consternation; they saw that the city was taken, they found themselves
in the midst of their foes; that their wives, children, and property,
had fallen a prey to their enemies, in consequence of which they were so
utterly panic-struck as to be incapable of making any resistance.

[Joshua 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 8:24</span></span>

Returned unto Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword. - This must
refer to the women, children, and old persons, left behind; for it is
likely that all the effective men had sallied out when they imagined the
Israelites had fled. See [Jos 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#016).

[Joshua 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 8:26</span></span>

Joshua drew not his hand back - He was not only the general, but the
standard-bearer or ensign of his own army, and continued in this
employment during the whole of the battle. See on [Jos
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018) (note). Some commentators
understand this and [Jos 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018)
figuratively, as if they implied that Joshua continued in prayer to God
for the success of his troops; nor did he cease till the armies of Ai
were annihilated, and the city taken and destroyed. The Hebrew word
כידון kidon, which we render spear, is rendered by the Vulgate clypeum,
buckler; and it must be owned that it seems to have this signification
in several passages of Scripture: (see [Sa1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006), [Sa1
17:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#045); [Job
39:23](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#023)): but it is clear enough also
that it means a spear, or some kind of offensive armor, in other places:
see [Job 41:29](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#029); [Jer
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023). I cannot therefore think that it
has any metaphorical meaning, such as that attributed to the holding up
of Moses's hands, [Exo 17:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#010), which
is generally allowed to have a spiritual meaning, though it might be
understood as the act of Joshua is here; and to this meaning an indirect
glance is given in the note on the above place. But however the place in
Exodus may be understood, that before us does not appear to have any
metaphorical or equivocal meaning; Joshua continued to hold up or
stretch out his spear, and did not slack from the pursuit till the
forces of Ai were utterly discomfited.

[Joshua 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 8:27</span></span>

Only the cattle and the spoil - In the case of Jericho these were all
consigned to destruction, and therefore it was criminal to take any
thing pertaining to the city, as we have already seen; but in the case
before us the cattle and spoils were expressly given to the conquerors
by the order of God. See [Jos 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#002).

[Joshua 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 8:28</span></span>

Unto this day - This last clause was probably added by a later hand.

[Joshua 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 8:29</span></span>

The king of Ai he hanged on a tree - He had gone out at the head of his
men, and had been taken prisoner, [Jos
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#023); and the battle being over, he
was ordered to be hanged, probably after having been strangled, or in
some way deprived of life, as in the case mentioned [Jos
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#026), for in those times it was not
customary to hang people alive.

As soon as the sun was down - It was not lawful to let the bodies remain
all night upon the tree. See the note on [Deu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023). The Septuagint say the king of
Ai was hanged επι ξυλον διδυμον, upon a double tree, which probably
means a forked tree, or something in the form of a cross. The tree on
which criminals were hanged among the Romans was called arbor infelix,
and lignum infelix, the unfortunate, ill-fated, or accursed tree.

Raise thereon a great heap of stones - This was a common custom through
all antiquity in every country, as we have already seen in the case of
Achan, [Jos 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#020).

[Joshua 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 8:30</span></span>

Then Joshua built an altar - This was done in obedience to the express
command of God, [Deu 27:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004) (note).

[Joshua 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 8:32</span></span>

A copy of the law of Moses - משנה תורת mishneh torath, the repetition of
the law; that is, a copy of the blessings and curses, as commanded by
Moses; not a copy of the Decalogue, as some imagine, nor of the book of
Deuteronomy, as others think; much less of the whole Pentateuch; but
merely of that part which contained the blessings and curses, and which
was to be read on this solemn occasion. See the note on [Deu
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003).

[Joshua 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 8:33</span></span>

Half of them over against Mount Gerizim - See the arrangement of the
whole of this business in the note and observations on [Deu
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026) (note). And see also the notes
on Deuteronomy 28:1-68 (note).

[Joshua 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jos 8:35</span></span>

With the women and the little ones - It was necessary that all should
know that they were under the same obligations to obey; even the women
are brought forward, not only because of their personal responsibility,
but because to them was principally intrusted the education of the
children. The children also witness this solemn transaction, that a
salutary fear of offending God might be early, diligently, and deeply
impressed upon their hearts. Thus every precaution is taken to ensure
obedience to the Divine precepts, and consequently to promote the
happiness of the people; for this every ordinance of God is remarkable,
as he ever causes the interest and duty of his followers to go hand in
hand.

1\. It may be asked, Seeing God promised to deliver Ai into the hands of
the Israelites, why needed they to employ so many men and so many
stratagems in order to its reduction? To this it may be answered, that
God will have man to put forth the wisdom and power with which he has
endued him, in every important purpose of life; that he endued him with
those powers for this very end; and that it would be inconsistent with
his gracious design so to help man at any time as to render the powers
he had given him useless.

2\. It is only in the use of lawful means that we have any reason to
expect God's blessing and help. One of the ancients has remarked,
"Though God has made man without himself he will not save him without
himself;" and therefore man's own concurrence of will, and co-operation
of power with God, are essentially necessary to his preservation and
salvation. This co-operation is the grand condition, sine qua non, on
which God will help or save. But is not this "endeavoring to merit
salvation by our own works?" No: for this is impossible, unless we could
prove that all the mental and corporeal powers which we possess came
from and are of ourselves, and that we held them independently of the
power and beneficence of our Creator, and that every act of these was of
infinite value, to make it an equivalent for the heaven we wished to
purchase. Putting forth the hand to receive the alms of a benevolent
man, can never be considered a purchase-price for the bounty bestowed.
For ever shall that word stand true in all its parts, Christ is the
Author of eternal salvation to all them that Obey him, [Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 9](jos009)

</div>
