<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1020)  [Next](kg1022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 21:0</span></span>

Ahab covets the vineyard of Naboth, and wishes to have it either by
purchase or exchange, [Kg1 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#001), [Kg1
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#002). Naboth refuses to alienate it on
any account, because it was his inheritance from his fathers, [Kg1
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#003). Ahab becomes disconsolate, takes
to his bed, and refuses to eat, [Kg1
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#004). Jezebel, finding out the cause,
promises to give him the vineyard, [Kg1
21:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#005). She writes to the nobles of
Jezreel to proclaim a fast, to accuse Naboth of blasphemy, carry him
out, and stone him to death; which is accordingly done, [Kg1
21:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#008). She then tells Ahab to go and
take possession of the vineyard; he goes, and is met by Elijah, who
denounces on him the heaviest judgments, [Kg1
21:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#015). Ahab's abominable character,
[Kg1 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#025), [Kg1
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#026). He humbles himself; and God
promises not to bring the threatened public calamities in his days, but
in the days of his son, [Kg1 21:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 21:1</span></span>

After these things - This and the twentieth chapter are transposed in
the Septuagint; this preceding the account of the Syrian war with
Ben-hadad. Josephus gives the history in the same order.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 21:2</span></span>

Give me thy vineyard - The request of Ahab seems at first view fair and
honorable. Naboth's vineyard was nigh to the palace of Ahab, and he
wished to add it to his own for a kitchen garden, or perhaps a
grass-plat, גן ירק gan yarak; and he offers to give him either a better
vineyard for it, or to give him its worth in money. Naboth rejects the
proposal with horror: The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the
inheritance of my fathers to thee. No man could finally alienate any
part of the parental inheritance; it might be sold or mortgaged till the
jubilee, but at that time it must revert to its original owner, if not
redeemed before; for this God had particularly enjoined [Lev
25:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#014), [Lev
25:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025) : therefore Naboth properly
said, [Kg1 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#003), The Lord forbid it
me, to give the inheritance of my fathers. Ahab most evidently wished
him to alienate it finally, and this is what God's law had expressly
forbidden; therefore he could not, consistently with his duty to God,
indulge Ahab; and it was high iniquity in Ahab to tempt him to do it;
and to covet it showed the depravity of Ahab's soul. But we see farther
that, despotic as those kings were, they dared not seize on the
inheritance of any man. This would have been a flagrant breach of the
law and constitution of the country; and this indeed would have been
inconsistent with the character which they sustained, viz., the Lord's
vicegerents. The Jewish kings had no authority either to alter the old
laws, or to make new ones. "The Hindoos," says Mr. Ward, "are as
strongly attached to their homesteads as the Jews were. Though the heads
of the family be employed in a distant part of the country, and though
the homesteads may be almost in ruins, they cling still to the family
inheritance with a fondness bordering on superstition.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 21:4</span></span>

He laid him down upon his bed - Poor soul! he was lord over ten-twelfths
of the land, and became miserable because he could not get a poor man's
vineyard added to all that he possessed! It is a true saying, "That soul
in which God dwells not, has no happiness: and he who has God has a
satisfying portion." Every privation and cross makes an unholy soul
unhappy; and privations and crosses it must ever meet with, therefore: -

"Where'er it goes is hell;

itself is hell!"

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 21:7</span></span>

Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? - Naboth, not Ahab, is king.
If he have authority to refuse, and thou have no power to take, he is
the greater man of the two. This is the vital language of despotism and
tyranny.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 21:8</span></span>

She wrote letters in Ahab's name - She counterfeited his authority by
his own consent; and he lent his signet to stamp that authority.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 21:9</span></span>

Proclaim a fast - Intimate that there is some great calamity coming upon
the nation, because of some evil tolerated in it.

Set Naboth on high - Bring him to a public trial.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 21:10</span></span>

Set two men - For life could not be attainted but on the evidence of two
witnesses at least.

Sons of Belial - Men who will not scruple to tell lies and take a false
oath.

Thou didst blaspheme God and the king - Thou art an atheist and a rebel.
Thou hast spoken words injurious to the perfections and nature of God;
and thou hast spoken words against the crown and dignity of the king.
The words literally are, Naboth hath Blessed Clod and the king; or, as
Parkhurst contends, "Thou hast blessed the false gods and Molech," ברכת
אלהים ומלך And though Jezebel was herself an abominable idolatress; yet,
as the law of Moses still continued in force, she seems to have been
wicked enough to have destroyed Naboth, upon the false accusation of
blessing the heathen Aleim and Molech, which subjected him to death by
[Deu 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006); [Deu
17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002). The first meaning appears the
most simple.

Many think that the word ברך barach signifies both to bless and curse;
and so it is interpreted in most Lexicons: it is passing strange that
out of the same word proceedeth blessing and cursing; and to give such
opposite and self-destructive meanings to any word is very dangerous.
Parkhurst denies that it ever has the meaning of cursing, and examines
all the texts where it is said to occur with this meaning; and shows
that blessing, not cursing, is to be understood in all those places: see
him under ברך, sec. vi.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 21:13</span></span>

And stoned him with stones - As they pretended to find him guilty of
treason against God and the king, it is likely they destroyed the whole
of his family; and then the king seized on his grounds as confiscated,
or as escheated to the king, without any heir at law. That his family
was destroyed appears strongly intimated, [Kg2
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#026); Surely I have seen yesterday the
blood of Naboth, And the Blood of His Sons, saith the Lord.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 21:15</span></span>

Arise, take possession - By what rites or in what forms this was done,
we do not know.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 21:18</span></span>

Go down to meet Ahab - This was the next day after the murder, as we
learn from the above quotation, [Kg2
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#026).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 21:19</span></span>

In the place where dogs licked, etc. - It is in vain to look for a
literal fulfillment of this prediction. Thus it would have been
fulfilled, but the humiliation of Ahab induced the merciful God to say,
I will not bring the evil in his days, but in the days of his son, [Kg1
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029). Now dogs did lick the blood of
Ahab; but it was at the pool of Samaria, where his chariot and his armor
were washed, after he had received his death wound at Ramoth-gilead; but
some think this was the place where Naboth was stoned: see [Kg1
22:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#038). And how literally the
prediction concerning his son was fulfilled, see [Kg2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025), where we find that the body of
Jehoram his son, just then slain by an arrow that had passed through his
heart, was thrown into the portion of the field of Naboth the
Jezreelite; and there, doubtless, the dogs licked his blood, if they did
not even devour his body. There is a similar idea of the propriety of
punishment overtaking the culprit in the place where he had committed
the crime, expressed by Orestes to Aegisthus, Soph. Elect. 1495.

\- Χωρει δ' ενθαπερ κατεκτανες

Πατερα τον αμον, ὡς εν ταυτῳ θανῃς.

\- Go where thou slew'st my father,

That in the self-same place thou too may'st die.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 21:20</span></span>

Thou hast sold thyself to work evil - See a similar form of speech, [Rom
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014) (note). Thou hast totally
abandoned thyself to the service of sin. Satan is become thy absolute
master, and thou his undivided slave.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 21:23</span></span>

The dogs shall eat Jezebel - This was most literally fulfilled; see [Kg2
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#036). The carcasses of poor Hindoos,
and of persons who have received public punishment, are thrown into the
rivers, and floating to the side, are devoured by dogs, vultures, and
crows.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 21:25</span></span>

Did sell himself to work wickedness - He hired himself to the devil for
this very purpose, that he might work wickedness. This was to be his
employment, and at this he labored.

In the sight of the Lord, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up - A good wife
is from the Lord; a bad wife is from the devil: Jezebel was of this
kind; and she has had many successors.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 21:27</span></span>

He rent his clothes - He was penetrated with sorrow, and that evidently
unfeigned.

Put sackcloth upon his flesh - He humbled himself before God and man.

And fasted - He afflicted his body for his soul's benefit.

Lay in sackcloth - Gave the fullest proof that his repentance was real.

And went softly - Walked barefooted; so the Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic.
The Vulgate has demisso capite, "with his head hanging down." Houbigant
translates went groaning. Jarchi says that the word אט at, used here,
signifies to be unshod. This is its most likely sense. All these things
prove that Ahab's repentance was genuine; and God's approbation of it
puts it out of doubt. The slow and measured pace which always
accompanies deep and reflective sorrow is also alluded to by Aeschylus,
where the Chorus are thus shortly addressed on the defeat of Xerxes. -
Aesch. Pers. 1073.

Γοασθ' ἁβροβαται

"With light and noiseless step lament."

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 21:29</span></span>

Seest thou how Ahab humbleth himself - He did abase himself; he did
truly repent him of his sins, and it was such a repentance as was
genuine in the sight of God: He humbleth himself Before Me.

The penitent heart ever meets the merciful eye of God; repentance is
highly esteemed by the Father of compassion, even where it is
comparatively shallow and short-lived. Any measure of godly sorrow has a
proportionate measure of God's regard; where it is deep and lasting, the
heart of God is set upon it. He that mourns shall be comforted; thus
hath God spoken, and though repentance for our past sins can purchase no
favor, yet without it God will not grant us his salvation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 22](kg1022)

</div>
