<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1011)  [Next](kg1013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 12:0</span></span>

The people go to Shechem to make Rehoboam king, and send for Jeroboam
out of Egypt, who with the heads of the tribes, requests relief from the
heavy burdens laid on them by Solomon, [Kg1
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001.md). He requires three days to
consider their petition, [Kg1 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#005.md). He
rejects the counsel of the elders, who served his father, and follows
that of young men, and returns the people a provoking answer, [Kg1
12:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#006.md). The people therefore renounce
the family of David, stone to death Adoram, who came to receive their
tribute, and make Jeroboam king; none cleaving to Rehoboam but the
tribes of Judah and Benjamin, [Kg1
12:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#016.md). Rehoboam comes to Jerusalem,
and assembles all the fighting men of Judah and Benjamin, and finds the
number to be one hundred and eighty thousand; and with these he purposes
to reduce the men of Israel to his allegiance, but is forbidden by the
Prophet Shemaiah, [Kg1 12:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#021.md).
Jeroboam builds Shechem in Mount Ephraim and Penuel, [Kg1
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025.md). And lest the people should be
drawn away from their allegiance to him by going up to Jerusalem to
worship, he makes two golden calves, and sets them up, one in Dan, the
other in Beth-el, and the people worship them, [Kg1
12:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#026.md). He makes priests of the
lowest of the people, and establishes the fifteenth day of the eighth
month as a feast to his new gods; makes offerings, and burns incense,
[Kg1 12:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#031.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 12:1</span></span>

Rehoboam went to Shechem - Rehoboam was probably the only son of
Solomon; for although he had a thousand wives, he had not the blessing
of a numerous offspring; and although he was the wisest of men himself,
his son was a poor, unprincipled fool. Had Solomon kept himself within
reasonable bounds in matrimonial affairs, he would probably have had
more children; and such as would have had common sense enough to discern
the delicacy of their situation, and rule according to reason and
religion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 12:4</span></span>

The grievous service - and - heavy yoke - They seem here to complain of
two things - excessively laborious service, and a heavy taxation. At
first it is supposed Solomon employed no Israelite in drudgery:
afterwards, when he forsook the God of compassion, he seems to have used
them as slaves, and to have revived the Egyptian bondage.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 12:7</span></span>

If thou wilt be a servant unto this people - This is a constitutional
idea of a king: he is the servant, but not the slave of his people;
every regal act of a just king is an act of service to the state. The
king is not only the fountain of law and justice; but as he has the
appointment of all officers and judges, consequently he is the executor
of the laws; and all justice is administered in his name. Properly
speaking, a good and constitutional king is the servant of his people;
and in being such he is their father and their king.

They will be thy servants for ever - The way to insure the obedience of
the people is to hold the reins of empire with a steady and impartial
hand; let the people see that the king lives for them, and not for
himself; and they will obey, love, and defend him. The state is
maintained on the part of the ruler and the ruled by mutual acts of
service and benevolence. A good king has no self-interest; and such a
king will ever have obedient and loving subjects. The haughty, proud
tyrant will have a suspicious and jealous people, hourly ripening for
revolt. The king is made for the people, not the people for the king.
Let every potentate wisely consider this; and let every subject know
that the heaviest cares rest on the heart, and the heaviest
responsibility rests on the head, of the king. Let them therefore, under
his government, fashion themselves as obedient children; acknowledge him
their head; and duly consider whose authority he has; that they may
love, honor and obey him. Happy are the people who have such a king;
safe is the king who has such a people.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 12:10</span></span>

And the young men that were grown up with him - It was a custom in
different countries to educate with the heir to the throne young
noblemen of nearly the same age. This, as Calmet observes, answered two
great and important ends: -

1\. It excited the prince to emulation; that he might, as far as
possible, surpass in all manly exercises, and in all acts of prudence
and virtue, those whom one day he was to surpass in the elevation and
dignity of his station.

2\. That he might acquire a correct knowledge of the disposition and
views of those who were likely to be, under him, the highest officers of
the state; and consequently, know the better how to trust and employ
them. The old counsellors Rehoboam did not know; with the young nobility
he had been familiar.

My little finger shall be thicker - A proverbial mode of expression: "My
little finger is thicker than my father's thigh." As much as the thigh
surpasses the little finger in thickness, so much does my power exceed
that of my father; and the use that I shall make of it, to employ and
tax you, shall be in proportion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 12:11</span></span>

Chastise you with scorpions - Should you rebel, or become disaffected,
my father's whip shall be a scorpion in my hand. His was chastisement,
mine shall be punishment. St. Isidore, and after him Calmet and others,
assert that the scorpion was a sort of severe whip, the lashes of which
were armed with iron points, that sunk into and tore the flesh. We know
that the scorpion was a military engine among the Romans for shooting
arrows, which, being poisoned, were likened to the scorpion's sting, and
the wound it inflicted.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 12:15</span></span>

The cause was from the Lord - God left him to himself, and did not
incline his heart to follow the counsel of the wise men. This is making
the best of our present version; but if we come to inquire into the
meaning of the Cause of all this confusion and anarchy, we shall find it
was Rehoboam's folly, cruelty, and despotic tyranny: and was this from
the Lord? But does the text speak this bad doctrine? No: it says סבה
sibbah, the Revolution, was from the Lord. This is consistent with all
the declarations which went before. God stirred up the people to revolt
from a man who had neither skill nor humanity to govern them. We had
such a סבה revolution in these nations in 1688; and, thank God, we have
never since needed another. None of our ancient translations understood
the word as our present version does: they have it either the Turning
Away was from the Lord, or it was the Lord's Ordinance; viz., that they
should turn away from this foolish king.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 12:16</span></span>

So Israel departed unto their tents - That is, the ten tribes withdrew
their allegiance from Rehoboam; only Judah and Benjamin, frequently
reckoned one tribe, remaining with him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 12:18</span></span>

King Rehoboam sent Adoram - As this was the person who was
superintendent over the tribute, he was probably sent to collect the
ordinary taxes; but the people, indignant at the master who had given
them such a brutish answer, stoned the servant to death. The sending of
Adoram to collect the taxes, when the public mind was in such a state of
fermentation, was another proof of Rehoboam's folly and incapacity to
govern.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 12:20</span></span>

Made him king over all Israel - What is called Israel here, was
ten-twelfths of the whole nation; and had they a right to call another
person to the throne? They had not, - they had neither legal nor
constitutional right. Jeroboam was not of the blood royal; he had no
affinity to the kingdom. Nothing could justify this act, but the just
judgment of God. God thus punished a disobedient and gainsaying people;
and especially Solomon's family, whose sins against the Lord were of no
ordinary magnitude.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 12:24</span></span>

For this thing is from me - That is, the separation of the ten tribes
from the house of David.

They - returned to depart - This was great deference, both in Rehoboam
and his officers, to relinquish, at the demand of the prophet, a war
which they thought they had good grounds to undertake. The remnant of
the people heard the Divine command gratefully, for the mass of mankind
are averse from war. No nations would ever rise up against each other,
were they not instigated to it or compelled by the rulers.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 12:27</span></span>

And they shall kill me - He found he had little cause to trust this
fickle people; though they had declared for him it was more from
caprice, desire of change, and novelty, than from any regular and
praiseworthy principle.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 12:28</span></span>

Made two calves of gold - He invented a political religion, instituted
feasts in his own times different from those appointed by the Lord, gave
the people certain objects of devotion, and pretended to think it would
be both inconvenient and oppressive to them to have to go up to
Jerusalem to worship. This was not the last time that religion was made
a state engine to serve political purposes. It is strange that in
pointing out his calves to the people, he should use the same words that
Aaron used when he made the golden calf in the wilderness, when they
must have heard what terrible judgments fell upon their forefathers for
this idolatry.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 12:29</span></span>

One in Beth-el, and the other - in Dan - One at the southern and the
other at the northern extremity of the land. Solomon's idolatry had
prepared the people for Jeroboam's abominations!

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 12:31</span></span>

A house of high places - A temple of temples; he had many high places in
the land, and to imitate the temple at Jerusalem, he made one chief over
all the rest, where he established a priesthood of his own ordination.
Probably a place of separate appointment, where different idols were set
up and worshipped; so it was a sort of pantheon.

Made priests of the lowest of the people - He took the people
indifferently as they came, and made them priests, till he had enough,
without troubling himself whether they were of the family of Aaron or
the house of Levi, or not. Any priests would do well enough for such
gods. But those whom he took seem to have been worthless,
good-for-nothing fellows, who had neither piety nor good sense. Probably
the sons of Levi had grace enough to refuse to sanction this new
priesthood and idolatrous worship.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 12:32</span></span>

Ordained a feast - The Jews held their feast of tabernacles on the
fifteenth day of the seventh month; Jeroboam, who would meet the
prejudices of the people as far as he could, appointed a similar feast
on the fifteenth of the eighth month; thus appearing to hold the thing
while he subverted the ordinance.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 12:33</span></span>

He offered upon the altar - Jeroboam probably performed the functions of
high priest himself, that he might in his own person condense the civil
and ecclesiastical power.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](kg1013.md)

</div>
