<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1018)  [Next](kg1020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 19:0</span></span>

Ahab tells Jezebel what Elijah had done; she is enraged, and threatens
to take away his life, [Kg1 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#001.md), [Kg1
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#002.md). He leaves Jezreel, and comes to
Beer-sheba, and thence to the wilderness, where he is fed and encouraged
by an angel, [Kg1 19:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#003.md). His
complaint and the vision by which God instructs him, [Kg1
19:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010.md). He is sent to Damascus, in
order to anoint Hazael king over Syria, and Jehu king over Israel, [Kg1
19:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#015.md). He meets with Elisha, who
becomes his servant, [Kg1 19:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#019.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 19:1</span></span>

Ahab told Jezebel - Probably with no evil design against Elijah.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 19:2</span></span>

So let the gods do - If I do not slay thee, let the gods slay me with
the most ignominious death.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 19:3</span></span>

He arose, and went for his life - He saw it was best to give place to
this storm, and go to a place of safety. He probably thought that the
miracle at Carmel would have been the means of effecting the conversion
of the whole court and of the country, but, finding himself mistaken, he
is greatly discouraged.

To Beer-sheba - This being at the most southern extremity of the
promised land, and under the jurisdiction of the king of Judah, he might
suppose himself in a place of safety.

Left his servant there - Being alone, he would be the more unlikely to
be discovered; besides, he did not wish to risk the life of his servant.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 19:4</span></span>

A day's journey into the wilderness - Probably in his way to Mount
Horeb. See [Kg1 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008.md).

Juniper tree - A tree that afforded him a shade from the scorching sun.

It is enough - I have lived long enough! I can do no more good among
this people; let me now end my days.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 19:5</span></span>

As he lay and slept - Excessive anguish of mind frequently induces
sleep, as well as great fatigue of body.

An angel touched him - He needed refreshment, and God sent an angel to
bring him what was necessary.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 19:6</span></span>

A cake baken on the coals - All this seems to have been supernaturally
provided.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 19:7</span></span>

The journey is too great for thee - From Beer-sheba to Horeb was about
one hundred and fifty miles.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 19:8</span></span>

Forty days and forty nights - So he fasted just the same time as Moses
did at Horeb, and as Christ did in the wilderness.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 19:9</span></span>

He came thither unto a cave - Conjectured by some to be the same cave in
which God put Moses that he might give him a glimpse of his glory. See
[Exo 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#022.md).

What doest thou here, Elijah? - Is this a reproach for having fled from
the face of Jezebel, through what some call unbelieving fears, that God
would abandon him to her rage?

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 19:10</span></span>

I have been very jealous for the Lord - The picture which he draws here
of apostate Israel is very affecting: -

1\. They have forsaken thy covenant - They have now cleaved to and
worshipped other gods.

2\. Thrown down thine altars - Endeavoured, as much as they possibly
could, to abolish thy worship, and destroy its remembrance from the
land.

3\. And slain thy prophets - That there might be none to reprove their
iniquity, or teach the truth; so that the restoration of the true
worship might be impossible.

4\. I only, am left - They have succeeded in destroying all the rest of
the prophets, and they are determined not to rest till they slay me.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 19:11</span></span>

Stand upon the mount before the Lord - God was now treating Elijah
nearly in the same way that he treated Moses; and it is not unlikely
that Elijah was now standing on the same place where Moses stood, when
God revealed himself to him in the giving of the law. See [Exo
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009.md), [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016.md).

The Lord passed by - It appears that the passing by of the Lord
occasioned the strong wind, the earthquake, and the fire; but in none of
these was God to make a discovery of himself unto the prophet; yet
these, in some sort, prepared his way, and prepared Elijah to hear the
still small voice. The apparatus, indicating the presence of the Divine
Majesty, is nearly the same as that employed to minister the law to
Moses; and many have supposed that God intended these things to be
understood thus: that God intended to display himself to mankind not in
judgment, but in mercy; and that as the wind, the earthquake, and the
fire, were only the forerunners of the still small voice, which
proclaimed the benignity of the Father of spirits; so the law, and all
its terrors, were only intended to introduce that mild spirit of the
Gospel of Jesus, proclaiming glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, and good will unto men. Others think that all this was merely
natural; and that a real earthquake, and its accompaniments, are
described.

1\. Previously to earthquakes the atmosphere becomes greatly disturbed,
mighty winds and tempests taking place.

2\. This is followed by the actual agitation of the earth.

3\. In this agitation fire frequently escapes, or a burning lava is
poured out, often accompanied with thunder and lightning.

4\. After these the air becomes serene, the thunder ceases to roll, the
forked lightnings no longer play, and nothing remains but a gentle
breeze.

However correct all this may be, it seems most probably evident that
what took place at this time was out of the ordinary course of nature;
and although the things, as mentioned here, may often be the
accompaniments of an earthquake that has nothing supernatural in it; yet
here, though every thing is produced in its natural order, yet the
exciting cause of the whole is supernatural. Thus the Chaldee
understands the whole passage: "And behold the Lord was revealed; and
before him was a host of the angels of the wind, tearing the mountains,
and breaking the rocks before the Lord, but the Majesty (Shechinah) of
the Lord was not in the host of the angels of the wind. And after the
host of the angels of the wind, there was a host of the angels of
commotion; but the Majesty of the Lord was not in the host of the angels
of commotion. And after the host of the angels of commotion, a fire; but
the Majesty of the Lord was not in the host of the angels of fire. And
after the host of the angels of fire, a voice singing in silence," etc.;
that is, a sound with which no other sound was mingled. Perhaps the
whole of this is intended to give an emblematical representation of the
various displays of Divine providence and grace.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 19:13</span></span>

Wrapped his face in his mantle - This he did to signify his respect; so
Moses hid his face, for he dared not to look upon God [Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006.md). Covering the face was a token of
respect among the Asiatics, as uncovering the head is among the
Europeans.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 19:15</span></span>

To the wilderness of Damascus - He does not desire him to take a road by
which he might be likely to meet Jezebel, or any other of his enemies.

Anoint Hazael - For what reason the Lord was about to make all these
revolutions, we are told in [Kg1
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#017.md). God was about to bring his
judgments upon the land, and especially on the house of Ahab. This he
exterminated by means of Jehu; and Jehu himself was a scourge of the
Lord to the people. Hazael also grievously afflicted Israel; see the
accomplishment of these purposes, 2 Kings 8 (note), and 2 Kings 9
(note).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 19:16</span></span>

Elisha - shalt thou anoint to be prophet in thy room - Jarchi gives a
strange turn to these words: "Thy prophecy (or execution of the
prophetic office) does not please me, because thou art the constant
accuser of my children." With all their abominations, this rabbin would
have us to believe that those vile idolaters and murderers were still
the beloved children of God! And why? Because God had made a covenant
with their fathers; therefore said the ancient as well as the modern
siren song: "Once in the covenant, always in the covenant; once a son,
and a son for ever." And yet we have here the testimony of God's own
prophet, and the testimony of their history, that they had forsaken the
covenant, and consequently renounced all their interest in it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 19:17</span></span>

Shall Elisha slay - We do not find that Elisha either used the sword, or
commissioned it to be used, though he delivered solemn prophecies
against this disobedient people: and this is probably the sense in which
this should be understood, as Elisha was prophet before Hazael was king,
and Hazael was king before Jehu; and the heavy famine which he brought
on the land took place before the reign either of Jehu or Hazael. The
meaning of the prophecy may be this: Hazael, Jehu, and Elisha, shall be
the ministers of my vengeance against this disobedient and rebellious
people. The order of time, here, is not to be regarded.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 19:18</span></span>

Seven thousand in Israel - That is, many thousands; for seven is a
number of perfection, as we have often seen: so, The barren has borne
seven - has had a numerous off-spring; Gold seven times purified -
purified till all the dross is perfectly separated from it. The court
and multitudes of the people had gone after Baal; but perhaps the
majority of the common people still worshipped in secret the God of
their fathers.

Every mouth which hath not kissed him - Idolaters often kissed their
hand in honor of their idols; and hence the origin of adoration -
bringing the hand to the mouth after touching the idol, if it were
within reach; and if not, kissing the right hand in token of respect and
subjection. The word is compounded of ad, to, and os, oris, the mouth.
Dextera manu deum contingentes, ori admovebant: "Touching the god with
their right hand, they applied it to their mouth." So kissing the hand,
and adoration, mean the same thing -

Thus Pliny,

Inter adorandum, dexteram ad osculum referimus, totum corpus
circumagimus: Nat. Hist. lib. xxviii., cap. 2. -

"In the act of adoration we kiss the right hand, and turn about the
whole body."

Cicero mentions a statue of Hercules, the chin and lips of which were
considerably worn by the frequent kissing of his worshippers:

Ut rictus ejus, et mentum paulo sit attritius, quod in precibus et
gratulationibus, non solum id venerari, sed etiam osculari solent. -
Orat. in Verrem.

I have seen several instances of this, especially in the paintings of
old saints: the lips and mouth of beautiful paintings literally worn
away by the unmerciful osculations of devotees.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 19:19</span></span>

Twelve yoke of oxen - Elisha must have had a considerable estate, when
he kept twelve yoke of oxen to till the ground. If, therefore, he obeyed
the prophetic call, he did it to considerable secular loss.

He with the twelfth - Every owner of an inheritance among the Hebrews,
and indeed among the ancients in general, was a principal agent in its
cultivation.

Cast his mantle upon him - Either this was a ceremony used in a call to
the prophetic office, or it indicated that he was called to be the
servant of the prophet. The mantle, or pallium, was the peculiar garb of
the prophet, as we may learn from [Zac
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004.md); and this was probably made of
skin dressed with the hair on. See also [Kg2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008.md). It is likely, therefore, that
Elijah threw his mantle on Elisha to signify to him that he was called
to the prophetic office. See more on this subject below.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 19:20</span></span>

Let me - kiss my father and my mother - Elisha fully understood that he
was called by this ceremony to the prophetic office: and it is evident
that he conferred not with flesh and blood, but resolved, immediately
resolved, to obey; only he wished to bid farewell to his relatives. See
below.

What have I done to thee? - Thy call is not from me, but from God: to
him, not to me, art thou accountable for thy use or abuse of it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 19:21</span></span>

He returned back - He went home to his house; probably he yet lived with
his parents, for it appears he was a single man: and he slew a yoke of
the oxen - he made a feast for his household, having boiled the flesh of
the oxen with his agricultural implements, probably in token that he had
abandoned secular life: then, having bidden them an affectionate
farewell, he arose, went after Elijah, who probably still awaited his
coming in the field or its vicinity, and ministered unto him.

On the call of Elisha, I may make a few remarks.

1\. Elijah is commanded, [Kg1 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016.md),
to anoint Elisha prophet in his room. Though it is generally believed
that kings, priests, and prophets, were inaugurated into their
respective offices by the right of unction, and this I have elsewhere
supposed; yet this is the only instance on record where a prophet is
commanded to be anointed; and even this case is problematical, for it
does not appear that Elijah did anoint Elisha. Nothing is mentioned in
his call to the prophetic office, but the casting the mantle of Elijah
upon him; wherefore it is probable that the word anoint, here signifies
no more than the call to the office, accompanied by the simple rite of
having the prophet's mantle thrown over his shoulders.

2\. A call to the ministerial office, though it completely sever from
all secular occupations, yet never supersedes the duties of filial
affection. Though Elisha must leave his oxen, and become a prophet to
Israel: yet he may first go home, eat and drink with his parents and
relatives, and bid them an affectionate farewell.

3\. We do not find any attempt on the part of his parents to hinder him
from obeying the Divine call: they had too much respect for the
authority of God, and they left their son to the dictates of his
conscience. Wo to those parents who strive, for filthy lucre's sake, to
prevent their sons from embracing a call to preach Jesus to their
perishing countrymen, or to the heathen, because they see that the life
of a true evangelist is a life of comparative poverty, and they had
rather he should gain money than save souls.

4\. The cloak, we have already observed, was the prophet's peculiar
habit; it was probably in imitation of this that the Greek philosophers
wore a sort of mantle, that distinguished them from the common people;
and by which they were at once as easily known as certain academical
characters are by their gowns and square caps. The pallium was as common
among the Greeks as the toga was among the Romans. Each of these was so
peculiar to those nations, that Palliatus is used to signify a Greek, as
Togatus is to signify a Roman.

5\. Was it from this act of Elijah, conveying the prophetic office and
its authority to Elisha by throwing his mantle upon him, that the popes
of Rome borrowed the ceremony of collating an archbishop to the
spiritualities and temporalities of his see, and investing him with
plenary sacerdotal authority, by sending him what is well known in
ecclesiastical history by the name pallium, pall, or cloak? I think this
is likely; for as we learn from [Zac
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#004.md), and [Kg2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008.md), that this mantle was a rough or
hairy garment, so we learn from Durandus that the pallium or pall was
made of white wool, after the following manner: -

The nuns of St. Agnes, annually on the festival of their patroness,
offer two white lambs on the altar of their church, during the time they
sing Agnus Dei, in a solemn mass; which lambs are afterwards taken by
two of the canons of the Lateran church, and by them given to the pope's
sub-deacons, who send them to pasture till shearing time; and then they
are shorn, and the pall is made of their wool, mixed with other white
wool. The pall is then carried to the Lateran church, and there placed
on the high altar by the deacons, on the bodies of St. Peter and St.
Paul; and, after a usual watching or vigil, it is carried away in the
night, and delivered to the sub-deacons, who lay it up safely. Now,
because it was taken from the body of St. Peter, it signifies the
plenitude of ecclesiastical power: and, therefore, the popes assume it
as their prerogative, being the professed successors of this apostle, to
invest other prelates with it. This was at first confined to Rome, but
afterwards it was sent to popish prelates in different parts of the
world.

6\. It seems, from the place in Zechariah, quoted above, that this rough
cloak or garment became the covering of hypocrites and deceivers; and
that persons assumed the prophetic dress without the prophetic call, and
God threatens to unmask them. We know that this became general in the
popish Church in the beginning of the 16th century; and God stripped
those false prophets of their false and wicked pretensions, and exposed
them to the people. Many of them profited by this exposure, and became
reformed; and the whole community became at least more cautious. The
Romish Church should be thankful to the Reformation for the moral purity
which is now found in it; for, had not its vices, and usurpations, and
super-scandalous sales of indulgences, been thus checked, the whole
fabric had by this time been probably dissolved. Should it carry its
reformation still farther, it would have a more legitimate pretension to
the title of apostolic. Let them compare their ritual with the Bible and
common sense, and they will find cause to lop many cumbrous and rotten
branches from a good tree.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 20](kg1020.md)

</div>
