<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1015)  [Next](kg1017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 16:0</span></span>

Jehu the prophet denounces the destruction of Baasha, [Kg1
16:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001). Zimri conspires against him,
and slays him and his family, and reigns seven days, [Kg1
16:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#008). The people make Omri king,
and besiege Zimri in Tirzah; who, finding no way to escape, sets fire to
his palace, and consumes himself in it, [Kg1
16:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#016). The people are divided, half
following Tibni, and half Omri; the latter faction overcomes the former,
Tibni is slain, and Omri reigns alone, [Kg1
16:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#021). He founds Samaria, [Kg1
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024). His bad character and death,
[Kg1 16:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#025). Ahab reigns in his
stead; marries Jezebel, restores idolatry, and exceeds his predecessors
in wickedness, [Kg1 16:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#029). Hiel the
Beth-elite rebuilds Jericho, [Kg1
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 16:1</span></span>

Then the word of the Lord came to Jehu - Of this prophet we know nothing
but from this circumstance. It appears from [Ch2
16:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007), that his father Hanani was
also a prophet, and suffered imprisonment in consequence of the faithful
discharge of his ministry to Asa.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 16:2</span></span>

Made thee prince over my people - That is, in the course of my
providence, I suffered thee to become king; for it is impossible that
God should make a rebel, a traitor, and a murderer, king over his
people, or over any people. God is ever represented in Scripture as
doing those things which, in the course of his providence, he permits to
be done.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 16:7</span></span>

And because he killed him - This the Vulgate understands of Jehu the
prophet, put to death by Baasha: Ob hanc causam occidit eum, hoe est.
Jehu filium Hanani prophetam; "On this account he killed him, that is,
Jehu the prophet, the son of Hanani." Some think Baasha is intended,
others Jeroboam, and others Nadab the son of Jeroboam. This last is the
sentiment of Rab. Sol. Jarchi, and of some good critics. The order is
here confused; and the seventh verse should probably be placed between
the 4th and 5th.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 16:9</span></span>

Captain of half his chariots - It is probable that Zimri, and some other
who is not here named, were commanders of the cavalry.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 16:11</span></span>

He slew all the house of Baasha - He endeavored to exterminate his race,
and blot out his memory; and the Jews say, when such a matter is
determined, they not only destroy the house of the person himself, but
the five neighboring houses, that the memory of such a person may perish
from the earth.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 16:13</span></span>

For all the sins of Baasha - We see why it was that God permitted such
judgments to fall on this family. Baasha was a grievous offender, and so
also was his son Elah; and they caused the people to sin; and they
provoked God to anger by their idolatries.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 16:15</span></span>

The people were encamped against Gibbethon - It appears that, at this
time, the Israelites had war with the Philistines, and were now
besieging Gibbethon, one of their cities. This army, hearing that Zimri
had rebelled and killed Elah, made Omri, their general, king, who
immediately raised the siege of Gibbethon, and went to attack Zimri in
the royal city of Tirzah; who, finding his affairs desperate, chose
rather to consume himself in his palace than to fall into the hands of
his enemies.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 16:21</span></span>

Divided into two parts - Why this division took place we cannot tell;
the people appear to have been for Tibni, the army for Omri; and the
latter prevailed.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 16:23</span></span>

In the thirty and first year of Asa - There must be a mistake here in
the number thirty-one; for, in [Kg1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#010) and [Kg1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#015), it is said that Zimri slew his
master, and began to reign in the twenty-seventh year of Asa; and as
Zimri reigned only seven days, and Omri immediately succeeded him, this
could not be in the thirty-first, but in the twenty-seventh year of Asa,
as related above. Rab. Sol. Jarchi reconciles the two places thus: "The
division of the kingdom between Tibni and Omri began in the
twenty-seventh year of Asa; this division lasted five years, during
which Omri had but a share of the kingdom. Tibni dying, Omri came into
the possession of the whole kingdom, which he held seven years; this was
in the thirty-first year of Asa. Seven years he reigned alone; five
years he reigned over part of Israel; twelve years in the whole. The two
dates, the twenty-seventh and thirty-first of Asa, answering, the first
to the beginning of the division, the second to the sole reign of Omri."
Jarchi quotes Sedar Olam for this solution.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 16:24</span></span>

He bought the hill Samaria of Shemer - This should be read, "He bought
the hill of Shomeron from Shomer, and called it Shomeron, (i.e., Little
Shomer), after the name of Shomer, owner of the hill." At first the
kings of Israel dwelt at Shechem, and then at Tirzah; but this place
having suffered much in the civil broils, and the place having been
burnt down by Zimri, Omri purposed to found a new city, to which he
might transfer the seat of government. He fixed on a hill that belonged
to a person of the name of Shomer; and bought it from him for two
talents of silver, about 707 3s. 9d. Though this was a large sum in
those days, yet we cannot suppose that the hill was very large which was
purchased for so little; and probably no other building upon it than
Shomer's house, if indeed he had one there. Shomeron, or, as it is
corruptly written, Samaria, is situated in the midst of the tribe of
Ephraim, not very far from the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, and about
midway between Dan and Beer-sheba: thus Samaria became the capital of
the ten tribes, the metropolis of the kingdom of Israel, and the
residence of its kings. The kings of Israel adorned and fortified it;
Ahab built a house of ivory in it, [Kg1
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#039); the kings of Syria had
magazines or storehouses in it, for the purpose of commerce; see [Kg1
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#034). And it appears to have been a
place of considerable importance and great strength.

Samaria endured several sieges; Ben-hadad king of Syria, besieged it
twice, [Kg1 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#001), etc.; and it cost
Shalmaneser a siege of three years to reduce it, [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006), etc. After the death of
Alexander the Great, it became the property of the kings of Egypt; but
Antiochus the Great took it from the Egyptians; and it continued in the
possession of the kings of Syria till the Asmoneans took and razed it to
the very foundation. Gabinius, pro-consul of Syria, partially rebuilt
it, and called it Gabiniana. Herod the Great restored it to its ancient
splendor, and placed in it a colony of six thousand men, and gave it the
name of Sebaste, in honor of Augustus. It is now a place of little
consequence.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 16:25</span></span>

Did worse than all - before him - Omri was,

1\. An idolater in principle;

2\. An idolater in practice;

3\. He led the people to idolatry by precept and example; and, which was
that in which he did worse than all before him,

4\. He made statutes in favor of idolatry, and obliged the people by law
to commit it. See [Mic 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016), where
this seems to be intended: For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all
the works of the house of Ahab.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 16:31</span></span>

He took to wife Jezebel - This was the head and chief of his offending;
he took to wife, not only a heathen, but one whose hostility to the true
religion was well known, and carried to the utmost extent.

1\. She was the idolatrous daughter of an idolatrous king;

2\. She practiced it openly;

3\. She not only countenanced it in others, but protected it, and gave
its partisans honors and rewards;

4\. She used every means to persecute the true religion;

5\. She was hideously cruel, and put to death the prophets and priests
of God;

6\. And all this she did with the most zealous perseverance and
relentless cruelty.

Notwithstanding Ahab had built a temple, and made an altar for Baal, and
set up the worship of Asherah, the Sidonian Venus, which we, [Kg1
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#033), have transformed into a grove;
yet so well known was the hostility of Jezebel to all good, that his
marrying her was esteemed the highest pitch of vice, and an act the most
provoking to God, and destructive to the prosperity of the kingdom.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 16:33</span></span>

Ahab made a grove - אשרה Asherah, Astarte, or Venus; what the Syriac
calls an idol, and the Arabic, a tall tree; probably meaning, by the
last, an image of Priapus, the obscene keeper of groves, orchards, and
gardens.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 16:34</span></span>

Did Hiel the Beth-elite build Jericho - I wish the reader to refer to my
note on [Jos 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026), for a general view
of this subject. I shall add a few observations. Joshua's curse is well
known: "Cursed be the man before the Lord that riseth up and buildeth
this city Jericho; he shall lay the foundation thereof in his
first-born; and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it,"
[Jos 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026). This is the curse, but the
meaning of its terms is not very obvious. Let us see how this is to be
understood from the manner in which it was accomplished.

"In his days did Hiel the Beth-elite build Jericho; he laid the
foundation thereof in Abiram his first-born, and set up the gates
thereof in his youngest son Segub; according to the word of the Lord,
which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun." This prediction was delivered
upwards of five hundred years before the event; and though it was most
circumstantially fulfilled, yet we know not the precise meaning of some
of the terms used in the original execration, and in this place, where
its fulfillment is mentioned. There are three opinions on the words, lay
the foundation in his first-born, and set up the gates in his youngest
son.

1\. It is thought that when he laid the foundation of the city, his
eldest son, the hope of his family, died by the hand and judgment of
God, and that all his children died in succession; so that when the
doors were ready to be hung, his youngest and last child died, and thus,
instead of securing himself a name, his whole family became extinct.

2\. These expressions signify only great delay in the building; that he
who should undertake it should spend nearly his whole life in it; all
the time in which he was capable of procreating children; in a word,
that if a man laid the foundation when his first-born came into the
world, his youngest and last son should be born before the walls should
be in readiness to admit the gates to be set up in them; and that the
expression is of the proverbial kind, intimating greatly protracted
labor, occasioned by multitudinous hinderances and delays.

3\. That he who rebuilt this city should, in laying the foundation, slay
or sacrifice his firstborn, in order to consecrate it, and secure the
assistance of the objects of his idolatrous worship; and should slay his
youngest at the completion of the work, as a gratitude-offering for the
assistance received. This latter opinion seems to be countenanced by the
Chaldee, which represents Hiel as slaying his first-born Abiram, and his
youngest son Segub.

But who was Hiel the Beth-elite? The Chaldee calls him Hiel of
Beth-mome, or the Beth-momite; the Vulgate, Hiel of Beth-el; the
Septuagint, Hiel the Baithelite; the Syriac represents Ahab as the
builder: "Also in his days did Ahab build Jericho, the place of
execration;" the Arabic, "Also in his days did Hiel build the house of
idols - to wit, Jericho." The MSS. give us no help. None of these
versions, the Chaldee excepted, intimates that the children were either
slain or died; which circumstance seems to strengthen the opinion, that
the passage is to be understood of delays and hinderances. Add to this,
Why should the innocent children of Hiel suffer for their father's
presumption? And is it likely that, if Hiel lost his first-born when he
laid the foundation, he would have proceeded under this evidence of the
Divine displeasure, and at the risk of losing his whole family? Which of
these opinions is the right one, or whether any of them be correct, is
more than I can pretend to state. A curse seems to rest still upon
Jericho: it is not yet blotted out of the map of Palestine, but it is
reduced to a miserable village, consisting of about thirty wretched
cottages, and the governor's dilapidated castle; nor is there any ruin
there to indicate its former splendor.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 17](kg1017)

</div>
