<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1004)  [Next](kg1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 5:0</span></span>

Hiram, king of Tyre, sends to congratulate Solomon on his accession to
the kingdom, [Kg1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001). Solomon
consults him on building a temple for the Lord, and requests his
assistance, [Kg1 5:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002). Hiram is
pleased and specifies the assistance which he will afford, [Kg1
5:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#007). He sends cedars and fir trees,
[Kg1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#010). The return made by Solomon,
[Kg1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011). They form a league, [Kg1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#012). Solomon makes a levy of men in
Israel to prepare wood and stones, [Kg1
5:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#013).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 5:1</span></span>

Hiram king of Tyre - It must have been at the beginning of Solomon's
reign that these ambassadors were sent; and some suppose that the Hiram
mentioned here is different from him who was the friend of David; but
there seems no very solid reason for this supposition. As Hiram had
intimate alliance with David, and built his palace, [Sa2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011), he wished to maintain the same
good understanding with his son, of whose wisdom he had no doubt heard
the most advantageous accounts; and he loved the son because he always
loved the father, for Hiram was ever a lover of David.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 5:2</span></span>

Solomon sent to Hiram - Made an interchange of ambassadors and friendly
greetings. Josephus tells us that the correspondence between Hiram and
Solomon was preserved in the archives of the Tyrians even in his time.
But this, like many other assertions of the same author, is worthy of
little credit.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 5:4</span></span>

There is neither adversary - אין שטן eyn satan, there is no satan - no
opposer, nor any kind of evil; all is peace and quiet, both without and
within. God has given me this quiet that I may build his temple. Deus
nobis haec otia fecit.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 5:5</span></span>

A house unto the name of the Lord - The name of God is God himself. I
purpose to build a house to that infinite and eternal Being called
Jehovah.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 5:6</span></span>

Any that can skill to hew timber - An obsolete and barbarous expression
for any that know how to cut timber. They had neither sawyers,
carpenters, joiners, nor builders among them, equal to the Sidonians.
Sidon was a part of the territories of Hiram, and its inhabitants appear
to have been the most expert workmen. It requires more skill to fell and
prepare timber than is generally supposed. Vitruvius gives some rules
relative to this, lib. ii., cap. 9, the sum of which is this:

1\. Trees should be felled in autumn, or in the winter, and in the wane
of the moon; for in this season the trees recover their vigor and
solidity, which was dispersed among their leaves, and exhausted by their
fruit, in spring and summer; they will then be free from a certain
moisture, very apt to engender worms and rot them, which in autumn and
winter is consumed and dried up.

2\. Trees should not be cut down at once; they should be cut carefully
round towards the pith, that the sap may drop down and distil away, and
thus left till thoroughly dry, and then cut down entirely.

3\. When fully dried, a tree should not be exposed to the south sun,
high winds, and rain; and should be smeared over with cow-dung to
prevent its splitting.

4\. It should never be drawn through the dew, but be removed in the
afternoon.

5\. It is not fit for floors, doors, or windows, till it has been felled
three years. Perhaps these directions attended to, would prevent the dry
rot. And we see from them that there is considerable skill required to
hew timber, and in this the Sidonians excelled. We do every thing in a
hurry, and our building is good for nothing.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 5:7</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord this day - From this, and indeed from every part of
Hiram's conduct, it is evident that he was a worshipper of the true God;
unless, as was the case with many of the heathens, he supposed that
every country had its own god, and every god his own country, and he
thanked the God of Israel that he had given so wise a prince to govern
those whom he considered his friends and allies: but the first opinion
seems to be the most correct.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 5:9</span></span>

Shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea - As the river Adonis
was in the vicinity of the forest of Lebanon, and emptied itself into
the Mediterranean sea, near Biblos, Hiram could transport the timber all
squared, and not only cut to scantling, but cut so as to occupy the
place it was intended for in the building, without any farther need of
axe or saw. It might be readily sent down the coast on rafts and landed
at Joppa, or Jamnia, just opposite to Jerusalem, at the distance of
about twenty-five miles. See [Ch2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#016). The carriage could not be great,
as the timber was all fitted for the building where it was hewn down.
The materials had only to be put together when they arrived at
Jerusalem. See [Kg1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#007).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 5:11</span></span>

And Solomon gave Hiram, etc. - The information in this verse of the
annual stipend paid to Hiram, is deficient, and must be supplied out of
[Ch2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#010). Here twenty thousand
measures of wheat, and twenty measures of pure oil, is all that is
promised: there, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, twenty
thousand measures of barley, twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty
thousand baths of oil, is the stipulation; unless we suppose the first
to be for Hiram's own family, the latter for his workmen. Instead of
twenty measures of oil, the Syriac, Arabic, and Septuagint, have twenty
thousand measures, as in Chronicles. In 2 Chron., instead of cors of
oil, it is baths. The bath was a measure much less than the cor.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 5:13</span></span>

The levy was thirty thousand men - We find from the following verse that
only ten thousand were employed at once, and those only for one month at
a time; and having rested two months, they again resumed their labor.
These were the persons over whom Adoniram was superintendent, and were
all Israelites.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 5:15</span></span>

Threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens - These were all
strangers, or proselytes, dwelling among the Israelites; as we learn
from the parallel place, [Ch2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#017),
[Ch2 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#018).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 5:16</span></span>

Besides - three thousand and three hundred which ruled over the people -
In the parallel place, [Ch2 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#018), it
is three thousand six hundred. The Septuagint has here the same number.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 5:17</span></span>

Great stones - Stones of very large dimensions.

Costly stones - Stones that cost much labor and time to cut them out of
the rock.

Hewed stones - Everywhere squared and polished.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 5:18</span></span>

And the stone-squarers - Instead of stone-squarers the margin very
properly reads Giblites, הגבלים haggiblim; and refers to [Eze
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009), where we find the inhabitants of
Gebal celebrated for their knowledge in ship-building. Some suppose that
these Giblites were the inhabitants of Biblos, at the foot of Mount
Libanus, northward of Sidon, on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea;
famous for its wines; and now called Gaeta. Both Ptolemy and Stephanus
Byzantinus speak of a town called Gebala, to the east of Tyre: but this
was different from Gebal, or Biblos. It seems more natural to understand
this of a people than of stone-squarers, though most of the versions
have adopted this idea which we follow in the text.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 6](kg1006)

</div>
