<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1017)  [Next](kg1019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 18:0</span></span>

Elijah is commanded by the Lord to show himself to Ahab, [Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001.md), [Kg1
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#002.md). Ahab, and Obadiah his steward,
search the land to find provender for the cattle, [Oba
1:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003.md). Obadiah meets Elijah, who
commands him to inform Ahab that he is ready to present himself before
him, [Kg1 18:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#007.md). Elijah and Ahab
meet, [Kg1 18:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#016.md). Elijah proposes
that the four hundred and fifty priests of Baal should be gathered
together at Mount Carmel; that they should offer a sacrifice to their
god, and he to Jehovah; and the God who should send down fire to consume
the sacrifice should be acknowledged as the true God, [Kg1
18:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019.md). The proposal is accepted,
and the priests of Baal call in vain upon their god through the whole
day, [Kg1 18:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#025.md). Elijah offers his
sacrifice, prays to Gods and fire comes down from heaven and consumes
it; whereupon the people acknowledge Jehovah to be the true God, and
slay all the prophets of Baal, [Kg1
18:30-40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030.md). Elijah promises Ahab that
there shall be immediate rain; it comes accordingly, and Ahab and Elijah
come to Jezreel, [Kg1 18:41-46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 18:1</span></span>

After many days - in the third year - We learn from our Lord, [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025.md), that the drought which brought
on the famine in Israel lasted three years and six months. St. James,
[Jam 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017.md), gives it the same duration.
Probably Elijah spent six months at the brook Cherith, and three years
with the widow at Sarepta.

I will send rain upon the earth - The word האדמה haadamah should be
translated the ground or the land, as it is probable that this drought
did not extend beyond the land of Judea.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 18:3</span></span>

Obadiah feared the Lord greatly - He was a sincere and zealous
worshipper of the true God, and his conduct towards the persecuted
prophets was the full proof both of his piety and humanity.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 18:4</span></span>

Fed them with bread and water - By these are signified the necessaries
of life, of whatsoever kind.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 18:5</span></span>

Unto all fountains of water - All marshy or well-watered districts,
where grass was most likely to be preserved.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 18:10</span></span>

There is no nation or kingdom - He had sent through all his own states
and to the neighboring governments to find out the prophet, as he knew,
from his own declaration, that both rain and drought were to be the
effect of his prayers. Had he found him, he no doubt intended to oblige
him to procure rain, or punish him for having brought on this drought.

He took an oath - Ahab must have had considerable power and authority
among the neighboring nations to require and exact this, and Elijah must
have kept himself very secret to have shunned such an extensive and
minute search.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 18:12</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord shall carry thee - Obadiah supposed that the
Spirit of the Lord had carried him to some strange country during the
three years and a half of the drought; and as he had reason to think
that Ahab would slay Elijah if he found him, and that the God of the
prophet would not suffer his servant to fall into such murderous hands,
he took for granted that as soon as he should come into danger, so soon
would the Spirit of the Lord carry him away, or direct him to some
hiding place.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 18:13</span></span>

When Jezebel slew the prophets - This persecution was probably during
the dearth, for as this bad woman would attribute the public calamity to
Elijah, not being able to find him, she would naturally wreak her
vengeance on the prophets of Jehovah who were within her reach.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 18:18</span></span>

I have not troubled Israel - Here the cause of the dearth is placed on
its true ground: the king and the people had forsaken the true God, and
God shut up the heavens that there was no rain. Elijah was only the
minister whom God used to dispense this judgment.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 18:19</span></span>

Gather to me all Israel - The heads of tribes and families; the rulers
of the people.

The prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty - the prophets of the groves
four hundred - The king and queen had different religious
establishments; the king and his servants worshipped Baal, the supreme
lord and master of the world, the sun. For this establishment four
hundred and fifty priests were maintained. The queen and her women
worshipped אשרה Asherah, Astarte, or Venus; and for this establishment
four hundred priests were maintained. These latter were in high honor;
they ate at Jezebel's table; they made a part of her household. It
appears that those eight hundred and fifty priests were the domestic
chaplains of the king and queen, and probably not all the priests that
belonged to the rites of Baal and Asherah in the land; and yet from the
following verse we learn that Ahab had sent to all the children of
Israel to collect these prophets; but Jezebel had certainly four hundred
of them in her own house who were not at the assembly mentioned here.
Those of Baal might have a more extensive jurisdiction than those of
Asherah, the latter being constantly resident in Samaria.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 18:21</span></span>

How long halt ye between two opinions? - Literally, "How long hop ye
about upon two boughs?" This is a metaphor taken from birds hopping
about from bough to bough, not knowing on which to settle. Perhaps the
idea of limping through lameness should not be overlooked. They were
halt, they could not walk uprightly; they dreaded Jehovah, and therefore
could not totally abandon him; they feared the king and queen, and
therefore thought they must embrace the religion of the state. Their
conscience forbade them to do the former; their fear of man persuaded
them to do the latter, but in neither were they heartily engaged; and at
this juncture their minds seemed in equipoise, and they were waiting for
a favorable opportunity to make their decision. Such an opportunity now,
through the mercy of God, presented itself.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 18:22</span></span>

I only, remain a prophet of the Lord - That is, I am the only prophet of
God present, and can have but the influence of an individual; while the
prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty men! It appears that the
queen's prophets, amounting to four hundred, were not at this great
assembly; and these are they whom we meet with [Kg1
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#006.md), and whom the king consulted
relative to the battle at Ramoth-gilead.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 18:24</span></span>

The God that answereth by fire - Elijah gave them every advantage when
he granted that the God who answered by fire should be acknowledged as
the true God; for as the Baal who was worshipped here was incontestably
Apollo, or the sun, he was therefore the god of fire, and had only to
work in his own element.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 18:25</span></span>

For ye are many - And therefore shall have the preference, and the
advantage of being first in your application to the deity.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 18:26</span></span>

From morning even until noon - It seems that the priests of Baal
employed the whole day in their desperate rites. The time is divided
into two periods:

1\. From morning until noon; this was employed in preparing and offering
the sacrifice, and in earnest supplication for the celestial fire. Still
there was no answer, and at noon Elijah began to mock and ridicule them,
and this excited them to commence anew. And,

2\. They continued from noon till the time of offering the evening
sacrifice, dancing up and down, cutting themselves with knives, mingling
their own blood with their sacrifice, praying, supplicating, and acting
in the most frantic manner.

And they leaped upon the altar - Perhaps it will be more correct to read
with the margin, they leaped up and down at the altar; they danced round
it with strange and hideous cries and gesticulations, tossing their
heads to and fro, with a great variety of bodily contortions.

A heathen priest, a high priest of Budhoo, has been just showing me the
manner in which they dance and jump up and down, and from side to side,
twisting their bodies in all manner of ways, when making their offerings
to their demon gods; a person all the while beating furiously on a
tom-tom, or drum, to excite and sustain those frantic attitudes; at the
same time imploring the succor of their god, frequently in some such
language as this: "O loving brother devil, hear me, and receive my
offering!" To perform these sacrificial attitudes they have persons who
are taught to practice them from their earliest years, according to
directions laid down in religious books; and to make the joints and body
pliant, much anointing of the parts and mechanical management are used;
and they have masters, whose business it is to teach these attitudes and
contortions according to the rules laid down in those books. It seems
therefore that this was a very general practice of idolatry, as indeed
are the others mentioned in this chapter.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 18:27</span></span>

At noon - Elijah mocked them - Had not Elijah been conscious of the
Divine protection, he certainly would not have used such freedom of
speech while encompassed by his enemies.

Cry aloud - Make a great noise; oblige him by your vociferations to
attend to your suit.

For he is a god - כי אלהים הוא ki Elohim hu, he is the supreme God, you
worship him as such, he must needs be such, and no doubt jealous of his
own honor and the credit of his votaries! A strong irony.

He is talking - He may be giving audience to some others; let him know
that he has other worshippers, and must not give too much of his
attention to one. Perhaps the word שיח siach should be interpreted as in
the margin, he meditateth; he is in a profound revery; he is making some
god-like projects; he is considering how he may best keep up his credit
in the nation. Shout! let him know that all is now at stake.

He is pursuing - He may be taking his pleasure in hunting, and may
continue to pursue the game in heaven, till he have lost all his credit
and reverence on earth. The original words, שיג לו sig lo, are variously
translated; He is in a hotel, in diversorio, Vulgate. Perhaps he is
delivering oracles, μη ποτε χρηματιζει αυτος, Septuagint. Or, he is on
some special business. Therefore, cry aloud!

He is in a journey - He has left his audience chamber, and is making
some excursions; call aloud to bring him back, as his all is at stake.

Peradventure he sleepeth - Rab. S. Jarchi gives this the most degrading
meaning; I will give it in Latin, because it is too coarse to be put in
English; Fortassis ad locum secretum abiit, ut ventrem ibi exomeret;
"Perhaps he is gone to the \_\_\_\_\_." This certainly reduces Baal to
the lowest degree of contempt, and with it the ridicule and sarcasm are
complete.

Among Asiatic idolaters their gods have different functions to fulfill,
and require sleep and rest. Vishnoo sleeps four months in the year.
Budhoo is represented in his temple as sleep, though his eyes are open.
Vayoo manages the winds; Varoona, the waters; Indra, the clouds, etc.;
and according to many fables in the Pooranas, the gods are often out on
journeys, expeditions, etc.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 18:28</span></span>

They cried aloud - The poor fools acted as they were bidden.

And cut themselves after their manner - This was done according to the
rites of that barbarous religion; if the blood of the bullock would not
move him they thought their own blood might; and with it they smeared
themselves and their sacrifice. This was not only the custom of the
idolatrous Israelites, but of the Syrians, Persians, Greeks, Indians,
and in short of all the heathen world.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 18:29</span></span>

They prophesied - They made incessant prayer and supplication; a farther
proof that to pray or supplicate is the proper ideal meaning of the word
נבא naba, which we constantly translate to prophesy, when even all the
circumstances of the time and place are against such a meaning. See what
is said on the case of Saul among the prophets, in the note on [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005) (note.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 18:30</span></span>

He repaired the altar of the Lord - There had been an altar of Jehovah
in that place, called, even among the heathens, the altar of Carmel,
probably built in the time of the judges, or, as the rabbins imagine, by
Saul. Tacitus and Suetonius mention an altar on Mount Carmel, which
Vespasian went to consult; there was no temple nor statue, but simply an
altar that was respectable for its antiquity. "Est Judaeam inter
Syriamque Carmelus; ita vocant montem Deumque: nec simulachrum Deo, aut
templum situm tradidere majores: aram tantum, et reverentiam." - Tacit.
Hist. lib. ii., c. 78. A priest named Basilides officiated at that
altar, and assured Vespasian that all his projects would be crowned with
success.

Suetonius speaks to this purpose: "Apud Judaeam Carmeli Dei oraculum
consulentem ita confirmavere sortes, ut quicquid cogitaret volveretque
animo quamlibet magnum, id esse proventurum pollicerentur." Suet. in
Vespas. cap. 5. The mount, the absence of a temple, no image, but a
simple altar, very ancient, and which was held in reverence on account
of the true answers which had been given there, prove that this was
originally the altar of Jehovah: though in the time of Vespasian it
seems to have been occupied by a heathen priest, and devoted to lying
vanities.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 18:31</span></span>

Took twelve stones - He did this to show that all the twelve tribes of
Israel should be joined in the worship of Jehovah.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 18:32</span></span>

He made a trench - This was to detain the water that might fall down
from the altar when the barrels should be poured upon it, [Kg1
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#035.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 18:33</span></span>

Fill four barrels - This was done to prevent any kind of suspicion that
there was fire concealed under the altar. An ancient writer under the
name of Chrysostom, quoted by Calmet, says that he had seen under the
altars of the heathens, holes dug in the earth with funnels proceeding
from them, and communicating with openings on the tops of the altars. In
the former the priests concealed fire, which, communicating through the
funnels with the holes, set fire to the wood and consumed the sacrifice;
and thus the simple people were led to believe that the sacrifice was
consumed by a miraculous fire. Elijah showed that no such knavery could
be practiced in the present case. Had there been a concealed fire under
the altar, as in the case mentioned above, the water that was thrown on
the altar must have extinguished it most effectually. This very
precaution has for ever put this miracle beyond the reach of suspicion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 18:36</span></span>

Lord God of Abraham - He thus addressed the Supreme Being, that they
might know when the answer was given, that it was the same God whom the
patriarchs and their fathers worshipped, and thus have their hearts
turned back again to the true religion of their ancestors.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 18:38</span></span>

Then the fire of the Lord fell - It did not burst out from the altar;
this might still, notwithstanding the water, have afforded some ground
for suspicion that fire had been concealed, after the manner of the
heathens, under the altar.

Pindar's account of the Rhodians' settling is the isle of Rhodes, and
their first sacrifice there, bears a near affinity to the account here
given: the shower of gold descending on the sacrifice offered up without
fire, to show the approbation of their god, is little more than a poetic
account of the above transactions.

Καιτοι γαρ αιθουσας εχοντες

Σπερμ' ανεβαν φλογος ου

Τευξαν δ' απυροις ἱεροις

Αλσος εν ακροπολει· κεινοισι μεν ξαν -

θαν αγαγων νεφελαι·

Πολυν ὑσε χρυσον

Pind. Olymp. Od. 7, ver. 86.

The Rhodians, mindful of their sire's behest,

Straight in the citadel an altar reared;

But with imperfect rites the Power addressed,

And without fire their sacrifice prepared;

Yet Jove, approving, o'er the assembly spread

A yellow cloud, that dropped with golden dews.

West.

Consumed the burnt-sacrifice - The process of this consumption is very
remarkable, and all calculated to remove the possibility of a suspicion
that there was any concealed fire.

1\. The fire came down from heaven.

2\. The pieces of the sacrifice were first consumed.

3\. The wood next, to show that it was not even by means of the wood
that the flesh was burned.

4\. The twelve stones were also consumed, to show that it was no common
fire, but one whose agency nothing could resist.

5\. The dust, the earth of which the altar was constructed, was burned
up.

6\. The water that was in the trench was, by the action of this fire,
entirely evaporated.

7\. The action of this fire was in every case downward, contrary to the
nature of all earthly and material fire. Nothing can be more simple and
artless than this description, yet how amazingly full and satisfactory
is the whole account!

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 18:39</span></span>

Fell on their faces - Struck with awe and reverence at the sight of this
incontestable miracle.

And they said - We should translate the words thus: Jehovah, He is the
God! Jehovah, He is the God! Baal is not the God; Jehovah alone is the
God of Israel.

As our term Lord is very equivocal, we should every where insert the
original word יהוה, which we should write Yeve or Yeheveh, or Yahvah or
Yehueh, or, according to the points, Yehovah.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 18:40</span></span>

Let not one of them escape - They had committed the highest crime
against the state and the people by introducing idolatry, and bringing
down God's judgments upon the land; therefore their lives were forfeited
to that law which had ordered every idolater to be slain. It seems also
that Ahab, who was present, consented to this act of impartial justice.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 18:41</span></span>

Get thee up, eat and drink - It appears most evidently that Ahab and the
prophet were now on good terms, and this is a farther evidence that the
slaying of the false prophets was by the king's consent.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 18:42</span></span>

Put his face between his knees - He kneeled down, and then bowed his
head to the earth, so that, while his face was between his knees, his
forehead touched the ground.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg1 18:43</span></span>

Look toward the sea - From the top of Mount Carmel the Mediterranean Sea
was full in view.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">kg1 18:44</span></span>

There ariseth a little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand. - ככף
איש kechaph ish, like the hollow of a man's hand. In the form of the
hand bent, the concave side downmost. I have witnessed a resemblance of
this kind at sea previously to a violent storm, a little cloud the size
of a man's hand first appearing, and this increasing in size and density
every moment, till at last it covered the whole heavens, and then burst
forth with incredible fury.

Mr. Bruce mentions a similar appearance in Abyssinia: -

"Every morning, in Abyssinia, is clear, and the sun shines. About nine a
small cloud, not above four hundred feet broad, appears in the east,
whirling violently round, as if upon an axis; but arrived near the
zenith, it first abates its motion, then loses its form, and extends
itself greatly, and seems to call up vapours from all opposite quarters.
These clouds, having attained nearly the same height, rush against each
other with great violence, and put me always in mind of Elijah
foretelling rain on Mount Carmel."

\- Travels, vol. v., page 336, edit. 1806.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">kg1 18:46</span></span>

Ran before Ahab - Many think that Elijah ran before the king in order to
do him honor; and much learned labor has been spent on this passage in
order to show that Elijah had put himself at the head of a company of
chanters who ran before the king reciting his praises, or the praises of
God; a custom which still exists in Arabian countries! I believe all
these entirely mistake the writer's meaning: Ahab yoked his chariot, and
made all speed to Jezreel. The hand of the Lord, or, as the Targum says,
the spirit of strength, came upon Elijah, and he girded up his loins,
that is, tucked up his long garments in his girdle, and ran; and
notwithstanding the advantage the king had by means of his chariot, the
prophet reached Jezreel before him. There is no intimation here that he
ran before the horses' heads. All this was intended to show that he was
under the peculiar influence and inspiration of the Almighty, that the
king might respect and fear him, and not do or permit to be done to him
any kind of outrage.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](kg1019.md)

</div>
