<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2014)  [Next](kg2016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 15:0</span></span>

Azariah begins to reign over Judah, and acts well, but does not remove
the high places, [Kg2 15:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001). He
becomes leprous, and dies, after having reigned fifty-two years; and
Jotham, his son, reigns in his stead, [Kg2
15:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#005). Zachariah reigns over Israel,
and acts wickedly; and Shallum conspires against him and slays him,
after he had reigned six months, [Kg2
15:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008). Shallum reigns one month, and
is slain by Menahem, [Kg2 15:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013).
Menahem's wicked and oppressive reign; he subsidizes the king of
Assyria, and dies, after having reigned ten years, [Kg2
15:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016). Pekahiah, his son, reigns in
his stead; does wickedly; Pekah, one of his captains, conspires against
and kills him, after he had reigned two years, [Kg2
15:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#023). Pekah reigns in his stead,
and acts wickedly, [Kg2 15:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#027).
Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria, carries into captivity the inhabitants
of many cities, [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029). Hoshea
conspires against and slays Pekah, after he had reigned twenty years;
and reigns in his stead, [Kg2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030),
[Kg2 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#031). Jotham beans to reign over
Judah; he reigns well; dies after a reign of sixteen years, and is
succeeded by his son Ahaz, [Kg2
15:32-38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 15:1</span></span>

In the twenty and seventh year of Jeroboam - Dr. Kennicott complains
loudly here, because of "the corruption in the name of this king of
Judah, who is expressed by four different names in this chapter: Ozriah,
Oziah, Ozrihu, and Ozihu. Our oldest Hebrew MS. relieves us here by
reading truly, in [Kg2 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001), [Kg2
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#006), [Kg2
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#007), עזיהו Uzziah, where the printed
text is differently corrupted. This reading is called true,

1\. Because it is supported by the Syriac and Arabic versions in these
three verses.

2\. Because the printed text itself has it so in [Kg2
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032), [Kg2
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#034) of this very chapter.

3\. Because it is so expressed in the parallel place in Chronicles; and,

4\. Because it is not Αζαριας, Azariah, but Οζιας, Oziah, (Uzziah), in
St. Matthew's genealogy."

There are insuperable difficulties in the chronology of this place. The
marginal note says, "This is the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam's
partnership in the kingdom with his father, who made him consort at his
going to the Syrian wars. It is the sixteenth year of Jeroboam's
monarchy." Dr. Lightfoot endeavors to reconcile this place with [Kg2
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#016), [Kg2
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017), thus: "At the death of Amaziah,
his son and heir Uzziah was but four years old, for he was about sixteen
in Jeroboam's twenty-seventh year; therefore, the throne must have been
empty eleven years, and the government administered by protectors while
Uzziah was in his minority." Learned men are not agreed concerning the
mode of reconciling these differences; there is probably some mistake in
the numbers. I must say to all the contending chronologers: -

Non nostrum inter vos tantas componere lites.

When such men disagree, I can't decide.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 15:3</span></span>

He did that which was right - It is said, [Ch2
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#005), that he sought the Lord in the
days of Zechariah the prophet, and God made him to prosper; that he
fought against the Philistines; broke down the walls of Gath, Jabneh,
and Ashdod; prevailed over the Arabians and Mehunims; and that the
Ammonites paid him tribute; and his dominion extended abroad, even to
the entering in of Egypt; that he built towers in Jerusalem, at the
corner gate, valley gate, and turning of the wall; and built towers also
in the desert, and digged many wells; that he had a very strong and
well-regulated military force, which he provided with a well-stocked
arsenal; and constructed many military engines to shoot arrows and
project great stones; and that his fame was universally spread abroad.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 15:5</span></span>

The Lord smote the king, so that he was a leper - The reason of this
plague is well told in the above quoted chapter, [Ch2
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#016).

That his heart being elated, he went into the temple to burn incense
upon the altar, assuming to himself the functions of the high priest;
that Azariah the priest, with fourscore others, went in after him, to
prevent him; and that while they were remonstrating against his conduct,
the Lord struck him with the leprosy, which immediately appeared on his
forehead; that they thrust him out as an unclean person; and that he
himself hurried to get out, feeling that the Lord had smitten him; that
he was obliged to dwell in a house by himself, being leprous, to the day
of his death; and that during this time the affairs of the kingdom were
administered by his son Jotham. A poet, ridiculing the conduct of those
who, without an episcopal ordination, think they have authority from God
to dispense all the ordinances of the Church, expresses himself thus: -

But now the warm enthusiast cries,

The office to myself I take;

Offering the Christian sacrifice,

Myself a lawful priest I make:

To me this honor appertains,

No need of man when God ordains.

\[Some go into the contrary extreme, and in effect say, no need of God
when Man ordains.\]

Though kings may not so far presume,

'Tis no presumption in a clown,

And, lo, without a call from Rome,

My flail or hammer I lay down;

And if my order's name ye seek,

Come, see a new Melchisedek!

Ye upstart (men-made) priests, your sentence know,

The marks you can no longer hide;

Your daring deeds too plainly show

The loathsome leprosy of pride;

And if ye still your crime deny,

Who lepers live shall lepers die.

Charles Wesley.

This is very severe, but applies to every man who, through pride,
presumption, or the desire of gain, enters into the priest's office,
though he have the utmost authority that the highest ecclesiastical
officer can confer.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 15:10</span></span>

Smote him before the people - In some public assembly: he probably
became very unpopular.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 15:12</span></span>

This was the word of the Lord - unto Jehu - God had promised to Jehu
that his sons should sit on the throne of Israel to the fourth
generation; and so it came to pass, for Jehoahaz, Joash, Jeroboam, and
Zachariah, succeeded Jehu, to whom this promise was made. But because he
executed the Divine purpose with an uncommanded cruelty, therefore God
cut his family short, according to his word by Hosea, I will avenge the
blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu; and I will cause to cease the
kingdom of the house of Israel, [Hos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 15:13</span></span>

He reigned a full month - Menahem is supposed to have been one of
Zachariah's generals. Hearing of the death of his master, when he was
with the troops at Tirzah, he hastened to Samaria, and slew the
murderer, and had himself proclaimed in his stead. But, as the people of
Tiphsah did not open their gates to him, he took the place by assault;
and as the text tells us, practiced the most cruel barbarities, even
ripping up the women that were with child!

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 15:19</span></span>

Pul, the king of Assyria - This is the first time we hear of Assyria
since the days of Nimrod, its founder, [Gen
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011).

Dean Prideaux supposes that this Pul was father of the famous
Sardanapalus, the son himself being called Sardan; to which, as was
frequent in those times, the father's name, Pul, was added, making
Sardanpul of which the Greeks and Latins made Sardanapalus; and this Pul
is supposed to be the same that reigned in Nineveh when Jonah preached
the terrors of the Lord to that city.

That his hand - That is, his power and influence, might be with him: in
this sense is the word hand frequently used in Scripture.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 15:20</span></span>

Each man fifty shekels of silver - Upwards of five pounds sterling a
man.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 15:21</span></span>

Are they not written in - the chronicles - There are no chronicles
extant, in which there is any thing farther relative to this king.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 15:25</span></span>

Smote him in Samaria, in the palace of the king's house, with Argob and
Arieh - Who Argob and Arieh were we know not; some make them men, some
make them statues. Pekah had fifty Gileadites in the conspiracy with
him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 15:29</span></span>

Came Tiglath-pileser - He is supposed to have been the successor of
Sardanapalus: Dean Prideaux makes him the same with Arbaces, called by
Aelian Thilgamus, and by Usher Ninus junior; who, together with Belesis,
headed the conspiracy against Sardanapalus, and fixed his seat at
Nineveh, the ancient residence of the Assyrian kings; as did Belesis,
who is called, in [Isa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001), Baladan,
fix his at Babylon.

Took Ijon - These places belonged to Israel; and were taken by
Ben-hadad, king of Syria, when he was in league with Asa, king of Judah.
See [Kg1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#020). They were regained by
Jeroboam the second; and now they are taken from Israel once more by
Tiglath-pileser. From [Ch1 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#026), we
learn that Pul and Tiglath-pileser, kings of Assyria, carried away into
captivity the two tribes of Reuben, and Gad, and the half tribe of
Manasseh; all that belonged to Israel, on the other side of Jordan.
These were never restored to Israel.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 15:30</span></span>

Hoshea the son of Elah - in the twentieth year of Jotham - There are
many difficulties in the chronology of this place. To reconcile the
whole, Calmet says: "Hoshea conspired against Pekah, the twentieth year
of the reign of this prince, which was the eighteenth after the
beginning of the reign of Jotham, king of Judah. Two years after this,
that is, the fourth year of Ahaz, and the twentieth of Jotham, Hoshea
made himself master of a part of the kingdom, according to [Kg2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030). Finally, the twelfth year of
Ahaz, Hoshea had peaceable possession of the whole kingdom, according to
[Kg2 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001)."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg2 15:36</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Jotham - These acts are distinctly stated in
[Ch2 27:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001). He built the high gate of
the house of the Lord, and he built much on the wall of Ophel. He built
cities in the mountains of Judah; and in the forests he built castles
and towers. He overthrew the Ammonites; and obliged them to give him one
hundred talents of silver, ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten
thousand of barley, for three consecutive years. He was twenty-five
years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years. These
are the particulars which we learn from the place in Chronicles quoted
above; few of which are mentioned in this place. As to the higher gate
of the house of the Lord, commentators are not well agreed: some think
it was a gate which he then made, and which did not exist before, and is
the same that is called the new gate, [Jer
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#010), which is very likely.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg2 15:37</span></span>

In those days the Lord began to send - It was about this time that the
Assyrian wars, so ruinous to the Jews, began; but it was in the
following reigns that they arrived at their highest pitch of disaster to
those unfaithful and unfortunate people. However much we may blame the
Jews for their disobedience and obstinacy, yet we cannot help feeling
for them under their severe afflictions. Grievously they have sinned,
and grievously have they suffered for it. And if they be still objects
of God's judgments, there is revelation to believe that they will yet be
objects of God's goodness. Many think the signs of the times are
favorable to this ingathering; but there is no evidence among the people
themselves that the day of their redemption is at hand. They do not
humble themselves; they do not seek the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 16](kg2016)

</div>
