<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2021)  [Next](kg2023.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 22:0</span></span>

Josiah succeeds Amon his father, and reigns thirty-one years, [Kg2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001.md), [Kg2
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#002.md). He repairs the breaches of the
temple, [Kg2 22:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003.md). Hilkiah finds the
book of the law in the temple, [Kg2
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008.md). It is read by Shaphan the
scribe, before the king and his servants, [Kg2
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#009.md), [Kg2
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#010.md). The king, greatly affected,
sends to inquire of Huldah the prophetess, [Kg2
22:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#011.md). She delivers an afflictive
prophecy concerning the evils that were coming upon the land, [Kg2
22:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014.md). But promises Josiah that
these evils shall not come in his time, [Kg2
22:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#018.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 22:1</span></span>

Josiah was eight years old - He was one of the best, if not the best, of
all the Jewish kings since the time of David. He began well, continued
well, and ended well.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 22:4</span></span>

That he may sum the silver - As Josiah began to seek the Lord as soon as
he began to reign, we may naturally conclude that the worship of God
that was neglected and suppressed by his father, was immediately
restored; and the people began their accustomed offerings to the temple.
Ten years therefore had elapsed since these offerings began; no one had,
as yet, taken account of them; nor were they applied to the use for
which they were given, viz., the repairing the breaches of the temple.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 22:8</span></span>

I have found the book of the law - Was this the autograph of Moses? It
is very probable that it was, for in the parallel place; [Ch2
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014.md), it is said to be the book of
the law of the Lord by Moses. It is supposed to be that part of
Deuteronomy (28, 29, 30, and 31), which contains the renewing of the
covenant in the plains of Moab, and which contains the most terrible
invectives against the corrupters of God's word and worship.

The rabbins say that Ahaz, Manasseh, and Amon endeavored to destroy all
the copies of the law, and this only was saved by having been buried
under a paving-stone. It is scarcely reasonable to suppose that this was
the only copy of the law that was found in Judea; for even if we grant
that Ahaz, Manasseh, and Amon had endeavored to destroy all the books of
the law, yet they could not have succeeded so as to destroy the whole.
Besides, Manasseh endeavored after his conversion to restore every part
of the Divine worship, and in this he could have done nothing without
the Pentateuch; and the succeeding reign of Amon was too short to give
him opportunity to undo every thing that his penitent father had
reformed. Add to all these considerations, that in the time of
Jehoshaphat teaching from the law was universal in the land, for he set
on foot an itinerant ministry, in order to instruct the people fully:
for "he sent to his princes to teach in the cities of Judah; and with
them he sent Levites and priests; and they went about through all the
cities of Judah, and taught the people, having the book of the Lord with
them;" see [Ch2 17:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007.md). And if there
be any thing wanting to show the improbability of the thing, it must be
this, that the transactions mentioned here took place in the eighteenth
year of the reign of Josiah, who had, from the time he came to the
throne, employed himself in the restoration of the pure worship of God;
and it is not likely that during these eighteen years he was without a
copy of the Pentateuch. The simple fact seems to be this, that this was
the original of the covenant renewed by Moses with the people in the
plains of Moab, and which he ordered to be laid up beside the ark; ([Deu
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026).md); and now being unexpectedly
found, its antiquity, the occasion of its being made, the present
circumstances of the people, the imperfect state in which the
reformation was as yet, after all that had been done, would all concur
to produce the effect here mentioned on the mind of the pious Josiah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 22:14</span></span>

Went unto Huldah the prophetess - This is a most singular circumstance:
At this time Jeremiah was certainly a prophet in Israel, but it is
likely he now dwelt at Anathoth and could not be readily consulted;
Zephaniah also prophesied under this reign, but probably he had not yet
begun; Hilkiah was high priest, and the priest's lips should retain
knowledge. Shaphan was scribe, and must have been conversant in sacred
affairs to have been at all fit for his office; and yet Huldah, a
prophetess, of whom we know nothing but by this circumstance, is
consulted on the meaning of the book of the law; for the secret of the
Lord was neither with Hilkiah the high priest, Shaphan the scribe, nor
any other of the servants of the king, or ministers of the temple! We
find from this, and we have many facts in all ages to corroborate it,
that a pontiff, a pope, a bishop, or a priest, may, in some cases, not
possess the true knowledge of God; and that a simple woman, possessing
the life of God in her soul, may have more knowledge of the Divine
testimonies than many of those whose office it is to explain and enforce
them.

On this subject Dr. Priestley in his note makes the following very
judicious remark: -

"It pleased God to distinguish several women with the spirit of
prophecy, as well as other great attainments, to show that in his sight,
and especially in things of a spiritual nature, there is no essential
pre-eminence in the male sex, though in some things the female be
subject to the male."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 22:17</span></span>

My wrath shall be kindled - The decree is gone forth; Jerusalem shall be
delivered into the hands of its enemies; the people will revolt more and
more; towards them longsuffering is useless; the wrath of God is
kindled, and shall not be quenched. This was a dreadful message.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 22:19</span></span>

Because thine heart was tender - Because thou hast feared the Lord, and
trembled at his word and hast wept before me, I have heard thee, so far
that these evils shall not come upon the land in thy lifetime.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 22:20</span></span>

Thou shalt be gathered into thy grave in peace - During thy life none of
these calamities shall fall upon the people, and no adversary shall be
permitted to disturb the peace of Judea, and thou shalt die in peace
with God. But was Josiah gathered to the grave in peace? Is it not said,
[Kg2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029.md), that Pharaoh-nechoh slew
him at Megiddo? On this we may remark, that the Assyrians and the Jews
were at peace; that Josiah might feel it his duty to oppose the Egyptian
king going against his friend and ally, and endeavor to prevent him from
passing through his territories; and that in his endeavors to oppose him
he was mortally wounded at Megiddo: but certainly was not killed there;
for his servants put him in his second chariot and brought him to
Jerusalem, where he died in peace. See [Ch2
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024.md). So that, however we take the
place here, we shall find that the words of Huldah were true: he did die
in peace, and was gathered to his fathers in peace.

From the account in the above chapter, where we have this business
detailed, we find that Josiah should not have meddled in the quarrel
between the Egyptian and the Assyrian kings, for God had given a
commission to the former against the latter; but he did it in error, and
suffered for it. But this unfortunate end of this pious man does not at
all impeach the credit of Huldah; he died in peace in his own kingdom.
He died in peace with God, and there was neither war nor desolation in
his land: nor did the king of Egypt proceed any farther against the Jews
during his life; for he said, "What have I to do with thee, thou king of
Judah? I come not against thee, but the house wherewith I have war; for
God commanded me to make haste: forbear then from meddling with God, who
is with me, that he destroy thee not. Nevertheless, Josiah would not
turn his face from him, and hearkened not to the words of Nechoh, from
the mouth of God. And the archers shot at King Josiah: and the king
said, Bear me away, for I am sore wounded. And his servants took him out
of that chariot, and put him in the second chariot, and they brought him
to Jerusalem, and he died and was buried in the sepulcher of his
fathers;" [Ch2 35:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#021.md).

It seems as if the Egyptian king had brought his troops by sea to
Caesarea, and wished to cross the Jordan about the southern point of the
sea of Tiberias, that he might get as speedily as possible into the
Assyrian dependencies; and that he took this road, for God, as he said,
had commanded him to make haste.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 23](kg2023.md)

</div>
