<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg1022)  [Next](kg2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Second Book of the KingsOtherwise Called the Fourth Book
of the Kings

In the preface to the First Book of Kings, I have spoken at large
concerning both these books, the author, time of writing, etc., etc., to
which I must refer my readers, as that preface is common to both.

The Second Book of Kings contains the history of three hundred and eight
years, from the rebellion of Moab, A.M. 3108, to the ruin of the kingdom
of Judah, A.M. 3416.

The history, on the whole, exhibits little less than a series of crimes,
disasters, Divine benefits, and Divine judgments. In the kingdom of
Judah we meet with a few kings who feared God, and promoted the
interests of pure religion in the land; but the major part were
idolaters and profligates of the highest order.

The kingdom of Israel was still more corrupt: all its kings were
determined idolaters; profligate, vicious, and cruel tyrants. Elijah and
Elisha stood up in the behalf of God and truth in this fallen,
idolatrous kingdom, and bore a strong testimony against the corruptions
of the princes, and the profligacy of the people: their powerful
ministry was confined to the ten tribes; Judah had its own prophets, and
those in considerable number.

At length the avenging hand of God fell first upon Israel, and
afterwards upon Judah. Israel after many convulsions, torn by domestic
and foreign wars, was at length wholly subjugated by the king of
Assyria, the people led away into captivity, and the land re-peopled by
strangers, A.M. 3287.

The kingdom of Judah continued some time longer, but was at last
overthrown by Nebuchadnezzar; Zedekiah, its last king, was taken
prisoner; his eyes put out; and the principal part of the people were
carried into captivity, which lasted about seventy years. The captivity
began under Jehoiakim, A.M. 3402, and ended under Belshazzar, A.M. 2470
or 3472. There was after this a partial restoration of the Jews, but
they never more rose to any consequence among the nations; and at last
their civil polity was finally dissolved by the Romans, and their temple
burnt, a.d. 70; and from that time until now they became fugitives and
vagabonds over the face of the earth, universally detested by mankind.
But should they not be loved for their fathers' sake? Are they not men
and brothers? Will persecution and contempt convert them to
Christianity, or to any thing that is good?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 1](kg2001.md)

</div>
