<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2000)  [Next](kg2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

Ahaziah, being hurt by a fall, sends messengers to Baal-zebub to inquire
whether he shall recover, [Kg2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001),
[Kg2 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002). They are met by Elijah, who
sends them back with the information that he shall surely die, [Kg2
1:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#003). The king sends a captain and
fifty men, to bring Elijah to Samaria, on which fire comes down from
heaven, and destroys both him and his men, [Kg2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#009), [Kg2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#010). Another captain and fifty men
are sent, who are likewise destroyed, [Kg2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#011), [Kg2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#012). A third is sent, who behaves
himself humbly, and Elijah is commanded to accompany him; he obeys,
comes to the king, reproves his idolatry, and announces his death, [Kg2
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#013). Ahaziah dies and Jehoram
reigns in his stead, [Kg2 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#017), [Kg2
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#018).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 1:1</span></span>

Moab rebelled - The Moabites had been subdued by David, and laid under
tribute, [Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004), and [Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002). After the division of the two
kingdoms, the Moabites fell partly under the dominion of Israel, and
partly under that of Judah, until the death of Ahab, when they arose and
shook off this yoke. Jehoram confederated with the king of Judah and the
king of Edom, in order to reduce them. See this war, [Kg2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#005).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 1:2</span></span>

Fell down through a lattice - Perhaps either through the flat root of
his house, or over or through the balustrades with which the roof was
surrounded.

Go, inquire of Baal-zebub - Literally, the fly-god, or master of flies.
The Septuagint has βααλ μυιαν, Baal the fly. He was the tutelary god of
Ekron, and probably was used at first as a kind of telesm, to drive away
flies. He became afterwards a very respectable devil, and was supposed
to have great power and influence. In the New Testament Beelzebub is a
common name for Satan himself, or the prince of devils. See my notes on
[Mat 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025) (note).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 1:4</span></span>

But shalt surely die - The true God tells you this; he in whose hands
are both life and death, who can kill and make alive. Baal-zebub can do
nothing; God has determined that your master shall die.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 1:8</span></span>

He was a hairy man - That is, he wore a rough garment, either made of
camels' hair, as his successor John Baptist's was, or he wore a skin
dressed with the hair on. Some think that the meaning is, he had very
long hair and a long beard. The ancient prophets all wore rough
garments, or upper coats made of the skins of beasts: They wandered
about in sheep-skins and goat-skins, says the apostle, [Heb
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 1:9</span></span>

A captain of fifty with his fifty - It is impossible that such a man as
Ahaziah, in such circumstances, could have had any friendly designs in
sending a captain and fifty soldiers for the prophet; and the manner in
which they are treated shows plainly that they went with a hostile
intent.

And he spake unto him, Thou man of God - Thou prophet of the Most High.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 1:10</span></span>

And there came down fire - Some have blamed the prophet for destroying
these men, by bringing down fire from heaven upon them. But they do not
consider that it was no more possible for Elijah to bring down fire from
heaven, than for them to do it. God alone could send the fire; and as he
is just and good, he would not have destroyed these men had there not
been a sufficient cause to justify the act. It was not to please Elijah,
or to gratify any vindictive humor in him, that God thus acted; but to
show his own power and justice. No entreaty of Elijah could have induced
God to have performed an act that was wrong in itself. Elijah,
personally, had no concern in the business. God led him simply to
announce on these occasions what he himself had determined to do. If I
be a man of God, i.e., as surely as I am a man of God, fire Shall come
down from heaven, and Shall consume thee and thy fifty. This is the
literal meaning of the original; and by it we see that Elijah's words
were only declarative, and not imprecatory.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 1:15</span></span>

And the angel of the Lord said - Go down with him - This is an
additional proof that Elijah was then acting under particular
inspirations: he had neither will nor design of his own. He waited to
know the counsel, declare the will, and obey the command, of his God.

And he arose, and went down - He did not even regard his personal safety
or his life; he goes without the least hesitation to the king, though he
had reason to suppose he would be doubly irritated by his prediction,
and the death of one hundred of his men. But with all these consequences
he had nothing to do; he was the ambassador of the King eternal, and his
honor and life were in the hands of his Master.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 1:17</span></span>

And Jehoram reigned in his stead - The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Syriac
say, Jehoram His Brother reigned in his stead, in the second year of
Jehoram. There were two Jehorams who were contemporary: the first, the
son of Ahab, brother to Ahaziah, and his successor in the kingdom of
Israel; the second, the son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah, who succeeded
his father in Judah. But there is a difficulty here: "How is it that
Jehoram the brother of Ahaziah began to reign in the second year of
Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat, seeing that, according to [Kg2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001), he began his reign in the
eighteenth year of the reign of Jehoshaphat; and, according to [Kg2
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#016), Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat began
to reign in the fifth year of Jehoram king of Israel?" Calmet and others
answer thus: "Jehoram king of Israel began to reign in the eighteenth
year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, which was the second year after this
same Jehoshaphat had given the viceroyalty to his son Jehoram; and
afterwards Jehoshaphat communicated the royalty to Jehoram his
successor, two years before his death, and the fifth year of Jehoram,
king of Israel." Dr. Lightfoot takes another method: -

"Observe," says he, "these texts, [Kg1
22:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#051) : Ahaziah the son of Ahab began
to reign over Israel in Samaria the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king
of Judah, and reigned two years; and [Kg2
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#017) : And Ahaziah died according to
the word of the Lord which Elijah had spoken, and Jehoram reigned in his
stead, in the second gear of Jehoram son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah;
and [Kg2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001) : Now Jehoram the son of
Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the eighteenth year of
Jehoshaphat king of Judah. By these scriptures it is most plain, that
both Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat, and Ahaziah the son of Ahab, began
to reign in the seventeenth of Jehoshaphat; for who sees not in these
texts that Jehoshaphat's eighteenth, when Jehoram the son of Ahab began
to reign, is called the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat?
Now Jehoshaphat's reign was not yet expired by eight or nine years, for
this was in his seventeenth year, and he reigned twenty-five years, [Kg1
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#042); nor was Ahab's reign expired by
two or three years, for this was in his twentieth year, and he reigned
twenty-two years. [Kg1 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#029). But the
reason why both their sons came thus into their thrones in their
lifetime, and both in the same year, was because their fathers,
Jehoshaphat and Ahab, were both engaged in the war against the Syrians
about Ramoth-gilead: and while they were providing for it, and carrying
it on, they made their sons viceroys, and set them to reign in their
stead, while they were absent or employed upon that expedition."

This is very probable, and seems well supported by the above texts, and
would solve all the difficulties with which many have been puzzled and
not a few stumbled, had we sufficient evidence for the viceroyalty here
mentioned.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 2](kg2002)

</div>
