<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Lamentations Index](lam.md)  
  [Previous](lam003)  [Next](lam005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001.md)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 4:0</span></span>

The present deplorable sate of the nation is now contrasted with its
ancient prosperity, [Lam 4:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001.md); and
the unhappy change ascribed, in a great degree, to the profligacy of the
priests and prophets, [Lam 4:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013.md).
The national calamities are tenderly lamented, [Lam
4:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#017.md). The ruin of the Edomites
also, who had insulted the Jews in their distress, is ironically
predicted, [Lam 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021.md). See [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007.md), and [Oba
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010.md). The chapter closes with a
gracious promise of deliverance from the Babylonish captivity, [Lam
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#022.md).

[Lamentations 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 4:1</span></span>

How is the gold become dim - The prophet contrasts, in various affecting
instances, the wretched circumstances of the Jewish nation, with the
flourishing state of their affairs in former times. Here they are
compared to gold, זהב zahab, native gold from the mine, which, contrary
to its nature, is become dim, is tarnished; and even the fine, the
sterling gold, כתם kethem, that which was stamped to make it current, is
changed or adulterated, so as to be no longer passable. This might be
applied to the temple, but particularly to the fallen priests and
apostate prophets.

The stones of the sanctuary - אבני קדש abney kodesh, the holy stones;
the Jewish godly men, who were even then the living stones of which God
built his Church.

[Lamentations 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lam 4:2</span></span>

The precious sons of Zion - The Jewish priests and Jewish believers.

Comparable to fine gold - Who were of the pure standard of holiness;
holy, because God who called them is holy; but now esteemed no better
than earthen pitchers - vessels of dishonor in comparison of what they
once were.

[Lamentations 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lam 4:3</span></span>

Even the sea monsters draw out the breast - The whales give suck to
their young ones. The word תנין tannin, signifies all large and cruel
creatures, whether aquatic or terrestrial; and need not here be
restrained to the former sort. My Old MS. Bible translates curiously:
Not and the cruel bestis that ben clepid Lamya, and thei nakeden ther
tetis, geve ther whelpis souken.

Like the ostriches in the wilderness - For her carelessness about her
eggs, and her inattention to her young, the ostrich is proverbial.

[Lamentations 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lam 4:4</span></span>

The tongue of the sucking child - See the note on [Lam
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#012) (note.md).

[Lamentations 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lam 4:5</span></span>

Embrace dunghills - Lie on straw or rubbish, instead of the costly
carpets and sofas on which they formerly stretched themselves.

[Lamentations 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lam 4:6</span></span>

For the punishment - He thinks the punishment of Jerusalem far greater
than that of Sodom. That was destroyed in a moment while all her
inhabitants were in health and strength; Jerusalem fell by the most
lingering calamities; her men partly destroyed by the sword, and partly
by the famine.

Instead of no hands stayed on her, Blayney translates, "Nor were hands
weakened in her." Perhaps the meaning is, "Sodom was destroyed in a
moment without any human labor." It was a judgment from God himself: so
the sacred text: "The Lord rained down fire and brimstone from the Lord
out of heaven." See [Gen 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024.md).

[Lamentations 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lam 4:7</span></span>

Her Nazarites were purer than snow - נזיר nazir does not always signify
a person separated under a religious vow; it sometimes denotes what is
chief or eminent. It is applied to Joseph, [Gen
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026.md).

Blayney therefore translates here, Her Nobles.

"Her nobles were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk;

They were ruddier on the bone than rubies; their veining was the
sapphires."

On which he remarks: - "In the first line the whiteness of their skin is
described, and in the second, their flesh;" and as גזר gazar signifies
to divide and intersect, as the blue veins do on the surface of the
body, these are without doubt intended.

Milk will most certainly well apply to the whiteness of the skin; the
beautiful ruby to the ruddiness of the flesh; and the sapphire, in its
clear transcendent purple, to the veins in a fine complexion. The
reverse of this state, as described in the following verse, needs no
explanation. The face was a dismal dark brown, the flesh gone, the skin
shrivelled, and apparently wrapped round the bones.

[Lamentations 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lam 4:10</span></span>

The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children - See on
[Lam 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#020) (note.md). But here there is a
reference to mothers eating their own children; and this was done, not
by mothers cruel and brutal, but by נשים רחמניות nashim rachmaniyoth,
the compassionate, the tender-hearted mothers. From these horrible
scenes it is well to pass with as hasty a step as possible.

[Lamentations 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lam 4:12</span></span>

The kings of the earth - Jerusalem was so well fortified, both by nature
and art, that it appeared as a miracle that it should be taken at all.

[Lamentations 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lam 4:13</span></span>

For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests - These
most wretched beings, under the pretense of zeal for the true religion,
persecuted the genuine prophets, priests, and people of God, and caused
their blood to be shed in the midst of the city, in the most open and
public manner; exactly as the murderous priests, and blood-thirsty
preachers, under the reign of bloody Queen Mary, did in England.
However, the profligate priests and idolatrous prophets in Jerusalem,
only shed the blood of the saints of God there: but the sanguinary
papists, in the above reign, burnt the blood here, for they burnt the
people alive; and at the same time, in their worse than Molochean
cruelty, consigned, with all the fervor peculiar to their then ruthless
Church, the souls of those whom they thus massacred, to the bitter pains
of eternal death! O earth, cover not thou their blood!

[Lamentations 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lam 4:14</span></span>

They have wandered as blind men in the streets - Rather, "They ran
frantic through the streets, they were stained with blood." This was in
their pretended zeal for their cause. Bishop Bonner, who was at the head
of those sanguinary executions in England, was accustomed to buffet the
poor Protestants, when on their examinations they were too powerful for
him in argument: -

"He proved his doctrine orthodox,

By apostolic blows and knocks."

Just as his elder brethren, the false priests and prophets of Jerusalem.

[Lamentations 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lam 4:15</span></span>

When they fled away - These priests and prophets were so bad, that the
very heathen did not like to permit them to sojourn among them. The
prophet now resumes the history of the siege.

[Lamentations 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lam 4:17</span></span>

We have watched for a nation - Viz., the Egyptians, who were their
pretended allies, but were neither able nor wilting to help them against
the Chaldeans.

[Lamentations 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lam 4:18</span></span>

We cannot go in our streets - Supposed to refer to the darts and other
missiles cast from the mounds which they had raised on the outside of
the walls, by which those who walked in the streets were grievously
annoyed, and could not shield themselves.

[Lamentations 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lam 4:19</span></span>

They pursued us upon the mountains - They hunted down the poor Jews like
wild beasts in every part of the country by their marauding parties,
whilst the great army besieged Jerusalem. But this may apply to the
pursuit of Zedekiah. See what follows.

[Lamentations 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lam 4:20</span></span>

The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord - That is, Zedekiah
the king, who was as the life or the city, was taken in his flight by
the Chaldeans, and his eyes were put out; so that he was wholly unfit to
perform any function of government; though they had fondly hoped that if
they surrendered and should be led captives, yet they should be
permitted to live under their own laws and king in the land of their
bondage.

[Lamentations 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lam 4:21</span></span>

Rejoice and be Lad, O daughter of Edom - A strong irony.

The cup also shall pass through unto thee - Thou who hast triumphed in
our disasters shalt shortly have enough of thy own. They had joined
themselves to the Chaldeans, (see [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007).md), and therefore they should
share in the desolations of Babylon.

[Lamentations 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lam 4:22</span></span>

The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion -
On the contrary: Rejoice, O Jerusalem, for thy captivity will soon end;
thy sufferings are nearly completed; thou shalt soon return to thy own
land: but he will visit thy iniquity, O Edom; he will discover thy sins.
When sin is pardoned it is said to be covered: here, God says he will
not cover the sins of Edom - he will not pardon them; they shall drink
the cup of wrath.

The promise in this last verse may refer to Jerusalem under the Gospel.
When they receive Christ crucified, they shall be gathered from all
nations, become one with the Church among the Gentiles, be one flock
under one and the same Shepherd, and shall be carried no more into
captivity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 5](lam005.md)

</div>
