<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Lamentations Index](lam.md)  
  [Previous](lam000)  [Next](lam002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)

The prophet begins with lamenting the dismal reverse of fortune that
befell his country, confessing at the same time that her calamities were
the just consequence of her sins, [Lam
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md). Jerusalem herself is then
personified and brought forward to continue the sad complaint, and to
solicit the mercy of God, vv. 7-22.

In all copies of the Septuagint, whether of the Roman or Alexandrian
editions, the following words are found as a part of the text: Και
εγενετο μετα το αιχμαλωτισθηναι τον Ισραηλ, και Ιερουσαλημ ερημωθηναι,
εκαθισεν Ιερεμιας κλαιων, και εθρηνησεν τον θρηνον τουτον επι
Ιερουσαλημ, και ειπεν· - And it came to pass after Israel had been
carried away captive, and Jerusalem was become desolate, that Jeremiah
sat weeping: and he lamented with this lamentation over Jerusalem; and
he said."

The Vulgate has the same, with some variations: - "Et factum est,
postquam in captivitatem redactus est Israel, et Jerusalem deserta est,
sedit Jeremias propheta fiens, et planxit lamentations hac in Jerusalem,
et amaro animo suspirans et ejulans, digit." The translation of this, as
given in the first translation of the Bible into English, may be found
at the end of Jeremiah, taken from an ancient MS. in my own possession.

I subjoin another taken from the first Printed edition of the English
Bible, that by Coverdale, 1535. "And it came to passe, (after Israel was
brought into captyvitie, and Jerusalem destroyed); that Jeremy the
prophet sat weeping, mournynge, and makinge his mone in Jerusalem; so
that with an hevy herte he sighed and sobbed, sayenge."

Matthew's Bible, printed in 1549, refines upon this: "It happened after
Israell was brought into captyvite, and Jerusalem destroyed, that Jeremy
the prophet sate wepyng, and sorrowfully bewayled Jerusalem; and
syghynge and hewlynge with an hevy and wooful hert, sayde."

Becke's Bible of the same date, and Cardmarden's of 1566, have the same,
with a trifling change in the orthography.

On this Becke and others have the following note: - "These words are
read in the lxx. interpreters: but not in the Hebrue."

All these show that it was the ancient opinion that the Book of
Lamentations was composed, not over the death of Josiah, but on account
of the desolations of Israel and Jerusalem.

The Arabic copies the Septuagint. The Syriac does not acknowledge it;
and the Chaldee has these words only: "Jeremiah the great priest and
prophet said."

[Lamentations 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 1:1</span></span>

How doth the city sit solitary - Sitting down, with the elbow on the
knee, and the head supported by the hand, without any company, unless an
oppressor near, - all these were signs of mourning and distress. The
coin struck by Vespasian on the capture of Jerusalem, on the obverse of
which there is a palm-tree, the emblem of Judea, and under it a woman,
the emblem of Jerusalem, sitting, leaning as before described, with the
legend Judea capta, illustrates this expression as well as that in [Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001.md). See the note on [Isa
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#026) (note.md), where the subject is
farther explained.

Become as a widow - Having lost her king. Cities are commonly described
as the mothers of their inhabitants, the kings as husbands, and the
princes as children. When therefore they are bereaved of these, they are
represented as widows, and childless.

The Hindoo widow, as well as the Jewish, is considered the most
destitute and wretched of all human beings. She has her hair cut short,
throws off all ornaments, eats the coarsest food, fasts often, and is
all but an outcast in the family of her late husband.

Is she become tributary! - Having no longer the political form of a
nation; and the remnant that is left paying tribute to a foreign and
heathen conqueror.

[Lamentations 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lam 1:2</span></span>

Among all her lovers - Her allies; her friends, instead of helping her,
have helped her enemies. Several who sought her friendship when she was
in prosperity, in the time of David and Solomon, are now among her
enemies.

[Lamentations 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lam 1:3</span></span>

Between the straits - She has been brought into such difficulties, that
it was impossible for her to escape. Has this any reference to the
circumstances in which Zedekiah and the princes of Judah endeavored to
escape from Jerusalem, by the way of the gates between the two walls?
[Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007.md).

[Lamentations 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lam 1:4</span></span>

The ways of Zion do mourn - A fine prosopopoeia. The ways in which the
people trod coming to the sacred solemnities, being now no longer
frequented, are represented as shedding tears; and the gates themselves
partake of the general distress. All poets of eminence among the Greeks
and Romans have recourse to this image. So Moschus, in his Epitaph on
Bion, ver. 1-3: -

Αιλινα μοι στροναχειτε ναπαι, και Δωριον ὑδωρ

Και ποταμοι κλαιοιτε τον ἱμεροεντα Βιωνα.

Νυν φυτα μοι μυρεσθε, και αλσεα νυν γοαοισθε, κ. τ. λ.

"Ye winds, with grief your waving summits bow,

Ye Dorian fountains, murmur as ye flow;

From weeping urns your copious sorrows shed,

And bid the rivers mourn for Bion dead.

Ye shady groves, in robes of sable hue,

Bewail, ye plants, in pearly drops of dew;

Ye drooping flowers, diffuse a languid breath,

And die with sorrow, at sweet Bion's death."

Fawkes.

So Virgil, Aen. vii., ver. 759: -

Te nemus Anguitiae, vitrea te Fucinus unda

Te liquidi flevere lacus.

"For thee, wide echoing, sighed th' Anguitian woods;

For thee, in murmurs, wept thy native floods."

And more particularly on the death of Daphnis, Eclog. 5 ver. 24: -

Non ulli pastos illis egere diebus Frigida,

Daphni, boves ad flumina: nulla neque amnem

Libavit quadrupes, nec graminis attigit herbam.

Daphni, tuum Poenos etiam ingemuisse leones

Interitum, montesque feri, sylvaeque loquuntur.

"The swains forgot their sheep, nor near the brink

Of running waters brought their herds to drink:

The thirsty cattle of themselves abstained

From water, and their grassy fare disdained.

The death of Daphnis woods and hills deplore;

The Libyan lions hear, and hearing roar."

Dryden.

[Lamentations 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lam 1:5</span></span>

Her adversaries are the chief - They have now supreme dominion over the
whole land.

[Lamentations 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lam 1:7</span></span>

Did mock at her Sabbaths - משבתה mishbatteha. Some contend that Sabbaths
are not intended here. The Septuagint has κατοικεσια αυτης, "her
habitation;" the Chaldee, על טובהא al tubaha, "her good things;" the
Syriac, al toboroh, "her breach." The Vulgate and Arabic agree with the
Hebrew. Some of my oldest MSS. have the word in the plural number,
משבתיה mishbatteyha, "her Sabbaths." A multitude of Kennicott's MSS.
have the same reading. The Jews were despised by the heathen for keeping
the Sabbath. Juvenal mocks them on that account: -

\- cui septima quaeque fuit lux

Ignava et partem vitae non attigit ullam.

Sat. v.

"To whom every seventh day was a blank,

and formed not any part of their life."

St. Augustine represents Seneca as doing the same: -

Inutiliter id eos facere affirmans, quod septimani ferme partem aetatis
suae perdent vacando, et multa in tempore urgentia non agendo laedantur.

"That they lost the seventh part of their life in keeping their
Sabbaths; and injured themselves by abstaining from the performance of
many necessary things in such times."

He did not consider that the Roman calendar and customs gave them many
more idle days than God had prescribed in Sabbaths to the Jews. The
Sabbath is a most wise and beneficent ordinance.

[Lamentations 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lam 1:9</span></span>

She remembereth not her last end - Although evident marks of her
pollution appeared about her, and the land was defiled by her sinfulness
even to its utmost borders, she had no thought or consideration of what
must be the consequence of all this at the last. - Blayney.

[Lamentations 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lam 1:11</span></span>

They have given their pleasant things - Jerusalem is compared to a woman
brought into great straits, who parts with her jewels and trinkets in
order to purchase by them the necessaries of life.

[Lamentations 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lam 1:12</span></span>

Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? - The desolations and
distress brought upon this city and its inhabitants had scarcely any
parallel. Excessive abuse of God's accumulated mercies calls for
singular and exemplary punishment.

[Lamentations 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lam 1:14</span></span>

The yoke of my transgressions - I am now tied and bound by the chain of
my sins; and it is so wreathed, so doubled and twisted round me, that I
cannot free myself. A fine representation of the miseries of a penitent
soul, which feels that nothing but the pitifulness of God's mercy can
loose it.

[Lamentations 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lam 1:15</span></span>

Called an assembly - The Chaldean army, composed of various nations,
which God commissioned to destroy Jerusalem.

[Lamentations 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lam 1:17</span></span>

Zion spreadeth forth her hands - Extending the hands is the form in
supplication.

Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman - To whom none dared to approach,
either to help or comfort, because of the law, [Lev
15:19-27](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019.md).

[Lamentations 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lam 1:19</span></span>

I called for my lovers - My allies; the Egyptians and others.

[Lamentations 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lam 1:20</span></span>

Abroad the sword bereaveth - War is through the country; and at home
death; the pestilence and famine rage in the city; calamity in every
shape is fallen upon me.

Virgil represents the calamities of Troy under the same image: -

\- Nec soli poenas dant sanguine Teucri:

Quondam etiam victis redit in praecordia virtus;

Victoresque cadunt Danai. Crudelis ubique

Luctus, ubique Pavor, et plurima mortis imago.

Aeneid. lib. 2:366.

"Not only Trojans fall; but, in their turn,

The vanquished triumph, and the victors mourn.

Ours take new courage from despair and night;

Confused the fortune is, confused the fight.

All parts resound with tumults, plaints, and fears;

And grisly death in sundry shapes appears."

Dryden.

So Milton -

" - Despair

Tended the sick, busiest from couch to couch;

And over them triumphant Death his dart Shook."

Par. Lost, B. 11:489.

Jeremiah, [Jer 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021.md), uses the same
image: -

Death is come up into our windows:

He hath entered our palaces,

To cut off the infants without,

And the young men in our streets.

So Silius Italicus, II. 548: -

Mors graditur, vasto pandens cava guttura rletu,

Casuroque inhians populo.

"Death stalks along, and opens his hideous

throat to gulp down the people."

[Lamentations 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lam 1:21</span></span>

They have heard that I sigh - My affliction is public enough; but no one
comes to comfort me.

They are glad that thou hast done it - On the contrary, they exult in my
misery; and they see that Thou hast done what they were incapable of
performing.

Thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, and they shall be like
unto me - Babylon shall be visited in her turn; and thy judgments poured
out upon her shall equal her state with my own. See the last six
chapters of the preceding prophecy for the accomplishment of this
prediction.

[Lamentations 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lam 1:22</span></span>

Let all their wickedness come before thee - That is, Thou wilt call
their crimes also into remembrance; and thou wilt do unto them by siege,
sword, famine, and captivity, what thou hast done to me. Though thy
judgments, because of thy long-suffering, are slow; yet, because of thy
righteousness, they are sure.

For my sighs are many - My desolations continue; and my heart is faint -
my political and physical strength almost totally destroyed.

Imprecations in the sacred writings are generally to be understood as
declarative of the evils they indicate; or, that such evils will take
place. No prophet of God ever wished desolation on those against whom he
was directed to prophesy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 2](lam002.md)

</div>
