<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Lamentations Index](lam.md)  
  [Previous](jer052)  [Next](lam001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Lamentations of Jeremiah

This book, like the several books of the Pentateuch, is denominated in
Hebrew איכה eicah, how, from its first word; and sometimes קינות
kinnoth, lamentations, from its subject. In the Septuagint it is termed
QRHNOI TOU IEREMIOU, for the same reason. The Syriac and Arabic copy or
follow the Septuagint; and so does the Vulgate, from the Lamentationes
of which, the book has that name which it bears in our language. In the
Chaldee it has no name; and in it, and perhaps anciently in the Hebrew,
it was written consecutively with the last chapter of Jeremiah.

It is one of the books of the מגילות Megilloth, or Roll, among the Jews;
and because it relates to the ruin of their affairs, and contains
promises of restoration, it is peculiarly prized, and frequently read.
The five Megilloth are: Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Lamentations,
Ruth, and Esther.

There has been little difference among learned men concerning the author
of this book. The whole current of antiquity and modern times has
pointed out Jeremiah as the writer: of this the style is a sufficient
evidence. Mr. John Henry Pareau, in a Dissertation prefixed to his
Translation and Notes on this book, (8vo. Lugd. Bat. 1790), has proved
this point amply from a general collation of the prophecy of Jeremiah
with select passages in this book. I have heard of but one learned man
who has entertained serious doubts on the subject, Mr. Herman Van der
Hardt, who has supposed the five chapters were written by Daniel,
Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, and Jeconiah. To this opinion I suppose
none has ever been converted.

There has been more difference of opinion relative to the subject and
occasion. Some have thought the book was composed on the death of
Josiah; others that it was composed on occasion of the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the various desolations connected with it. To this all
its parts and its general phraseology seem best to apply; and this is
the sentiment most generally embraced at present. This will receive much
proof from a minute consideration of the book itself.

The composition of this poem is what may be called very technical. Every
chapter, except the last, is an acrostic. Of the two first, each verse
begins with a several letter of the Hebrew alphabet, in the order of the
letters, with this exception, that in the second, third, and fourth
chapters, the פ phe is put before the ע ain; whereas in all the acrostic
Psalms the latter preceded the former, as it does in all grammars of the
Hebrew language. In the first and second chapters each verse is composed
of three hemistichs or half verses, except the seventh verse of the
first, and the nineteenth of the second chapter, which have each four
hemistichs.

The third chapter contains sixty-four verses, each, as before, formed of
three hemistichs, but with this difference, that each hemistich begins
with the same letter, so that the whole alphabet is thrice repeated in
this chapter.

The fourth chapter is made up of twenty-two verses, according to the
number of the Hebrew letters; but the composition is different from all
the rest, for each verse consists of only two hemistichs, and those much
shorter than any in the preceding chapters.

I have called this an inimitable poem; better judges are of the same
opinion. "Never," says Bishop Lowth, "was there a more rich and elegant
variety of beautiful images and adjuncts arranged together within so
small a compass, nor more happily chosen and applied."

"One would think," says Dr. South, "that every letter was written with a
tear; every word, the sound of a breaking heart: that the author was
compacted of sorrows; disciplined to grief from his infancy; one who
never breathed but in sighs, nor spoke but in a groan."

"Nor can we too much admire," says Dr. Blayney, "the full and graceful
flow of that pathetic eloquence in which the author pours forth the
effusions of a patriotic heart, and piously weeps over the ruins of his
venerable country. But it was observed before that the prophet's
peculiar talent lay in working up and expressing the passions of grief
and pity; and, unhappily for him as a man and a citizen, he met with a
subject but too well calculated to give his genius its full display."
David in several places has forcibly depicted the sorrows of a heart
oppressed with penitential sorrow; but where, in a composition of such
length, have bodily misery and mental agony been more successfully
painted? All the expressions and images of sorrow are here exhibited in
various combinations, and in various points of view. Misery has no
expression that the author of the Lamentations has not employed.
Patriots! you who tell us you burn for your country's welfare, look at
the prophecies and history of this extraordinary man; look at his
Lamentations; take him through his life to his death, and learn from him
what true patriotism means! The man who watched, prayed, and lived for
the welfare of his country; who choose to share her adversities, her
sorrows, her wants, her afflictions, and disgrace, where he might have
been a companion of princes, and have sat at the table of kings; who
only ceased to live for his country when he ceased to breathe; - that
was a patriot, in comparison with whom almost all others are obscured,
minished, and brought low, or are totally annihilated!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 1](lam001.md)

</div>
