<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](lam002)  [Next](lam004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 3:0</span></span>

The prophet, by enumerating his own severe trials, vv. 1-20, and showing
his trust in God, [Lam 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021),
encourages his people to the like resignation and trust in the Divine
and never-failing mercy, [Lam 3:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022).
He vindicates the goodness of God in all his dispensations, and the
unreasonableness of murmuring under them, [Lam
3:28-39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028). He recommends
self-examination and repentance; and then, from their experience of
former deliverances from God, encourages them to look for pardon for
their sins, and retribution to their enemies, vv. 40-66.

[Lamentations 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 3:1</span></span>

I am the man that hath seen affliction - Either the prophet speaks here
of himself, or he is personating his miserable countrymen. This and
other passages in this poem have been applied to Jesus Christ's passion;
but, in my opinion, without any foundation.

[Lamentations 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lam 3:2</span></span>

He hath - brought me into darkness - In the sacred writings, darkness is
often taken for calamity, light, for prosperity.

[Lamentations 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lam 3:5</span></span>

He hath builded against me - Perhaps there is a reference here to the
mounds and ramparts raised by the Chaldeans in order to take the city.

[Lamentations 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lam 3:7</span></span>

He hath hedged me about - This also may refer to the lines drawn round
the city during the siege. But these and similar expressions in the
following verses may be merely metaphorical, to point out their
straitened, oppressed, and distressed state.

[Lamentations 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lam 3:9</span></span>

He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone - He has put insuperable
obstacles in my way; and confounded all my projects of deliverance and
all my expectations of prosperity.

[Lamentations 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lam 3:12</span></span>

He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow - One might
conjecture that the following thought in the Toozek i Teemour was
borrowed from this: -

"One addressed the caliph Aaly, and said, 'If the heavens were a bow,
and the earth the cord thereof; if calamities were arrows, man the butt
for those arrows; and the holy blessed God the unerring marksman; where
could the sons of Adam flee for succor?' The caliph replied, 'The
children of Adam must flee unto the Lord.'" This was the state of poor
Jerusalem. It seemed as a butt for all God's arrows; and each arrow of
calamity entered into the soul, for God was the unerring marksman.

[Lamentations 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lam 3:13</span></span>

The arrows of his quiver - בני אשפתו beney ashpatho, "The sons of his
quiver." The issue or effect; the subject, adjunct, or accident, or
produce of a thing, is frequently denominated its son or child. So
arrows that issue from a quiver are here termed the sons of the quiver.

[Lamentations 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lam 3:15</span></span>

He hath filled me with bitterness - במרורים bimrorim, with bitternesses,
bitter upon bitter.

He hath made me drunken with wormwood - I have drunk the cup of misery
till I am intoxicated with it. Almost in all countries, and in all
languages, bitterness is a metaphor to express trouble and affliction.
The reason is, there is nothing more disagreeable to the taste than the
one; and nothing more distressing to the mind than the other. An Arabic
poet. Amralkeis, one of the writers of the Moallakat, terms a man
grievously afflicted a pounder of wormwood.

[Lamentations 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lam 3:16</span></span>

He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones - What a figure to
express disgust, pain, and the consequent incapacity of taking food for
the support of life; a man, instead of bread, being obliged to eat small
pebbles till all his teeth are broken to pieces by endeavoring to grind
them. One can scarcely read this description without feeling the
toothache. The next figure is not less expressive.

He hath covered me with ashes - הכפישני באפר hichphishani beepher, "he
hath plunged me into the dust." To be thrown into a mass or bed of
perfect dust, where the eyes are blinded by it, the ears stopped, and
the mouth and lungs filled at the very first attempt to respire after
having been thrown into it - what a horrible idea of suffocation and
drowning! One can scarcely read this without feeling a suppression of
breath, or a stricture upon the lungs! Did ever man paint sorrow like
this man?

[Lamentations 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lam 3:17</span></span>

Those hast removed my soul - Prosperity is at such an utter distance
from me, that it is impossible I should ever reach it; and as to
happiness, I have forgotten whether I have ever tasted of it.

[Lamentations 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lam 3:18</span></span>

And my hope - That first, that last support of the miserable - it is
gone! it is perished! The sovereign God alone can revive it.

[Lamentations 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lam 3:20</span></span>

By soul - is humbled in me - It is evident that in the preceding verses
there is a bitterness of complaint against the bitterness of adversity,
that is not becoming to man when under the chastising hand of God; and,
while indulging this feeling, all hope fled. Here we find a different
feeling; he humbles himself under the mighty hand of God, and then his
hope revives, [Lam 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#021).

[Lamentations 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lam 3:22</span></span>

It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed - Being thus
humbled, and seeing himself and his sinfulness in a proper point of
view, he finds that God, instead of dealing with him in judgment, has
dealt with him in mercy; and that though the affliction was excessive,
yet it seas less than his iniquity deserved. If, indeed, any sinner be
kept out of hell, it is because God's compassion faileth not.

[Lamentations 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lam 3:23</span></span>

They are new every morning - Day and night proclaim the mercy and
compassion of God. Who could exist throughout the day, if there were not
a continual superintending Providence? Who could be preserved in the
night, if the Watchman of Israel ever slumbered or slept?

[Lamentations 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lam 3:24</span></span>

The Lord is my portion - See on [Psa
119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067) (note).

[Lamentations 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lam 3:26</span></span>

It is good that a man should both hope - Hope is essentially necessary
to faith; he that hopes not, cannot believe; if there be no expectation,
there can be no confidence. When a man hopes for salvation, he should
not only waft for it, but use every means that may lead to it; for hope
cannot live, if there be no exercise. If hope become impatient, faith
will be impossible: for who can believe for his salvation when his mind
is agitated? He must therefore quietly wait. He must expect, and yet be
dumb, as the words imply; ever feeling his utter unworthiness; and,
without murmuring, struggle into life.

[Lamentations 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lam 3:27</span></span>

That he bear the yoke in his youth - Early habits, when good, are
invaluable. Early discipline is equally so. He who has not got under
wholesome restraint in youth will never make a useful man, a good man,
nor a happy man.

[Lamentations 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lam 3:28</span></span>

He sitteth alone - He has learned that necessary lesson of independence,
that shows him how he is to serve himself; to give no trouble to others;
and keep his troubles, as far as possible, in his own bosom.

[Lamentations 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lam 3:29</span></span>

He putteth his mouth in the dust - Lives in a state of deep humility.

If so be there may be hope - Because there is room for hope.

[Lamentations 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lam 3:30</span></span>

He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth - He has that love that is not
provoked. He is not quarrelsome, nor apt to resent injuries; he suffers
long and is kind. Or, it may be rendered, "let him give his cheek."

He is filled full with reproach - Though all this take place, yet let
his "trust be in God, who will not cast off for ever." God will take his
part, and bring him safely through all hardships.

[Lamentations 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lam 3:31</span></span>

The Lord - אדני Adonai; but one of my ancient MSS. has יהוה Jehovah. The
above verse is quoted in reference to our Lord's passion, by [Mat
26:62](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#062).

[Lamentations 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lam 3:33</span></span>

For he doth not afflict willingly - It is no pleasure to God to afflict
men. He takes no delight in our pain and misery: yet, like a tender and
intelligent parent, he uses the rod; not to gratify himself, but to
profit and save us.

[Lamentations 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lam 3:34</span></span>

To crush under his feet - He can neither gain credit nor pleasure in
trampling upon those who are already bound, and in suffering; such he
knows to be the state of man here below. From which it most assuredly
follows, that God never afflicts us but for our good, nor chastises but
that we may be partakers of his holiness.

All the prisoners of the earth - By the prisoners of the earth, or land,
Dr. Blayney understands those insolvent debtors who were put in prison,
and there obliged to work out the debt. Yet this is mercy in comparison
with those who put them in prison, and keep them there, when they know
that it is impossible, from the state of the laws, to lessen the debt by
their confinement.

In [Lam 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#034), [Lam
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#035), and [Lam
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#036), certain acts of tyranny, malice,
and injustice are specified, which men often indulge themselves in the
practice of towards one another, but which the Divine goodness is far
from countenancing or approving by any similar conduct. - Blayney.

[Lamentations 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lam 3:35</span></span>

To turn aside the right of a man - To make a man lose his right, because
one of the higher orders opposes him. Dr. Blayney thinks that עליון
elyon, instead of being referred to God, should be considered as
pointing out one of the chief of the people. I do not see that we gain
any thing by this. The evil fact is, turning aside the right of a man;
and the aggravation of it is, doing it before the face of the Most High;
that is, in a court of justice, where God is ever considered to be
present.

[Lamentations 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lam 3:36</span></span>

To subvert a man in his cause - To prevent his having justice done him
in a lawsuit, etc., by undue interference, as by suborning false
witnesses, or exerting any kind of influence in opposition to truth and
right. - Blayney.

The Lord approved not - Instead of אדני Adonai, seventeen MSS., of
Kennicott's, and one ancient of my own, have יהוה Yehovah. Approveth
not, לא ראה lo raah, doth not see, turns away his face from it, abhors
it.

[Lamentations 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">lam 3:39</span></span>

Wherefore doth a living man complain - He who has his life still lent to
him has small cause of complaint. How great soever his affliction may
be, he is still alive; therefore, he may seek and find mercy unto
eternal life. Of this, death would deprive him; therefore let not a
living man complain.

[Lamentations 3:40](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">lam 3:40</span></span>

Let us search - How are we to get the pardon of our sins? The prophet
tells us:

1\. Let us examine ourselves.

2\. "Let us turn again to the Lord."

3\. "Let us lift up our heart;" let us make fervent prayer and
supplication for mercy.

4\. "Let us lift up our hand;" let us solemnly promise to be his, and
bind ourselves in a covenant to be the Lord's only: so much lifting up
the hand to God implies. Or, let us put our heart on our hand, and offer
it to God; so some have translated this clause.

5\. "We have transgressed;" let our confession of sin be fervent and
sincere.

6\. And to us who profess Christianity it may be added, Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ as having died for thee; and thou shalt not perish,
but have everlasting life.

[Lam 3:46](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046), [Lam
3:47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047), [Lam
3:48](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048), beginning with פ phe, should, as
to the order of the alphabet, follow [Lam
3:49](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#049), [Lam
3:50](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#050), [Lam
3:51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#051), which begin with ע ain, which in
its grammatical position precedes the former.

[Lamentations 3:47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">lam 3:47</span></span>

Fear and a snare - See on [Jer 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013)
(note).

[Lamentations 3:48](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">lam 3:48</span></span>

Mine eye runneth down - I weep incessantly.

[Lamentations 3:51](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">lam 3:51</span></span>

Mine eye affecteth mine heart - What I see I feel. I see nothing but
misery; and I feel, in consequence, nothing but pain. There have been
various translations of the original: but they all amount to this.

The daughters of my city - The villages about Jerusalem.

[Lamentations 3:52](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">lam 3:52</span></span>

Mine enemies chased me - From this to the end of the chapter the prophet
speaks of his own personal sufferings, and especially of those which he
endured in the dungeon. See [Jer 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006),
etc.

[Lamentations 3:56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">lam 3:56</span></span>

Hide not thine ear at my breathing - He dared not even to complain, nor
to cry, nor to pray aloud: he was obliged to whisper his prayer to God.
It was only a breathing.

[Lamentations 3:57](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">lam 3:57</span></span>

Fear not - How powerful is this word when spoken by the Spirit of the
Lord to a disconsolate heart. To every mourner we may say, on the
authority of God, Fear not! God will plead thy cause, and redeem thy
soul.

[Lamentations 3:60](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">lam 3:60</span></span>

Thou hast seen - all their imaginations - Every thing is open to the eye
of God. Distressed soul! though thou knowest not what thy enemies
meditate against thee; yet he who loves thee does, and will infallibly
defeat all their plots, and save thee.

[Lamentations 3:65](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">lam 3:65</span></span>

Give them sorrow of heart - They shall have a callous heart, covered
with obstinacy, and thy execration. The former is their state, the
latter their fate. This is the consequence of their hardening their
hearts from thy fear. Blayney translates, "Thou wilt give with a hearty
concordance thy curse unto them." That is, Thou wilt give it to them
freely, and without reserve; intimating that God felt no longer any
bowels of compassion for them. Formerly he inflicted punishments with
reluctance, while there was any hope of amendment: but, in the instance
before us, the case was so hopeless, that God acts according to the
simple principle of vindictive justice. The prophet therefore considers
them on the utmost verge of final reprobation: another plunge, and they
are lost for ever.

[Lamentations 3:66](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">lam 3:66</span></span>

Persecute and destroy them - Thou wilt pursue them with destruction.
These are all declaratory, not imprecatory.

From under the heavens of the Lord - This verse seems to allude to the
Chaldaic prediction, in [Jer 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011). By
their conduct they will bring on themselves the curse denounced against
their enemies.

The Septuagint and Vulgate seem to have read "From under heaven, O
Jehovah:" and the Syriac reads, "Thy heavens, O Jehovah!" None of these
makes any material change in the meaning of the words.

It has already been noticed in the introduction, that this chapter
contains a triple acrostic, three lines always beginning with the same
letter; so that the Hebrew alphabet is thrice repeated in this chapter,
twenty-two multiplied by three being equal to sixty-six.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 4](lam004)

</div>
