<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev007)  [Next](lev009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 8:0</span></span>

Moses is commanded to consecrate Aaron and his sons, [Lev
8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001). Moses convenes the
congregation; washes, clothes, and anoints Aaron, [Lev
8:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#004). He also clothes Aaron's sons,
[Lev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#013). Offers a bullock for them
as a sin-offering, [Lev 8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014). And a
ram for a burnt-offering, [Lev
8:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#018). And another ram for a
consecration-offering, [Lev 8:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#022).
The fat, with cakes of unleavened bread, and the right shoulder of the
ram, he offers as a wave-offering, and afterwards burns, [Lev
8:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#025). The breast, which was the
part of Moses, he also waves, [Lev
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#029). And sprinkles oil and blood upon
Aaron and his sons, [Lev 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030). The
flesh of the consecration ram is to be boiled and eaten at the door of
the tabernacle, [Lev 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#031), [Lev
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#032). Moses commands Aaron and his
sons to abide seven days at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, which they do accordingly, [Lev
8:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033).

[Leviticus 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 8:2</span></span>

Take Aaron and his sons - The whole subject of this chapter has been
anticipated in the notes, [Exo 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001)
(note), etc., and [Exo 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001) (note),
etc., in which all the sacrifices, rites, and ceremonies have been
explained in considerable detail; and to those notes the reader is
referred. It is only necessary to observe that Aaron and his sons were
not anointed until now. Before, the thing was commanded; now, first
performed.

[Leviticus 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 8:8</span></span>

He put in the breastplate the Urim and the Thummim - The Urim and
Thummim are here supposed to be something different from the breastplate
itself. See Clarke's note on [Exo
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#015), See Clarke's note on [Exo
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#016), See Clarke's note on [Exo
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030).

[Leviticus 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 8:9</span></span>

And he put the mitre - See Clarke's note on [Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036).

[Leviticus 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 8:14</span></span>

The bullock for the sin-offering - This was offered each day during the
seven days of consecration. See [Exo
29:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036).

[Leviticus 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 8:23</span></span>

Put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, etc. - See this significant
ceremony explained in the note on [Exo
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#020) (note). Calmet remarks that the
consecration of the high priest among the Romans bore a considerable
resemblance to the consecration of the Jewish high priest. "The Roman
priest, clothed with a garment of silk, his head covered with a crown of
gold adorned with sacred ribbons, was conducted into a subterranean
place, over which there was a floor of planks pierced through with many
holes. On this floor they sacrificed a bullock, whose blood was freely
poured out on the planks or floor, which running through the holes fell
upon the priest, who stood under to receive this sacred aspersion, and
who, in order to be completely covered with the blood, took care to
present the whole of his body, his clothes, face, eyes, nose, lips, and
even his tongue, to receive the drops of blood falling through the
pierced floor above. Being completely covered with this sanguineous
shower, he ascended from his subterranean place, and was acknowledged
and adored by the people as Pontifex Maximus, or supreme high priest."
These rites, which bear a striking allusion to those used in the
consecration of Aaron, and from which they were probably borrowed, and
disguised by the introduction of their own superstitions, are
particularly described by Aurelius Prudentius, in his poem entitled
Romani Martyris Supplicium, from which I shall select those verses, the
subject of which is given above, as the passage is curious, and the work
not common.

"Summus sacerdos nempe sub terram scrobe

Acta in profundum consecrandus mergitur,

Mire infulatus, festa vittis tempora

Nectens, corona tum repexus aurea,

Cinctu Gabino sericam fultus togam.

Tabulis superne strata texunt pulpita,

Rimosa rari pegmatis compagibus,

Scindunt subinde vel terebrant aream,

Crebroque lignum perforant acumine,

Pateat minutis ut frequens hiatibus -

Hic ut statuta est immolanda bellua,

Pectus sacrata dividunt venabulo,

Eructat amplum volnus undam sanguinis - etc.

Tum per frequentes mille rimarum vias

Illapsus imber, tabidum rorem pluit,

Defossus intus quem sacerdos excipit,

Guttas ad omnes turpe subjectans caput,

Et veste et omni putrefactus corpore:

Quin os supinat, obvias offert genas

Supponit aures, labra, nares objicit,

Oculos et ipsos perluit liquoribus,

Nec jam palato parcit, et linguam rigat,

Donec cruorem totus atrum combibat -

Procedit inde pontifex vlsu horridus - etc.

Omnes salutant atque adorant eminus,

Vilis quod illum sanguls, et bos mortuus

Foedis latentem sub cavernis laverint."

Of these lines the reader will not be displeased to find the following
poetical version: -

"For when, with sacred pomp and solemn state,

Their great high priest the Romans consecrate,

His silken vest in Gabine cincture bound,

A festal fillet twines his temples round:

And, while aloft the gorgeous mitre shines,

His awful brow a golden crown confines.

In a deep dyke, for mystic ritual made,

He stands, surrounded with terrific shade.

High o'er his holy head a stage they place,

Adorn with paintings, and with statues grace;

Then with keen piercers perforate the floor,

Till thronging apertures admit no more.

Thither the victim ox is now convey'd,

To glut the vengeance of the thirsty blade.

The sacred spear his sturdy throat divides,

Down, instant streaming, gush the gory tides,

Through countless crevices the gaping wood

Distils corrupted dew and smoking blood;

Drop after drop, in swift succession shed,

Falls on the holy pontiff's mitred head;

While, to imbibe the sanctifying power,

His outspread garments drink the crimson shower;

Then on his back in reeking streams he lies,

And laves in livid blood his lips and eyes;

Bares every limb, exposes every pore,

To catch the virtue of the streaming gore;

With open mouth expects the falling flood,

Moistens his palate and his tongue with blood;

Extends his ears to meet the sanguine rain,

Nor lets a single drop descend in vain.

Then from the gloomy cave comes forth to light,

Bathed in black blood, and horrible to sight! -

By the vile torrent, and the victim slain,

In the dark cavern cleansed from mortal stain,

Their priest, enveloped in atoning gore,

With trembling awe surrounding throngs adore."

Prudentius was born about the middle of the fourth century, and was no
doubt intimately acquainted with the circumstances he describes.

[Leviticus 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 8:27</span></span>

And waved them for a wave-offering - See the nature of this and the
heave-offering in the note on [Exo
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027) (note).

[Leviticus 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 8:30</span></span>

And Moses took - the blood - and sprinkled it upon Aaron, etc. - Thus we
find that the high priest himself must be sprinkled with the blood of
the sacrifice; and our blessed Lord, of whom Aaron was a type, was
sprinkled with his own blood.

1\. In his agony in the garden.

2\. In his being crowned with thorns.

3\. In the piercing of his hands and his feet. And,

4\. In his side being pierced with the spear. All these were so many
acts of atonement performed by the high priest.

[Leviticus 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 8:33</span></span>

For seven days shall he consecrate you - This number was the number of
perfection among the Hebrews; and the seven days' consecration implied a
perfect and full consecration to the sacerdotal office. See Clarke's
note on [Exo 29:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#030).

[Leviticus 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">lev 8:36</span></span>

So Aaron and his sons did - This chapter shows the exact fulfillment of
the commands delivered to Moses, Exodus 29; and consequently the
complete preparation of Aaron and his sons to fill the awfully important
office of priests and mediators between God and Israel, to offer
sacrifices and make atonement for the sins of the people. "Thus," says
Mr. Ainsworth, "the covenant of the priesthood was confirmed unto the
tribe of Levi in Aaron and his sons, which covenant was life and peace,
[Mal 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005). But these are made priests
without an oath; also, there were many priests, because they were not
suffered to continue by reason of death; and they served unto the
example and shadow of heavenly things, offering gifts and sacrifices
which could not make him who did the service perfect as pertaining to
the conscience; for they were carnal ordinances imposed upon them till
the time of reformation, that is, until the time of Christ, who was made
a priest of God with an oath, and made surety of a better covenant
established on better promises. And because he continueth for ever, he
hath a priesthood which passeth not from one to another, and is a
minister of the true tabernacle, which God pitched and not man. Not by
the blood of bulls and of goats, but by his own blood, he entered once
into the holy place, having found everlasting redemption for us; and is
therefore able to save to the uttermost them who come unto God through
him, as he ever liveth to make intercession for them." Taken in
reference to his priesthood and sacrifice, all these rites and
ceremonies are significant and edifying, but taken out of his relation,
they would be as absurd and nugatory as the consecration of the Roman
Pontifex Maximus, mentioned above by Prudentius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 9](lev009)

</div>
