<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev015)  [Next](lev017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 16:0</span></span>

The solemn yearly expiation for the high priest, who must not come at
all times into the holy place, [Lev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001.md), [Lev
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002.md). He must take a bullock for a
sin-offering, and a ram for a burnt-offering, bathe himself, and be
dressed in his sacerdotal robes, [Lev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003.md), [Lev
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004.md). He shall take two goats, one of
which is to be determined by lot to be a sacrifice; the other to be a
scapegoat, [Lev 16:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005.md). He shall
offer a bullock for himself and for his family, [Lev
16:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#011.md). And shall kill the goat as a
sin-offering for the people, and sprinkle its blood upon the mercy-seat,
and hallow the altar of burnt-offerings, [Lev
16:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015.md). The scapegoat shall be then
brought, on the head of which he shall lay his hands, and confess the
iniquities of the children of Israel; after which the goat shall be
permitted to escape to the wilderness, [Lev
16:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020.md). After this Aaron shall bathe
himself, and make a burnt-offering for himself and for the people, [Lev
16:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023.md). This is to be an everlasting
statute, and the day on which the atonement is to be made shall be a
Sabbath, or day of rest, through all their generations, [Lev
16:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029.md).

[Leviticus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 16:1</span></span>

After the death of the two sons of Aaron - It appears from this verse
that the natural place of this chapter is immediately after the tenth,
where probably it originally stood; but the transposition, if it did
take place, must be very ancient, as all the versions acknowledge this
chapter in the place in which it now stands.

[Leviticus 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 16:2</span></span>

That he come not at all times into the holy place - By the holy place we
are to understand here what is ordinarily called the Holy of Holies, or
most holy place; that place within the veil where the ark of the
covenant, etc., were laid up; and where God manifested his presence
between the cherubim. In ordinary cases the high priest could enter this
place only once in the year, that is, on the day of annual atonement;
but in extraordinary cases he might enter more frequently, viz., while
in the wilderness, in decamping and encamping, he must enter to take
down or adjust the things; and on solemn pressing public occasions, he
was obliged to enter in order to consult the Lord: but he never entered
without the deepest reverence and due preparation. That it may appear
that the grand subject of this chapter, the ordinance of the scape-goat,
typified the death and resurrection of Christ, and the atonement thereby
made, I beg leave to refer to [Heb
9:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007.md), and [Heb
9:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024.md), which I shall here
transcribe, because it is a key to the whole of this chapter. "Into the
second \[tabernacle\] went the high priest alone once every year, not
without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the
people. The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of
all was not yet made manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet
standing: which was a figure for the time then present, in which were
offered both gifts and sacrifices that could not make him that did the
service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience; which stood only in
meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal ordinances, imposed on
them until the time of reformation. But Christ being come, a high priest
of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not
made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; neither by the
Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his Own Blood; he entered into the
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. For Christ is not
entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of
the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God
for us: nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest
entereth into the holy place every year with the blood of others; (for
then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world); but
now once in the end of the world, hath he appeared To Put Away Sin By
The Sacrifice Of Himself."

[Leviticus 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 16:3</span></span>

With a young bullock for a sin-offering - The bullock was presented as a
sin-offering for himself, his family, the whole priesthood, and probably
the Levites. The ram was for a burnt-offering, to signify that he and
his associates were wholly consecrated, and to be wholly employed in
this work of the ministry. The ceremonies with which these two
sacrifices were accompanied are detailed in the following verses.

[Leviticus 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 16:4</span></span>

He shall put on the holy linen coat - He was not to dress in his
pontifical garments, but in the simple sacerdotal vestments, or those of
the Levites, because it was a day of humiliation; and as he was to offer
sacrifices for his own sins, it was necessary that he should appear in
habits suited to the occasion. Hence he has neither the robe, the ephod,
the breastplate, the mitre, etc.; these constituted his dress of dignity
as the high priest of God, ministering for others and the representative
of Christ: but now he appears, before God as a sinner, offering an
atonement for his transgressions, and his garments are those of
humiliation.

[Leviticus 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 16:7</span></span>

And he shall take the two goats - It is allowed on all hands that this
ceremony, taken in all its parts, pointed out the Lord Jesus dying for
our sins and rising again for our justification; being put to death in
the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. Two goats are brought, one to be
slain as a sacrifice for sin, the other to have the transgressions of
the people confessed over his head, and then to be sent away into the
wilderness. The animal by this act was represented as bearing away or
carrying off the sins of the people. The two goats made only one
sacrifice, yet only one of them was slain. One animal could not point
out both the Divine and human nature of Christ, nor show both his death
and resurrection, for the goat that was killed could not be made alive.
The Divine and human natures in Christ were essential to the grand
expiation: yet the human nature alone suffered, for the Divine nature
could not suffer; but its presence in the human nature, while agonizing
unto death, stamped those agonies, and the consequent death, with
infinite merit. The goat therefore that was slain prefigured his human
nature and its death; the goat that escaped pointed out his
resurrection. The one shows the atonement for sin, as the ground of
justification; the other Christ's victory, and the total removal of sin
in the sanctification of the soul. Concerning these ceremonies we shall
see farther particulars as we proceed. According to Maimonides fifteen
beasts were offered on this day. "The daily, or morning and evening
sacrifice, was offered as usual: besides a bullock, a ram, and seven
lambs, all burnt-offerings; and a goat for a sin-offering, which was
eaten in the evening. Then a bullock for a sin-offering, and this they
burnt; and a ram for a burnt-offering: these both for the high priest.
Then the ram for the consecration, (see [Lev
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005).md) which is called the people's
ram. They brought also for the congregation two he-goats; the one for a
sin-offering, the other for a scape-goat. Thus all the beasts offered on
this great solemn day were Fifteen: the two daily sacrifices, one
bullock, two rams, and seven lambs: all of these burnt-offerings. Two
goats for sin-offerings; one offered without and eaten on the evening,
the other offered within and burnt; and one bullock for a sin-offering
for the high priest. The service of all these fifteen beasts is
performed on this day by the high priest only." See Maimonides and
Ainsworth on the place.

[Leviticus 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 16:8</span></span>

Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats - The Jews inform us that there
were two lots made either of wood, stone, or any kind of metal. On one
was written לשם Lashshem, for the Name, i. e., יהוה Jehovah, which the
Jews will neither write nor pronounce: on the other was written לעזאזל
Laazazel, for the Scape-Goat: then they put the two lots into a vessel
which was called קלפי kalpey, the goats standing with their faces
towards the west. Then the priest came, and the goats stood before him,
one on the right hand and the other on the left; the kalpey was then
shaken, and the priest put in both his hands and brought out a lot in
each: that which was in his right hand he laid on the goat that was on
his right, and that in his left hand he laid on the goat that was on his
left; and according to what was written on the lots, the scape-goat and
the goat for sacrifice were ascertained. See the Mishna, in Tract. Yoma.
The determining this solemn business by lot, the disposal of which is
with the Lord, [Pro 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033.md), shows that
God alone was to select and point out the person by whom this great
atonement was to be made; hence he says: Behold I lay in Zion a stone,
elect (that is, chosen by himself) and precious - of infinite value.

[Leviticus 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 16:10</span></span>

To be the scape-goat - עזאזל azazel, from עז az, a goat, and אזל azal,
to dismiss; the dismissed or sent away goat, to distinguish it from the
goat that was to be offered in sacrifice. Most ancient nations had
vicarious sacrifices, to which they transferred by certain rites and
ceremonies the guilt of the community at large, in the same manner in
which the scapegoat was used by the Jews. The white bull that was
sacrificed by the Egyptians to their god Apis was of this kind; they cut
off the head of the victim which they had sacrificed, and after having
loaded it with execrations, "that if there be any evil hanging over them
or the land of Egypt, it may be poured out upon that head," they either
sold it to the Greeks or threw it into the Nile - See Herod. Euterp., p.
104, edit. Gale.

Petronius Arbiter says that it was a custom among the ancient
inhabitants of Marseilles, whenever they were afflicted by any
pestilence, to take one of the poorer citizens who offered himself for
the purpose, and having fed him a whole year with the purest and best
food, they adorned him with vervain, and clothed him with sacred
vestments: they then led him round their city, loading him with
execrations; and having prayed that all the evils to which the city was
exposed might fall upon him, they then precipitated him from the top of
a rock - Satiricon, in fine.

Suidas, under the word περιψημα, observes that it was a custom to devote
a man annually to death for the safety of the people, with these words,
Περιψἡμα ημων γενου, Be thou our purifier; and, having said so, to throw
him into the sea as a sacrifice to Neptune. It was probably to this
custom that Virgil alludes when speaking of the pilot Palinurus, who
fell into the sea and was drowned, he says: -

Unum pro multis dabiter caput -

Aen., lib. v., ver. 815.

"One life is given for the preservation of many."

But the nearest resemblance to the scapegoat of the Hebrews is found in
the Ashummeed Jugg of the Hindoos, where a horse is used instead of a
goat, the description of which I shall here introduce from Mr. Halhed's
Code of Gentoo Laws; Introduction, p. xix. "That the curious," says he,
"may form some idea of this Gentoo sacrifice when reduced to a symbol,
as well as from the subsequent plain account given of it in a chapter of
the Code, sec. ix., p. 127, an explanation of it is here inserted from
Darul Shekh's famous Persian translation of some commentaries upon the
four Beids, or original Scriptures of Hindostan. The work itself is
extremely scarce, and it was by mere accident that this little specimen
was procured: - "The Ashummeed Jugg does not merely consist in the
performance of that ceremony which is open to the inspection of the
world, namely, in bringing a horse and sacrificing him; but Ashummeed is
to be taken in a mystic signification, as implying that the sacrificer
must look upon himself to be typified in that horse, such as he shall be
described; because the religious duty of the Ashummeed Jugg comprehends
all those other religious duties to the performance of which the wise
and holy direct all their actions, and by which all the sincere
professors of every different faith aim at perfection. The mystic
signification thereof is as follows: The head of that unblemished horse
is the symbol of the morning; his eyes are the sun; his breath, the
wind; his wide-opening mouth is the bish-waner, or that innate warmth
which invigorates all the world; his body typifies one entire year; his
back, paradise; his belly, the plains; his hoof, this earth; his sides,
the four quarters of the heavens; the bones thereof, the intermediate
spaces between the four quarters; the rest of his limbs represent all
distinct matter; the places where those limbs meet, or his joints, imply
the months, and halves of the months, which are called peche, (or
fortnights); his feet signify night and day; and night and day are of
four kinds:

1\. The night and day of Brihma;

2\. The night and day of angels;

3\. The night and day of the world of the spirits of deceased ancestors;

4\. The night and day of mortals.

These four kinds are typified in his four feet. The rest of his bones
are the constellations of the fixed stars, which are the twenty-eight
stages of the moon's course, called the lunar year; his flesh is the
clouds; his food, the sand; his tendons, the rivers; his spleen and
liver, the mountains; the hair of his body, the vegetables; and his long
hair, the trees; the forepart of his body typifies the first half of the
day, and the hinder part, the latter half; his yawning is the flash of
the lightning, and his turning himself is the thunder of the cloud; his
urine represents the rain, and his mental reflection is his only speech.
The golden vessels which are prepared before the horse is let loose are
the light of the day, and the place where those vessels are kept is a
type of the ocean of the east; the silver vessels which are prepared
after the horse is let loose are the light of the night, and the place
where those vessels are kept is a type of the ocean of the west. These
two sorts of vessels are always before and after the horse. The Arabian
horse, which on account of his swiftness is called Hy, is the performer
of the journeys of angels; the Tajee, which is of the race of Persian
horses, is the performer of the journeys of the Kundherps, (or good
spirits); the Wazba, which is of the race of the deformed Tazee horses,
is the performer of the journeys of the Jins, (or demons); and the
Ashov, which is of the race of Turkish horses, is the performer of the
journeys of mankind: this one horse which performs these several
services on account of his four different sorts of riders, obtains the
four different appellations. The place where this horse remains is the
great ocean, which signifies the great spirit of Perm-Atma, or the
universal soul, which proceeds also from that Perm-Atma, and is
comprehended in the same Perm-Atma. The intent of this sacrifice is,
that a man should consider himself to be in the place of that horse, and
look upon all these articles as typified in himself; and conceiving the
Atma (or Divine soul) to be an ocean, should let all thought of self be
absorbed in that Atma." This sacrifice is explained, in sec. ix., p.
127, of the Code of Hindoo Laws, thus: - "An Ashummeed Jugg is when a
person, having commenced a Jugg, (i. e., religious ceremony), writes
various articles upon a scroll of paper on a horse's neck, and dismisses
the horse, sending along with the horse a stout and valiant person,
equipped with the best necessaries and accoutrements to accompany the
horse day and night whithersoever he shall choose to go; and if any
creature, either man, genius, or dragon, should seize the horse, that
man opposes such attempt, and having gained the victory upon a battle,
again gives the horse his freedom. If any one in this world, or in
heaven, or beneath the earth, would seize this horse, and the horse of
himself comes to the house of the celebrator of the Jugg, upon killing
that horse he must throw the flesh of him upon the fire of the Juk, and
utter the prayers of his deity; such a Jugg is called a Jugg Ashummeed,
and the merit of it as a religious work is infinite." This is a most
curious circumstance; and the coincidence between the religious rites of
two people who probably never had any intercourse with each other, is
very remarkable. I would not however say that the Hindoo ceremony could
not have been borrowed from the Jews; (though it is very unlikely); no
more than I should say, as some have done, that the Jewish rite was
borrowed from the Egyptian sacrifice to Apis mentioned above, which is
still more unlikely. See particularly Clarke's note on [Lev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004) (note.md).

[Leviticus 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 16:21</span></span>

Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head, etc. - What this
imposition of hands meant see in the notes on [Exo
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#010) (note.md), and [Lev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004) (note.md).

And confess over him all the iniquities - transgressions - sins - The
three terms used here, Iniquities, עונת avonoth, from עוה avah, to
pervert, distort, or turn aside; Transgressions, פשעים peshaim, from פשע
pasha, to transgress, to rebel; and Sins, חטאת chattaoth, from חטא
chata, to miss the mark, are supposed by the Jews to comprise every
thing that implies a breach of the Divine law, or an offense against
God. See Clarke's note on [Gen 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#013.md).
Maimonides gives us the confession in the following words: -

"O Lord, thy people, the house of Israel, have sinned and done iniquity,
and trespassed before thee. O Lord, make atonement now for the
iniquities and transgressions and sins that thy people, the house of
Israel, have sinned and transgressed against thee; as it is written in
the law of Moses thy servant, saying: That in this day he shall make
atonement for you, to cleanse you from all your sins before the Lord,
and ye shall be clean." - See the Mishna, vol. ii., p. 329. When this
confession was finished, the goat was sent by a proper hand to the
wilderness, and there let loose; and nothing farther was ever heard of
it. Did not all this signify that Christ has so carried and borne away
our sins, that against them who receive him as the only true atoning
sacrifice they should never more be brought to remembrance? On the head
of the scape-goat, a piece of scarlet cloth was tied, and the tradition
of the Jews states that if God accepted the sacrifice, the scarlet cloth
turned white while the goat was led to the desert; but if God had not
accepted this expiation, the redness continued, and the rest of the year
was spent in mourning. From the foundation of the Church of God it was
ever believed by his followers, that there were certain infallible
tokens by which he discovered to genuine believers his acceptance of
them and their services. This was sometimes done by a fire from heaven
consuming the sacrifice; sometimes by an oracular communication to the
priest or prophet; and at other times, according to the Jewish account,
by changing the fillet or cloth on the head of the scape-goat from
scarlet to white: but most commonly, and especially under the Gospel
dispensation, he gives this assurance to true believers by the testimony
of his Spirit in their consciences, that he has forgiven their
iniquities, transgressions, and sins, for his sake who has carried their
griefs, and borne their sorrows.

[Leviticus 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 16:26</span></span>

He that let go the goat - shall wash, etc. - Not only the person who led
him away, but the priest who consecrated him, was reputed unclean,
because the goat himself was unclean, being considered as bearing the
sins of the whole congregation. On this account both the priest and the
person who led him to the wilderness were obliged to wash their clothes
and bathe themselves, before they could come into the camp.

[Leviticus 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 16:29</span></span>

The seventh month, on the tenth day of the month - The commandment of
fasting, and sanctifying this tenth day, is again repeated [Lev
23:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027.md); but in the last verse it is
called the ninth day at even, because the Jewish day began with the
evening. The sacrifices which the day of atonement should have more than
other days, are mentioned [Num
29:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#007.md); and the jubilee which was
celebrated every fiftieth year was solemnly proclaimed by sound of
trumpet on this tenth day, [Lev 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008.md),
[Lev 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009.md). A shadow, says Mr.
Ainsworth, of that acceptable year of the Lord, the year of freedom,
which Christ has proclaimed by the trumpet of his Gospel, [Luk
4:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018.md); [Co2
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md). This seventh month was Tisri, and
answers to a part of our September and October. It was the seventh of
the sacred and the first month of the civil year.

The great day of atonement, and the sacrifices, rites, and ceremonies
prescribed for it, were commanded to be solemnized by the Jews through
the whole of their dispensation, and as long as God should acknowledge
them for his people: yet in the present day scarcely a shadow of these
things remains; there is no longer a scape-goat, nor a goat for
sacrifice, provided by them in any place. They are sinners, and they are
without an atonement. How strange it is that they do not see that the
essence of their religion is gone, and that consequently God has thrown
them entirely out of covenant with himself! The true expiation, the
Christ crucified, they refuse to receive, and are consequently without
temple, altar, scape-goat, atonement, or any means of salvation! The
state of the Gentile world is bad, but that of the Jews is doubly
deplorable. Their total excision excepted, wrath is come upon them to
the uttermost. What a proof is this of the truth of the predictions in
their own law, and of those in the Gospel of Christ! Who, with the Jews
and the Bible before his eyes, can doubt the truth of that Bible as a
Divine revelation? Had this people been extinct, we might have doubted
whether there were ever a people on the earth that acknowledged such a
law, or observed such ordinances; but the people, their law, and their
prophets are still in being, and all proclaim what God has wrought, and
that he has now ceased to work among them, because they have refused to
receive and profit by the great atonement; and yet he preserves them
alive, and in a state of complete separation from all the people of the
earth in all places of their dispersion! How powerfully does the
preservation of the Jews as a distinct people bear testimony at once to
the truth of their own law which they acknowledge, and the Gospel of
Christ which they reject!

2\. But while the Jews sit in thick darkness, because of the veil that
is on their hearts, though the light of the glory of God is shining all
around them, but not into them because of their unbelief; in what state
are those who profess to see their unbelief and obstinacy, acknowledge
the truth of the New Testament, and yet are living without an atonement
applied to their souls for the removal of their iniquities,
transgressions, and sins? These are also in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of iniquity. An all-sufficient Savior held out in the New
Testament, can do them no more good than a scape-goat and day of
atonement described in the law can do the Jews. As well may a man
imagine that the word bread can nourish his body, as that the name
Christ can save his soul. Both must be received and applied in order
that the man may live.

3\. The Jews prepared themselves to get benefit from this most solemn
ordinance by the deepest humiliations. According to their canons, they
were obliged to abstain from all meat and drink - from the bath - from
anointing themselves - to go barefoot - and to be in a state of perfect
continency. He who is likely to get benefit for his soul through the
redemption that is in Christ, must humble himself under the mighty hand
of God, confess his iniquity, abstain from every appearance of evil, and
believe on him who died for his offenses, and rose again for his
justification. The soul that seeks not shall not find, even under the
Gospel of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 17](lev017.md)

</div>
