<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev013)  [Next](lev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 14:0</span></span>

Introduction to the sacrifices and ceremonies to be used in cleansing
the leper, [Lev 14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001). Two living
birds, cedar-wood, scarlet, and hyssop, to be brought for him who was to
be cleansed, [Lev 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004). One of the
birds to be killed, [Lev 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005); and the
living bird, with the cedar-wood, scarlet, and hyssop, to be dipped in
the blood, and to be sprinkled on him who had been infected with the
leprosy, [Lev 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#006), [Lev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#007); after which he must wash his
clothes, shave his head, eye brows, beard, etc., bathe himself, tarry
abroad seven days, [Lev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008), [Lev
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#009); on the eighth day he must bring
two he-lambs, one ewe lamb, a tenth deal of flour, and a log of oil,
[Lev 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#010); which the priest was to
present as a trespass-offering, wave-offering, and sin-offering before
the Lord, [Lev 14:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#011). Afterwards he
was to sprinkle both the blood and oil on the person to be cleansed,
[Lev 14:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#014). The atonement made by
these offerings, [Lev 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#019), [Lev
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#020). If the person were poor, one
lamb, with the flour and oil, two turtledoves, or two young pigeons,
were only required, [Lev 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#021), [Lev
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#022). These to be presented, and the
blood and oil applied as before, [Lev
14:23-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#023). Laws and ordinances relative
to houses infected by the leprosy, vv. 33-48. An atonement to be made in
order to cleanse the house, similar to that made for the healed leper,
[Lev 14:49-53](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#049). A summary of this and
the preceding chapter, relative to leprous persons, garments, and
houses, [Lev 14:54-56](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#054). The end for
which these different laws were given, [Lev
14:57](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#057).

[Leviticus 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 14:3</span></span>

The priest shall go forth out of the camp - As the leper was separated
from the people, and obliged, because of his uncleanness, to dwell
without the camp, and could not be admitted till the priest had declared
that he was clean; hence it was necessary that the priest should go out
and inspect him, and, if healed, offer for him the sacrifices required,
in order to his re-admission to the camp. As the priest alone had
authority to declare a person clean or unclean, it was necessary that
the healed person should show himself to the priest, that he might make
a declaration that he was clean and fit for civil and religious society,
without which, in no case, could he be admitted; hence, when Christ
cleansed the lepers, [Mat 8:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002), he
commanded them to go and show themselves to the priest, etc.

[Leviticus 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 14:4</span></span>

Two birds alive and clean, etc. - Whether these birds were sparrows, or
turtledoves, or pigeons, we know not; probably any kind of clean bird,
or bird proper to be eaten, might be used on this occasion, though it is
more likely that turtle-doves or pigeons were employed, because these
appear to have been the only birds offered in sacrifice. Of the
cedarwood, hyssop, clean bird, and scarlet wool or fillet, were made an
aspergillum, or instrument to sprinkle with. The cedar-wood served for
the handle, the hyssop and living bird were attached to it by means of
the scarlet wool or crimson fillet. The bird was so bound to this handle
as that its tail should be downwards, in order to be dipped into the
blood of the bird that had been killed. The whole of this made an
instrument for the sprinkling of this blood, and when this business was
done, the living bird was let loose, and permitted to go whithersoever
it would. In this ceremony, according to some rabbins, "the living bird
signified that the dead flesh of the leper was restored to soundness;
the cedar-wood, which is not easily corrupted, that he was healed of his
putrefaction; the scarlet thread, wool, or fillet, that he was restored
to his good complexion; and the hyssop, which was purgative and
odoriferous, that the disease was completely removed, and the bad scent
that accompanied it entirely gone." Ainsworth, Dodd, and others, have
given many of these rabbinical conceits. Of all these purifications, and
their accompanying circumstances, we may safely say, because authorized
by the New Testament so to do, that they pointed out the purification of
the soul through the atonement and Spirit of Christ; but to run
analogies between the type and the thing typified is difficult, and
precarious. The general meaning and design we sufficiently understand;
the particulars are not readily ascertainable, and consequently of
little importance; had they been otherwise, they would have been pointed
out.

[Leviticus 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 14:5</span></span>

Over running water - Literally, living, that is, spring water. The
meaning appears to be this: Some water (about a quarter of a log, an
eggshell and a half full, according to the rabbins) was taken from a
spring, and put into a clean earthen vessel, and they killed the bird
over this water, that the blood might drop into it; and in this blood
and water mixed, they dipped the instrument before described, and
sprinkled it seven times upon the person who was to be cleansed. The
living or spring water was chosen because it was purer than what was
taken from pits or wells, the latter being often in a putrid or corrupt
state; for in a ceremony of purifying or cleansing, every thing must be
as pure and perfect as possible.

[Leviticus 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 14:7</span></span>

Shall let the living bird loose - The Jews teach that wild birds were
employed on this occasion, no tame or domestic animal was used. Mr.
Ainsworth piously conjectures that the living and dead birds were
intended to represent the death and resurrection of Christ, by which an
atonement was made to purify the soul from its spiritual leprosy. The
bird let loose bears a near analogy to the scapegoat. See Leviticus 16.

[Leviticus 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 14:8</span></span>

And shave off all his hair - That the water by which he was to be washed
should reach every part of his body, that he might be cleansed from
whatever defilement might remain on any part of the surface of his body.
The Egyptian priests shaved the whole body every third day, to prevent
all manner of defilement.

[Leviticus 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 14:10</span></span>

Two he-lambs - One for a trespass-offering, [Lev
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#012), the other for a burnt-offering,
[Lev 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#019), [Lev
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#020).

One ewe-lamb - This was for a sin-offering [Lev
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#019). Three tenth deals - Three parts
of an ephah, or three omers; See all these measures explained in [Exo
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016) (note). The three tenth deals of
flour were for a minchah, meat or gratitude-offering, [Lev
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#020). The sin-offering was for his
impurity; the trespass-offering for his transgression; and the
gratitude-offering for his gracious cleansing. These constituted the
offering which each was ordered to bring to the priest; see [Mat
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004).

[Leviticus 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 14:12</span></span>

Wave-offering - See [Exo 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#027), and
Leviticus 7, where the reader will find an ample account of all the
various offerings and sacrifices used among the Jews.

[Leviticus 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 14:14</span></span>

Upon the tip of the right ear, etc. - See Clarke's note on [Exo
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#020).

[Leviticus 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 14:21</span></span>

And if he be poor - he shall take one lamb - There could be no cleansing
without a sacrifice. On this ground the apostle has properly observed
that all things under the law are purged with blood; and that without
shedding of blood there is no remission. Even if the person be poor, he
must provide one lamb; this could not be dispensed with: - so every soul
to whom the word of Divine revelation comes, must bring that Lamb of God
which takes away the sin of the world. There is no redemption but in his
blood.

[Leviticus 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">lev 14:34</span></span>

When ye be come into the land - and I put the plague of leprosy - It was
probably from this text that the leprosy has been generally considered
to be a disease inflicted immediately by God himself; but it is well
known that in Scripture God is frequently represented as doing what, in
the course of his providence, he only permits or suffers to be done. It
is supposed that the infection of the house, as well as of the person
and the garments, proceeded from animalcula. See Clarke's note on [Lev
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#047), and [Lev
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#052) (note).

[Leviticus 14:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">lev 14:45</span></span>

He shall break down the house - "On the suspicion of a house being
infected, the priest examined it, and ordered it to be shut up seven
days; if he found the plague, or signs of the plague, (hollow streaks,
greenish or reddish), were not spread, he commanded it to be shut up
seven days more. On the thirteenth day he revisited it; and if he found
the infected place dim, or gone away, he took out that part of the wall,
carried it out to an unclean place, mended the wall, and caused the
whole house to be new plastered. It was then shut up a third seven days,
and he came on the nineteenth, and if he found that the plague was
broken out anew, he ordered the house to be pulled down." See Ainsworth.
From all this may we not learn a lesson of instruction? If the means
made use of by God and his ministers for the conversion of a sinner be,
through his willful obstinacy, rendered of no avail; if by his evil
practices he trample under foot the blood of the covenant wherewith he
might have been sanctified, and do despite to the Spirit of God; then
God will pull down his house - dislodge his soul from its earthly
tabernacle, consign the house, the body, to corruption, and the spirit
to the perdition of ungodly men. Reader, see well how it stands with thy
soul. God is not mocked: what a man soweth, that shall he reap.

[Leviticus 14:53](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">lev 14:53</span></span>

He shall let go the living bird - This might as well be called the
scape-bird; as the goat, in Leviticus 16, is called the scape-goat. The
rites are similar in both cases, and probably had nearly the same
meaning. We have already taken occasion to observe (see the end of the
preceding chapter at [Lev 13:58](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#058)
(note)) that the leprosy was strongly emblematical of sin; to which we
may add here: -

1\. That the leprosy was a disease generally acknowledged to be
incurable by any human means; and therefore the Jews did not attempt to
cure it. What is directed to be done here was not in order to cure the
leper, but to declare him cured and fit for society. In like manner the
contagion of sin, its guilt and its power, can only be removed by the
hand of God; all means, without his especial influence, can be of no
avail.

2\. The body must be sprinkled and washed, and a sacrifice offered for
the sin of the soul, before the leper could be declared to be clean. To
cleanse the spiritual leper, the Lamb of God must be slain, and the
sprinkling of his blood be applied. Without the shedding of this blood
there is no remission.

3\. When the leper was cleansed, he was obliged to show himself to the
priest, whose province it was to pronounce him clean, and declare him
fit for intercourse with civil and religious society. When a sinner is
converted from the error of his ways, it is the business, as it is the
prerogative, of the ministers of Christ, after having duly acquainted
themselves with every circumstance, to declare the person converted from
sin to holiness, to unite him with the people of God, and admit him to
all the ordinances which belong to the faithful.

4\. When the leper was cleansed, he was obliged by the law to offer a
gift unto the Lord for his healing, as a proof of his gratitude, and an
evidence of his obedience. When a sinner is restored to the Divine
favor, he should offer continually the sacrifice of a grateful heart,
and, in willing obedience, show forth the virtues of Him who has called
him from darkness and wretchedness to marvelous light and happiness.

Reader, such was the leprosy, its destructive nature and consequences,
and the means of removing it; such is the spiritual evil represented by
it, such its consequences, and such the means by which alone it can be
removed. The disease of sin, inflicted by the devil, can only be cured
by the power of God.

1\. Art thou a leper? Do the spots of this spiritual infection begin to
appear on thee?

2\. Art thou young, and only entering into the ways of the world and
sin? Stop! bad habits are more easily conquered to-day than they will be
tomorrow.

3\. Art thou stricken in years, and rooted in transgression? How kind is
thy Maker to have preserved thee alive so long! Turn from thy
transgressions, humble thy soul before him, confess thine iniquity and
implore forgiveness. Seek, and thou shalt find. Behold the Lamb of God,
who taketh away the sin of the world!

4\. Hast thou been cleansed, and hast not returned to give glory to God?
hast not continued in the truth, serving thy Maker and Savior with a
loving and obedient heart? How cutting is that word, Were there not Ten
cleansed? but where are the Nine? Thou art probably one of them. Be
confounded at thy ingratitude, and distressed for thy backsliding; and
apply a second time for the healing efficacy of the great Atonement.
Turn, thou backslider; for he is married unto thee, and will heal thy
backslidings, and will love thee freely. Amen. So be it, Lord Jesus!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 15](lev015)

</div>
