<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev016)  [Next](lev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 17:0</span></span>

The people are commanded to bring all the cattle they intend to kill to
the door of the tabernacle, where they are to be made an offering to the
Lord; and those who disobey are to be cut off, [Lev
17:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001). The priest is to sprinkle the
blood, [Lev 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#006). They are forbidden
to offer sacrifices to devils, [Lev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007). The injunction to bring their
offerings to the door of the tabernacle is repeated, [Lev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008), [Lev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#009). The eating of blood is solemnly
forbidden, [Lev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010). It is the life
of the beast, and is given to make an atonement for their souls, [Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011), [Lev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#012). If a bird or beast be taken in
hunting, its blood must be poured out and covered with dust, for the
reasons before assigned, [Lev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013),
[Lev 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014). None shall eat an animal
that dies of itself, or is torn by beasts; if any act otherwise he must
bathe his clothes and his flesh, or bear his iniquity, [Lev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015), [Lev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#016).

[Leviticus 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 17:4</span></span>

And bringeth it not unto the door - As sacrifice was ever deemed
essential to true religion, it was necessary that it should be performed
in such a way as to secure the great purpose of its institution. God
alone could show how this should be done so as to be pleasing in his
sight, and therefore he has given the most plain and particular
directions concerning it. The Israelites, from their long residence in
Egypt, an idolatrous country, had doubtless adopted many of their
usages; and many portions of the Pentateuch seem to have been written
merely to correct and bring them back to the purity of the Divine
worship. That no blood should be offered to idols, God commands every
animal used for food or sacrifice to be slain at the door of the
tabernacle. While every animal was slain in this sacrificial way, even
the daily food of the people must put them in mind of the necessity of a
sacrifice for sin. Perhaps St. Paul had this circumstance in view when
he said, Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of God, [Co1 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031); and,
Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus,
giving thanks to God and the Father by him. While the Israelites were
encamped in the wilderness, it was comparatively easy to prevent all
abuses of this Divine institution; and therefore they were all commanded
to bring the oxen, sheep, and goats to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, that they might be slain there, and their blood sprinkled
upon the altar of the Lord. But when they became settled in the promised
land, and the distance, in many cases, rendered it impossible for them
to bring the animals to be slain for domestic uses to the temple, they
were permitted to pour out the blood in a sacrificial way unto God at
their respective dwellings, and to cover it with the dust; see [Lev
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013), and [Deu
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#020), [Deu
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#021).

Blood shall be imputed unto that man - Having poured out the blood
improperly, he shall be considered as guilty of murder, because that
blood, had it been properly and sacrificially employed, might have made
atonement for the life of a man.

[Leviticus 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 17:7</span></span>

They shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils - They shall not
sacrifice לשעירים lasseirim, to the hairy ones, to goats. The famous
heathen god, Pan, was represented as having the posteriors, horns, and
ears of a goat; and the Mendesians, a people of Egypt, had a deity which
they worshipped under this form. Herodotus says that all goats were
worshipped in Egypt, but the he-goat particularly. It appears also that
the different ape and monkey species were objects of superstitious
worship; and from these sprang, not only Mendes and Jupiter Ammon, who
was worshipped under the figure of a ram, but also Pan and the Sileni,
with the innumerable herd of those imaginary beings, satyrs, dryads,
hamadryads, etc. etc., all woodland gods, and held in veneration among
the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans.

After whom they have gone a whoring - Though this term is frequently
used to express idolatry, yet we are not to suppose that it is not to be
taken in a literal sense in many places in Scripture, even where it is
used in connection with idolatrous acts of worship. It is well known
that Baal-Peor and Ashtaroth were worshipped with unclean rites; and
that public prostitution formed a grand part of the worship of many
deities among the Egyptians, Moabites, Canaanites, Greeks, and Romans.
The great god of the two latter nations, Jupiter, was represented as the
general corrupter of women; and of Venus, Flora, Priapus, and others, it
is needless to speak. That there was public prostitution in the
patriarchal times, see Clarke on [Gen
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#021) (note). And that there was
public prostitution of women to goats in Egypt, see Herodotus, lib. ii.,
c. 46, p. 108, edit. Gale, who gives a case of this abominable kind that
took place in Egypt while he was in that country. See also many examples
in Bochart, vol. ii., col. 641; and see Clarke's note on [Lev
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#016).

[Leviticus 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 17:11</span></span>

For the life of the flesh is in the blood - This sentence, which
contains a most important truth, had existed in the Mosaic writings for
3600 years before the attention of any philosopher was drawn to the
subject. This is the more surprising, as the nations in which philosophy
flourished were those which especially enjoyed the Divine oracles in
their respective languages. That the blood actually possesses a living
principle, and that the life of the whole body is derived from it, is a
doctrine of Divine revelation, and a doctrine which the observations and
experiments of the most accurate anatomists have served strongly to
confirm. The proper circulation of this important fluid through the
whole human system was first taught by Solomon in figurative language,
[Ecc 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#006); and discovered, as it is
called, and demonstrated, by Dr. Harvey in 1628; though some Italian
philosophers had the same notion a little before. This accurate
anatomist was the first who fully revived the Mosaic notion of the
vitality of the blood; which notion was afterward adopted by the justly
celebrated Dr. John Hunter, professor of anatomy in London, and fully
established by him by a great variety of strong reasoning and accurate
experiments. To support this opinion Dr. Hunter proves: -

1\. That the blood unites living parts in some circumstances as
certainly as the yet recent juices of the branch of one tree unite with
that of another; and he thinks that if either of these fluids were dead
matter, they would act as stimuli, and no union would take place in the
animal or vegetable kingdom; and he shows that in the nature of things
there is not a more intimate connection between life and a solid than
between life and a fluid.

2\. He shows that the blood becomes vascular, like other living parts of
the body; and he demonstrated this by a preparation in which vessels
were clearly seen to arise from what had been a coagulum of blood; for
those vessels opened into the stream of the circulating blood, which was
in contiguity with this coagulated mass.

3\. He proves that if blood be taken from the arm in the most intense
cold that the human body can suffer, it will raise the thermometer to
the same height as blood taken in the most sultry heat. This is a very
powerful argument for the vitality of the blood, as it is well known
that living bodies alone have the power of resisting great degrees of
heat and cold, and of maintaining in almost every situation while in
health that temperature which we distinguish by the name of animal heat.

4\. He proves that blood is capable of being acted upon by a stimulus,
as it coagulates on exposure to the air, as certainly as the cavities of
the abdomen and thorax become inflamed from the same cause. The more the
blood is alive, i. e., the more the animal is in health, the sooner the
blood coagulates on exposure; and the more it has lost of the living
principle, as in cases of violent inflammation, the less sensible it is
to the stimulus produced by being exposed, and coagulates more slowly.

5\. He proves that the blood preserves life in different parts of the
body. When the nerves going to any part are tied or cut, the part
becomes paralytic, and loses all power of motion, but it does not
mortify. But let the artery be cut, and then the part dies and
mortification ensues. It must therefore be the vital principle of the
blood that keeps the part alive; nor does it appear that this fact can
be accounted for on any other principle.

6\. He thinks this vitality farther proved from the case of a person who
was brought to St. George's hospital for a simple fracture of the os
humeri, and who died about a month after. As the bones had not united,
he injected the arm, and thus found that the coagulated blood which
filled the cavity between the extremities of the fractured bones was
become vascular, and in some places very much so, which vessels, had it
been dead matter, it never could have produced.

This system has been opposed, and arguments have been adduced to prove
that the principle of vitality exists not in the blood but in the
nervous system. But every argument on this ground appears to be done
away by the simple consideration that the whole nervous system, as well
as every other part of the body, is originally derived from the blood;
for is it not from the blood of the mother that the fetus has its being
and nourishment in the womb? Do not all the nerves, as well as the
brain, etc., originate from that alone? And if it be not vital can it
give the principle of vitality to something else, which then exclusively
(though the effect of a cause) becomes the principle of vitality to all
the solids and fluids of the body? This seems absurd. That the human
being proceeded originally from the blood admits of no doubt; and it is
natural and reasonable to suppose that as it was the cause under God
which generated all the other parts of the body, so it still continues
to be the principle of life, and by it alone all the wastes of the
system are repaired. Two points relative to this subject are strongly
asserted in Divine revelation, one by Moses, the other by St. Paul.

1\. Moses says, The Life of the flesh is in the Blood, [Lev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011). This has been proved by the
most indisputable facts.

2\. St. Paul says, God hath made of One Blood all nations of men, [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026). And this is demonstrated, not
only from there being only one pair from whom all the nations of men
have been derived, but also from the fact that every human being, from
the first-born of Eve to the present hour, has been formed out of and
supported by the mother's blood; and that from the agency of this fluid
the human body, after being born into the world, has its increment and
support.

The reason given by God for the law against eating blood is perfectly
conclusive: I will set my face against that soul that eateth blood - for
the Life (נפש nephesh) of the flesh is in the Blood, and I have given it
to you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls (נפשתיכם
naphshotheychem, your Lives): for it is the blood (because it is the
Life, נפש nephesh) that maketh an atonement for the soul (בנפש
bannephesh, for the life; for the word is the same in all these cases).
By transgression a man forfeits his Life to Divine justice, and he must
die, did not mercy provide him a substitute. The life of a beast is
appointed and accepted by God as a substitute for the sinner's life (in
reference to the life of Christ, which was to be given for the life of
the world); but as this life is in the Blood, and as the blood is the
grand principle of vitality, therefore the blood is to be poured out
upon the altar: and thus the life of the beast becomes a substitute for
the life of the man.

And it is well worthy of being remarked, that Christ not only died for
sinners, but our redemption is everywhere attributed to his Blood, and
the shedding of that blood; and that on the altar of the cross, this
might make an atonement for the lives and souls of men, he not only
bowed his head, and gave up the ghost, but his side was opened, the
pericardium and the heart evidently pierced, that the vital fluid might
be poured out from the very seat of life, and that thus the blood, which
is the life, should be poured out to make an atonement for the life of
the soul. The doctrine of Moses and Paul proves the truth of the
doctrine of Harvey and Hunter; and the reasonings and experiments of
Harvey and Hunter illustrate and confirm the doctrine of Moses and Paul
- Here then is a farther proof of the truth and authority of Divine
revelation. See Clarke's note on [Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004); Dr. J. Corrie's Essay on the
Vitality of the Blood; and the article Blood, in the Encyclopaedias.

[Leviticus 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 17:14</span></span>

Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh - Independently of the
moral reasons given above, we may add,

1\. That blood, being highly alkalescent, especially in hot climates, is
subject to speedy putrefaction.

2\. That it affords a gross nutriment, being very difficult of
digestion, so much so that bull's blood was used in ancient times as
poison, "Its extreme viscidity rendering it totally indigestible by the
powers of the human stomach."

3\. It is allowed that when blood was used in this country in great
quantities, the scurvy was more frequent than at other times.

4\. It appears from history that those nations who lived most on it were
very fierce, savage, and barbarous, such as the Scythians, Tartars,
Arabs of the desert, the Scandinavians, etc., etc., some of whom drank
the blood of their enemies, making cups of their sculls!

[Leviticus 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 17:15</span></span>

That which died of itself, or that which was torn - Because, in both
cases, the blood was retained in the body; hence the council at
Jerusalem forbade things strangled as well as blood, because in such
beasts the blood was coagulated in the veins and arteries. See [Act
15:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028). Every thing considered,
surely there is as little propriety in eating of blood as there is
necessity to do it. They who will do otherwise must bear their iniquity.
If blood eating be no offense, then they have no sin to answer for. The
principal subjects of this chapter have been already so amply handled in
the notes, that there is no need to add any thing by way of reflection
or improvement.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 18](lev018)

</div>
