<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev004)  [Next](lev006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 5:0</span></span>

Concerning witnesses who, being adjured, refuse to tell the truth, [Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001). Of those who contract defilement
by touching unclean things or persons, [Lev
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002), [Lev
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#003). Of those who bind themselves by
vows or oaths, and do not fulfill them, [Lev
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004), [Lev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#005). The trespass-offering prescribed
in such cases, a lamb or a kid, [Lev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006); a turtle-dove or two young
pigeons, [Lev 5:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007); or an ephah of
fine flour with oil and frankincense, [Lev
5:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011). Other laws relative to
trespasses, through ignorance in holy things, [Lev
5:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014). Of trespasses in things
unknown, [Lev 5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#017).

[Leviticus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 5:1</span></span>

If a soul sin - It is generally supposed that the case referred to here
is that of a person who, being demanded by the civil magistrate to
answer upon oath, refuses to tell what he knows concerning the subject;
such a one shall bear his iniquity - shall be considered as guilty in
the sight of God, of the transgression which he has endeavored to
conceal, and must expect to be punished by him for hiding the iniquity
to which he was privy, or suppressing the truth which, being discovered,
would have led to the exculpation of the innocent, and the punishment of
the guilty.

[Leviticus 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 5:2</span></span>

Any unclean thing - Either the dead body of a clean animal, or the
living or dead carcass of any unclean creature. All such persons were to
wash their clothes and themselves in clean water, and were considered as
unclean till the evening, [Lev
11:24-31](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#024). But if this had been
neglected, they were obliged to bring a trespass-offering. What this
meant, see in the notes on Leviticus 7 (note).

[Leviticus 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 5:4</span></span>

To do evil, or to do good - It is very likely that rash promises are
here intended; for if a man vow to do an act that is evil, though it
would be criminal to keep such an oath or vow, yet he is guilty because
he made it, and therefore must offer the trespass-offering. If he
neglect to do the good he has vowed, he is guilty, and must in both
cases confess his iniquity, and bring his trespass-offering.

[Leviticus 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 5:5</span></span>

He shall confess that he hath sinned - Even restitution was not
sufficient without this confession, because a man might make restitution
without being much humbled; but the confession of sin has a direct
tendency to humble the soul, and hence it is so frequently required in
the Holy Scriptures, as without humiliation there can be no salvation.

[Leviticus 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 5:7</span></span>

If he be not able to bring a lamb - See the conclusion at [Lev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#016) (note).

[Leviticus 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 5:8</span></span>

But shall not divide it - See Clarke's note on [Lev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#016).

[Leviticus 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 5:10</span></span>

He shall offer the second for a burnt-offering - The pigeon for the
burnt-offering was wholly consumed, it was the Lord's property; that for
the sin-offering was the priest's property, and was to be eaten by him
after its blood had been partly sprinkled on the side of the altar, and
the rest poured out at the bottom of the altar. See also [Lev
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026).

[Leviticus 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 5:11</span></span>

Tenth part of an ephah - About three quarts. The ephah contained a
little more than seven gallons and a half.

[Leviticus 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 5:15</span></span>

In the holy things of the Lord - This law seems to relate particularly
to sacrilege, and defrauds in spiritual matters; such as the neglect to
consecrate or redeem the firstborn, the withholding of the first-fruits,
tithes, and such like; and, according to the rabbins, making any secular
gain of Divine things, keeping back any part of the price of things
dedicated to God, or withholding what man had vowed to pay. See a long
list of these things in Ainsworth.

With thy estimation - The wrong done or the defraud committed should be
estimated at the number of shekels it was worth, or for which it would
sell. These the defrauder was to pay down, to which he was to add a
fifth part more, and bring a ram without blemish for a sin-offering
besides. There is an obscurity in the text, but this seems to be its
meaning.

[Leviticus 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 5:16</span></span>

Shall make amends - Make restitution for the wrong he had done according
to what is laid down in the preceding verse.

[Leviticus 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 5:19</span></span>

He hath certainly trespassed - And because he hath sinned, therefore he
must bring a sacrifice. On no other ground shall he be accepted by the
Lord. Reader, how dost thou stand in the sight of thy Maker? On the
subject of this chapter it may be proper to make the following
reflections. When the infinite purity and strict justice of God are
considered, the exceeding breadth of his commandment, our slowness of
heart to believe, and our comparatively cold performance of sacred
duties, no wonder that there is sinfulness found in our holy things; and
at what a low ebb must the Christian life be found when this is the
case! This is a sore and degrading evil in the Church of God; but there
is one even worse than this, that is, the strenuous endeavor of many
religious people to reconcile their minds to this state of inexcusable
imperfection, and defend it zealously, on the supposition that it is at
once both unavoidable and useful - unavoidable, for they think they
cannot live without it; and useful, because they suppose it tends to
humble them! The more inward sin a man has, the more pride he will feel;
the less, the more humility. A sense of God's infinite kindness to us,
and our constant dependence on him, will ever keep the soul in the dust.
Sin can never be necessary to the maintenance or extension of the
Christian life, it is the thing which Jesus Christ came into the world
to destroy; and his name is called Jesus or Savior because he saves his
people from their sins. But how little of the spirit and influence of
his Gospel is known in the world! He saves, unto the uttermost, them who
come unto the Father through him. But alas! how few are thus saved! for
they will not come unto him that they might have life. Should any
Christian refuse to offer up the following prayer to God? "Almighty God,
unto whom all hearts be open, and from whom no secrets are hid, cleanse
the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that
we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name, through
Christ our Lord. Amen." - The Liturgy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 6](lev006)

</div>
