<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev001)  [Next](lev003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 2:0</span></span>

The meat-offering of flour with oil and incense, [Lev
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001.md). The oblation of the
meat-offering baked in the oven and in the pan, [Lev
2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004.md). The meat-offering baked in the
frying-pan, [Lev 2:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#007.md). No leaven nor
honey to be offered with the meat-offering, [Lev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011.md). The oblation of the
first-fruits, [Lev 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#012.md). Salt to be
offered with the meat offering, [Lev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013.md). Green ears dried by the fire,
and corn to be beaten out of full ears, with oil and frankincense, to be
offered as a meat-offering of first-fruits, [Lev
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014.md).

[Leviticus 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 2:1</span></span>

Meat-offering - מנחה minchah. For an explanation of this word see
Clarke's note on [Gen 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003.md), and Lev.
vii. Calmet has remarked that there are five kinds of the minchah
mentioned in this chapter.

1\. סלת soleth, simple flour or meal, [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001.md).

2\. Cakes and wafers, or whatever was baked in the oven, [Lev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004.md).

3\. Cakes baked in the pan, [Lev 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005.md).

4\. Cakes baked on the frying-pan, or probably, a gridiron, [Lev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#007.md).

5\. Green ears of corn parched, [Lev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014.md).

All these were offered without honey or leaven, but accompanied with
wine, oil, and frankincense. It is very likely that the minchah, in some
or all of the above forms, was the earliest oblation offered to the
Supreme Being, and probably was in use before sin entered into the
world, and consequently before bloody sacrifices, or piacular victims,
had been ordained. The minchah of green ears of corn dried by the fire,
etc., was properly the gratitude-offering for a good seed time, and the
prospect of a plentiful harvest. This appears to have been the offering
brought by Cain, [Gen 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003.md); see
Clarke's note [Gen 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003.md). The flour,
whether of wheat, rice, barley, rye, or any other grain used for
aliment, was in all likelihood equally proper; for in [Num
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015.md), we find the flour of barley, or
barley meal, is called minchah. It is plain that in the institution of
the minchah no animal was here included, though in other places it seems
to include both kinds; but in general the minchah was not a bloody
offering, nor used by way of atonement or expiation, but merely in a
eucharistic way, expressing gratitude to God for the produce of the
soil. It is such an offering as what is called natural religion might be
reasonably expected to suggest: but alas! so far lost is man, that even
thankfulness to God for the fruits of the earth must be taught by a
Divine revelation; for in the heart of man even the seeds of gratitude
are not found, till sown there by the hand of Divine grace. Offerings of
different kinds of grain, flour, bread, fruits, etc., are the most
ancient among the heathen nations; and even the people of God have had
them from the beginning of the world. See this subject largely discussed
on [Exo 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#029) (note.md), where several
examples are given. Ovid intimates that these gratitude-offerings
originated with agriculture. "In the most ancient times men lived by
rapine, hunting, etc., for the sword was considered to be more honorable
than the plough; but when they sowed their fields, they dedicated the
first-fruits of their harvest to Ceres, to whom the ancients attributed
the art of agriculture, and to whom burnt-offerings of corn were made,
according to immemorial usages." The passage to which I refer, and of
which I have given the substance, is the following: -

"Non habuit tellus doctos antiqua colonos:

Lassabant agiles aspera bella viros.

Plus erat in gladio quam curvo laudis aratro:

Neglectus domino pauca ferebat ager.

Farra tamen veteres jaciebant, farra metebant:

Primitias Cereri farra resecta dabant.

Usibus admoniti flammis torrenda dedere:

Multaque peccato damna tulere suo."

Fastor., lib. ii., ver. 515.

Pliny observes that "Numa taught the Romans to offer fruits to the gods,
and to make supplications before them, bringing salt cakes and parched
corn; as grain in this state was deemed most wholesome." Numa instituit
deos Fruge colere, et Mola Salsa supplicare, atque (ut auctor est
Hemina) far torrere, quoniam tostum cibo salubrius esset - Hist. Nat.
lib xviii., c. 2. And it is worthy of remark, that the ancient Romans
considered "no grain as pure or proper for divine service that had not
been previously parched." Id uno modo consecutum, statuendo non esse
purum ad rem divinam nisi tostum - Ibid.

God, says Calmet, requires nothing here which was not in common use for
nourishment; but he commands that these things should be offered with
such articles as might give them the most exquisite relish, such as
salt, oil, and wine, and that the flour should be of the finest and
purest kind. The ancients, according to Suidas, seem to have made much
use or meal formed into a paste with milk, and sometimes with water.
(See Suidas in Μαζα). The priests kept in the temples a certain mixture
of flour mingled with oil and wine, which they called Ὑγιεια Hugieia or
health, and which they used as a kind of amulet or charm against
sickness; after they had finished their sacrifices, they generally threw
some flour upon the fire, mingled with oil and wine, which they called
θυληματα thulemata, and which, according to Theophrastus, was the
ordinary sacrifice of the poor.

[Leviticus 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 2:2</span></span>

His handful of the flour - This was for a memorial, to put God in mind
of his covenant with their fathers, and to recall to their mind his
gracious conduct towards them and their ancestors. Mr. Ainsworth
properly remarks, "that there was neither oil nor incense offered with
the sin and jealousy offerings; because they were no offerings of
memorial, but such as brought iniquities to remembrance, which were
neither gracious nor sweet-smelling before the Lord." [Num
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015.md); [Lev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011.md). In this case a handful only was
burnt, the rest was reserved for the priest's use; but all the
frankincense was burnt, because from it the priest could derive no
advantage.

[Leviticus 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 2:4</span></span>

Baken in the oven - תנור tannur, from נר nar, to split, divide, says Mr.
Parkhurst; and hence the oven, because of its burning, dissolving, and
melting heat.

[Leviticus 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 2:5</span></span>

Baken in a pan - מחבת machabath, supposed to be a flat iron plate,
placed over the fire; such as is called a griddle in some countries.

[Leviticus 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 2:7</span></span>

The frying-pan - מרחשת marchesheth, supposed to be the same with that
called by the Arabs a ta-jen, a shallow earthen vessel like a
frying-pan, used not only to fry in, but for other purposes. On the
different instruments, as well as the manner of baking in the east, Mr.
Harmer, in his observations on select passages of Scripture, has
collected the following curious information.

"Dr. Shaw informs us that in the cities and villages of Barbary, there
are public ovens, but that among the Bedouins, who live in tents, and
the Kabyles, who live in miserable hovels in the mountains, their bread,
made into thin cakes, is baked either immediately upon the coals, or
else in a ta-jen, which he tells us is a shallow earthen vessel like a
frying-pan: and then cites the Septuagint to show that the supposed pan,
mentioned [Lev 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005.md), was the same thing
as a ta-jen. The ta-jen, according to Dr. Russel, is exactly the same
among the Bedouins as the τηγανον, a word of the same sound as well as
meaning, was among the Greeks. So the Septuagint, [Lev
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005.md) : if thy oblation be a
meat-offering, baken in a pan, (απο τηγανου), it shall be of fine flour
unleavened, mingled with oil.

"This account given by the doctor is curious; but as it does not give us
all the eastern ways of baking, so neither does it furnish us, I am
afraid, with a complete comment on that variety of methods of preparing
the meat-offerings which is mentioned by Moses in Leviticus 2. So long
ago as Queen Elizabeth's time, Rauwolff observed that travelers
frequently baked bread in the deserts of Arabia on the ground, heated
for that purpose by fire, covering their cakes of bread with ashes and
coals, and turning them several times until they were baked enough; but
that some of the Arabians had in their tents, stones, or copper plates,
made on purpose for baking. Dr. Pococke very lately made a like
observation, speaking of iron hearths used for baking their bread.

"Sir John Chardin, mentioning the several ways of baking their bread in
the east, describes these iron plates as small and convex. These plates
are most commonly used, he tells us, in Persia, and among the wandering
people that dwell in tents, as being the easiest way of baking, and done
with the least expense; the bread being as thin as a skin, and soon
prepared. Another way (for he mentions four) is by baking on the hearth.
That bread is about an inch thick; they make no other all along the
Black Sea from the Palus Maeotis to the Caspian Sea, in Chaldea, and in
Mesopotamia, except in towns. This, he supposes, is owing to their being
woody countries. These people make a fire in the middle of a room; when
the bread is ready for baking they sweep a corner of the hearth, lay the
bread there, and cover it with hot ashes and embers; in a quarter of an
hour they turn it: this bread is very good. The third way is that which
is common among us. The last way, and that which is common through all
Asia, is thus: they make an oven in the ground, four or five feet deep
and three in diameter, well plastered with mortar. When it is hot, they
place the bread (which is commonly long, and not thicker than a finger)
against the sides, and it is baked in a moment.

"D'Arvieux mentions another way used by the Arabs about Mount Carmel,
who sometimes bake in an oven, and at other time on the hearth; but have
a third method, which is, to make a fire in a great stone pitcher and
when it is heated, they mix meal and water, as we do to make paste to
glue things together, which they apply with the hollow of their hands to
the outside of the pitcher, and this extremely soft paste spreading
itself upon it is baked in an instant. The heat of the pitcher having
dried up all the moisture, the bread comes off as thin as our wafers;
and the operation is so speedily performed that in a very little time a
sufficient quantity is made.

"Maimonides and the Septuagint differ in their explanation of [Lev
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005.md); for that Egyptian rabbi supposes
this verse speaks of a fiat plate, and these more ancient interpreters,
of a ta-jen. But they both seem to agree that these were two of the
methods of preparing the meat-offering; for Maimonides supposes the
seventh verse speaks of a frying-pan or ta-jen; whereas the Septuagint,
on the contrary, thought the word there meant a hearth, which term takes
in an iron or copper plate, though it extends farther.

"The meat-offerings of the fourth verse answer as well to the Arab
bread, baked by means of their stone pitchers, which are used by them
for the baking of wafers, as to their cakes of bread mentioned by
D'Arvieux, who, describing the way of baking among the modern Arabs,
after mentioning some of their methods, says they bake their best sort
of bread, either by heating an oven, or a large pitcher, half full of
certain little smooth shining flints, upon which they lay the dough,
spread out in form of a thin broad cake. The mention of wafers seems to
fix the meaning of Moses to these oven pitchers, though perhaps it may
be thought an objection that this meat-offering is said to have been
baked in an oven; but it will be sufficient to observe that the Hebrew
words only signify a meat-offering of the oven, and consequently may be
understood as well of wafers baked on the outside of these oven
pitchers, as of cakes of bread baked in them. And if thou bring an
oblation, a baked thing, of the oven, it shall be an unleavened cake of
fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
Whoever then attends to these accounts of the stone pitcher, the ta-jen,
and the copper plate or iron hearth, will enter into this second of
Leviticus, I believe, much more perfectly than any commentator has done,
and will find in these accounts what answers perfectly well to the
description Moses gives us of the different ways of preparing the
meat-offerings. A ta-jen indeed, according to Dr. Shaw, serves for a
frying-pan as well as for a baking vessel; for he says, the bagreah of
the people of Barbary differs not much from our pancakes, only that,
instead of rubbing the ta-jen or pan in which they fry them with butter,
they rub it with soap, to make them like a honeycomb.

"Moses possibly intended a meat-offering of that kind might be presented
to the Lord; and our translators seem to prefer that supposition, since,
though the margin mentions the opinion of Maimonides, the reading of the
text in the sixth verse opposes a pan for baking to a pan for frying in
the seventeenth verse. The thought, however, of Maimonides seems to be
most just, as Moses appears to be speaking of different kinds of bread
only, not of other farinaceous preparations.

"These oven pitchers mentioned by D'Arvieux, and used by the modern
Arabs for baking cakes of bread in them, and wafers on their outsides,
are not the only portable ovens of the east. St. Jerome, in his
commentary on [Lam 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#010.md), describes an
eastern oven as a round vessel of brass, blackened on the outside by the
surrounding fire which heats it within. Such an oven I have seen used in
England. Which of these the Mishnah refers to when it speaks of the
women lending their ovens to one another, as well as their mills and
their sieves, I do not know; but the foregoing observations may serve to
remove a surprise that this circumstance may otherwise occasion in the
reader of the Mishnah. Almost every body knows that little portable
handmills are extremely common in the Levant; movable ovens are not so
well known. Whether ovens of the kind which St. Jerome mentions be as
ancient as the days of Moses, does not appear, unless the ta-jen be used
after this manner; but the pitcher ovens of the Arabs are, without
doubt, of that remote antiquity.

"Travellers agree that the eastern bread is made in small thin moist
cakes, must be eaten new, and is good for nothing when kept longer than
a day. This, however, admits of exceptions. Dr. Russel of late, and
Rauwolff formerly, assure us that they have several sorts of bread and
cakes: some, Rauwolff tells us, done with yolk of eggs; some mixed with
several sorts of seed, as of sesamum, Romish coriander, and wild garden
saffron, which are also stewed upon it; and he elsewhere supposes that
they prepare biscuits for travelling. Russel, who mentions this stewing
of seeds on their cakes says, they have a variety of rusks and biscuits.
To these authors let me add Pitts, who tells us the biscuits they carry
with them from Egypt will last them to Mecca and back again.

"The Scriptures suppose their loaves of bread were very small, three of
them being requisite for the entertainment of a single person, [Luk
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005.md). That they were generally eaten
new, and baked as they wanted them, as appears from the case of Abraham.
That sometimes, however, they were made so as to keep several days; so
the shew-bread was fit food, after lying before the Lord a week. And
that bread for travelers was wont to be made to keep some time, as
appears from the pretences of the Gibeonites, [Jos
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#012.md), and the preparations made for
Jacob's journey into Egypt, [Gen
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#023.md). The bread or rusks for
travelling is often made in the form of large rings, and is moistened or
soaked in water before it is used. In like manner, too, they seem to
have had there a variety of eatables of this kind as the Aleppines now
have. In particular, some made like those on which seeds are strewed, as
we may collect from that part of the presents of Jeroboam's wife to the
Prophet Ahijah, which our translators have rendered cracknels, [Kg1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#003.md). Buxtorf indeed supposes the
original word נקדים nikkuddim signifies biscuits, called by this name,
either because they were formed into little buttons like some of our
gingerbread, or because they were pricked full of holes after a
particular manner. The last of these two conjectures, I imagine, was
embraced by our translators of this passage; for cracknels, if they are
all over England of the same form, are full of holes, being formed into
a kind of flourish of lattice-work. I have seen some of the unleavened
bread of the English Jews made in like manner in a net form.
Nevertheless I should think it more natural to understand the word of
biscuit spotted with seeds; for it is used elsewhere to signify works of
gold spotted with studs of silver; and, as it should seem, bread spotted
with mould, [Jos 9:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#005.md); how much more
natural is it then to understand the word of cakes spotted with seeds,
which are so common in the east! Is not לבבות lebiboth, in particular,
the word that in general means rich cakes? a sort of which Tamar used to
prepare that was not common, and furnished Amnon with a pretense for
desiring her being sent to his house, that she might make some of that
kind for him in the time of his indisposition, his fancy running upon
them; see [Sa2 13:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#002.md). Parkhurst
supposes the original word to signify pancakes, and translates the root
לבב labab to move or toss up and down: 'And she took the dough, (ותלוש
vattalosh), and kneaded (ותלבב vattelabbeb, and tossed) it in his sight,
ותבשל vattebashshel, and dressed the cakes.' In this passage, says Mr.
Parkhurst, it is to be observed that לבב is distinguished from לש to
knead, and from בשל to dress, which agrees with the interpretation here
given.

"The account which Mr. Jackson gives of an Arab baking apparatus, and
the manner of kneading and tossing their cakes, will at once, if I
mistake not, fix the meaning of this passage, and cast much light on
[Lev 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#035.md). "I was much amused by
observing the dexterity of the Arab women in baking their bread. They
have a small place built with clay, between two and three feet high,
having a hole in the bottom for the convenience of drawing out the
ashes, somewhat similar to that of a lime-kiln. The oven, which I think
is the most proper name for this place, is usually about fifteen inches
wide at top, and gradually grows wider to the bottom. It is heated with
wood, and when sufficiently hot, and perfectly clear from smoke, having
nothing but clear embers at the bottom, which continue to reflect great
heat, they prepare the dough in a large bowl, and mould the cakes to the
desired size on a board or stone placed near the oven. After they have
kneaded the cake to a proper consistence, they pat it a little, then
toss it about with great dexterity in one hand till it is as thin as
they choose to make it. They then wet one side of it with water, at the
same time wetting the hand and arm with which they put it into the oven.
The side of the cake adheres fast to the side of the oven till it is
sufficiently baked, when, if not paid proper attention to, it would fall
down among the embers. If they were not exceedingly quick at this work,
the heat of the oven would burn their arms; but they perform it with
such amazing dexterity that one woman will continue keeping three or
four cakes in the oven at once, till she has done baking. This mode, let
me add, does not require half the fuel that is made use of in Europe."

See more in Harmer's Observat., vol. i., p. 414, etc., Edit. 1808.

[Leviticus 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 2:8</span></span>

Thou shalt bring the meat-offering - It is likely that the person
himself who offered the sacrifice brought it to the priest, and then the
priest presented it before the Lord.

[Leviticus 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 2:11</span></span>

No meat-offering - shall be made with leaven - See the reason of this
prohibition in the note on [Exo 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008.md)
(note).

Nor any honey - Because it was apt to produce acidity, as some think,
when wrought up with flour paste; or rather because it was apt to gripe
and prove purgative. On this latter account the College of Physicians
have totally left it out of all medicinal preparations. This effect
which it has in most constitutions was a sufficient reason why it should
be prohibited here, as a principal part of all these offerings was used
by the priests as a part of their ordinary diet; and these offerings,
being those of the poorer sort, were in greater abundance than most
others. On this account, the griping, and purgative quality of the honey
must render it extremely improper. As leaven was forbidden because
producing fermentation, it was considered a species of corruption, and
was therefore used to signify hypocrisy, malice, etc., which corrupt the
soul; it is possible that honey might have had a moral reference, also,
and have signified, as St. Jerome thought, carnal pleasures and sensual
gratifications. Some suppose that the honey mentioned here was a sort of
saccharine matter extracted from dates. Leaven and honey might be
offered with the first-fruits, as we learn from the next verse; but they
were forbidden to be burnt on the altar,

[Leviticus 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 2:13</span></span>

With all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt - Salt was the opposite
to leaven, for it preserved from putrefaction and corruption, and
signified the purity and persevering fidelity that were necessary in the
worship of God. Every thing was seasoned with it, to signify the purity
and perfection that should be extended through every part of the Divine
service, and through the hearts and lives of God's worshippers. It was
called the salt of the covenant of God, because as salt is
incorruptible, so was the covenant made with Abram, Isaac, Jacob, and
the patriarchs, relative to the redemption of the world by the
incarnation and death of Jesus Christ. Among the heathens salt was a
common ingredient in all their sacrificial offerings; and as it was
considered essential to the comfort and preservation of life, and an
emblem of the most perfect corporeal and mental endowments, so it was
supposed to be one of the most acceptable presents they could make unto
their gods, from whose sacrifices it was never absent. That inimitable
and invaluable writer, Pliny, has left a long chapter on this subject,
the seventh of the thirty-first book of his Natural History, a few
extracts from which will not displease the intelligent reader.

Ergo, hercule, vita humanior sine Sale nequit degere: adeoque
necessarium elementum est, ut transierit intellectus ad voluptates animi
quoque. Nam ita Sales appellantur omnisque vitae lepos et summa
hilaritas, laborumque requies non alio magis vocabulo constat. Honoribus
etiam militiaeque inter ponitur, Salariis inde dictis - Maxime tamen in
sacris intelligitur auctoritas, quando nulla conficiuntur sine mola
salsa.

"So essentially necessary is salt that without it human life cannot be
preserved: and even the pleasures and endowments of the mind are
expressed by it; the delights of life, repose, and the highest mental
serenity, are expressed by no other term than sales among the Latins. It
has also been applied to designate the honorable rewards given to
soldiers, which are called salarii or salaries. But its importance may
be farther understood by its use in sacred things, as no sacrifice was
offered to the gods without the salt cake."

So Virgil, Eclog. viii., ver. 82: Sparge molam.

"Crumble the sacred mole of salt and corn."

And again, Aeneid., lib. iv., ver. 517: -

Ipsa mola, manibitsque piis, altaria juxta.

"Now with the sacred cake, and lifted hands,

All bent on death, before her altar stands."

Pitt.

In like manner Homer: -

Πασσε δ' ἁλος θειοιο, κρατευταων επαειπας.

Iliad, lib. ix., ver. 214.

"And taking sacred salt from the hearth side,

Where it was treasured, pour'd it o'er the feast."

Cowper.

Quotations of this kind might be easily multiplied, but the above may be
deemed sufficient.

[Leviticus 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 2:14</span></span>

Green ears of corn dried by the fire - Green or half-ripe ears of wheat
parched with fire is a species of food in use among the poor people of
Palestine and Egypt to the present day. As God is represented as keeping
a table among his people, (for the tabernacle was his house, where he
had the golden table, shewbread, etc)., so he represents himself as
partaking with them of all the aliments that were in use, and even
sitting down with the poor to a repast on parched corn! We have already
seen that these green ears were presented as a sort of eucharistical
offering for the blessings of seed time, and the prospect of a plentiful
harvest. See Clarke's note on [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001.md); several other examples might be
added here, but they are not necessary. The command to offer salt with
every oblation, and which was punctually observed by the Jews, will
afford the pious reader some profitable reflections. It is well known
that salt has two grand properties.

1\. It seasons and renders palatable the principal ailments used for the
support of life.

2\. It prevents putrefaction and decay.

The covenant of God, that is, his agreement with his people, is called a
covenant of salt, to denote as we have seen above, its stable undecaying
nature, as well as to point out its importance and utility in the
preservation of the life of the soul. The grace of God by Christ Jesus
is represented under the emblem of salt, (see [Mar
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049.md); [Eph
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#029.md); [Col
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#006).md), because of its relishing,
nourishing, and preserving quality. Without it no offering, no
sacrifice, no religious service, no work even of charity and mercy, can
be acceptable in the sight of God. In all things we must come unto the
Father Through Him. And from none of our sacrifices or services must
this salt of the covenant of our God be lacking.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 3](lev003.md)

</div>
