<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev011)  [Next](lev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 12:0</span></span>

Ordinances concerning the purification of women after child-birth, [Lev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001); after the birth of a son, who is
to be circumcised the eighth day, [Lev
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002), [Lev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#003). The mother to be considered
unclean for forty days, [Lev 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004).
After the birth of a daughter, fourscore days, [Lev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#005). When the days of her purifying
were ended, she was to bring a lamb for a burnt-offering, and a young
pigeon or a turtle-dove for a sin-offering, [Lev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006), [Lev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#007). If poor, and not able to bring a
lamb, she was to bring either two turtle-doves or two young pigeons,
[Lev 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008).

[Leviticus 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 12:2</span></span>

If a woman have conceived - In the extent mentioned here the ordinances
of this chapter have little relation to us: and to inquire into their
physical reasons, as far as they related to the Jews, could afford but
little edification; and to make such a subject sufficiently plain would
require such minute examination and circumstantial detail as could
scarcely be proper for several readers. All that is necessary to be said
the reader will find on [Lev 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004).

[Leviticus 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 12:3</span></span>

And in the eighth day - Before this time the child could scarcely be
considered as having strength sufficient to bear the operation; after
this time it was not necessary to delay it, as the child was not
considered to be in covenant with God, and consequently not under the
especial protection of the Divine providence and grace, till this rite
had been performed. On circumcision see Clarke's note on [Gen
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#010). Circumcision was to every man a
constant, evident sign of the covenant into which he had entered with
God, and of the moral obligations under which he was thereby laid. It
was also a means of purity, and was especially necessary among a people
naturally incontinent, and in a climate not peculiarly favorable to
chastity. This is a light in which this subject should ever be viewed,
and in which we see the reasonableness, propriety, expediency, and moral
tendency of the ceremony.

[Leviticus 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 12:4</span></span>

The blood of her purifying - A few words will make this subject
sufficiently plain.

1\. God designs that the human female should bring forth children.

2\. That children should derive, under his providence, their being, all
their solids and all their fluids, in a word, the whole mass of their
bodies, from the substance of the mother.

3\. For this purpose he has given to the body of the female an extra
quantity of blood and nutritious juices.

4\. Before pregnancy this superabundance is evacuated at periodical
times.

5\. In pregnancy, that which was formerly evacuated is retained for the
formation and growth of the fetus, or the general strengthening of the
system during the time of pregnancy.

6\. After the birth of the child, for seven or fourteen days, more or
less according to certain circumstances, that superabundance, no longer
necessary for the growth of the child as before, continues to be
evacuated: this was called the time of the female's purification among
the Jews.

7\. When the lacerated vessels are rejoined, this superfluity of blood
is returned into the general circulation, and, by a wise law of the
Creator, becomes principally useful to the breasts, and helps in the
production of milk for the nourishment of the new-born infant.

8\. And thus it continues till the weaning of the child, or renewed
pregnancy takes place. Here is a series of mercies and wise providential
regulations which cannot be known without being admired, and which
should be known that the great Creator and Preserver may have that
praise from his creatures which his wonderful working demands.

The term purifying here does not imply that there is any thing impure in
the blood at this or the other times referred to above; on the contrary,
the blood is pure, perfectly so, as to its quality, but is excessive in
quantity for the reasons above assigned. The idle tales found in certain
works relative to the infectious nature of this fluid, and of the female
in such times are as impious as they are irrational and absurd.

[Leviticus 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 12:6</span></span>

When the days of her purifying - It is not easy to account for the
difference in the times of purification, after the birth of a male and
female child. After the birth of a boy the mother was considered unclean
for forty days; after the birth of a girl, four-score days. There is
probably no physical reason for this difference, and it is difficult to
assign a political one. Some of the ancient physicians assert that a
woman is in the order of nature much longer in completely recovering
after the birth of a female than after the birth of a male child. This
assertion is not justified either by observation or matter of fact.
Others think that the difference in the time of purification after the
birth of a male and female is intended to mark the inferiority of the
female sex. This is a miserable reason, and pitifully supported.

She shall bring - a burnt-offering, and - a sin-offering - It is likely
that all these ordinances were intended to show man's natural impurity
and original defilement by sin, and the necessity of an atonement to
cleanse the soul from unrighteousness.

[Leviticus 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 12:8</span></span>

And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
turtles, or two young pigeons - As the Virgin Mary brought only the
latter, hence it is evident that she was not able, i. e., she was not
rich enough to provide the former; for such a holy woman would not have
brought the less offering had she been capable of bringing the greater.
How astonishing is this! The only heir to the throne of David was not
able to bring a lamb to offer in sacrifice to God! How abominable must
sin be when it required him who was in the form of God thus to empty and
to humble himself, yea, even to the death of the cross, in order to make
an atonement for it, and to purify the soul from all defilement!

The priest shall make an atonement for her - Every act of man is sinful,
but such as proceed from the influence of the grace and mercy of God.
Her sorrow in conception, and her pain in bringing forth children,
reminded the woman of her original offense; an offense which deserved
death, an offense which she could not expiate, and for which a sacrifice
must be offered: and in reference to better things the life of an animal
must be offered as a ransom for her life. And being saved in childbed,
though she deserved to die, she is required, as soon as the days of her
separation were ended, to bring a sacrifice according to her ability to
the priest, that he might offer it to God as an atonement for her. Thus,
wherever God keeps up the remembrance of sin, he keeps up also the
memorial of sacrifice, to show that the state of a sinner, howsoever
deplorable, is not hopeless, for that he himself has found out a ransom.
Every where, in the law and in the Gospel, in every ordinance and in
every ceremony, we may see both the justice and the mercy of God. Hence,
while we have the knowledge of our sin we have also the knowledge of our
cure. Reader, whilst thou art confessing thy own misery do not forget
the Lord's mercy; and remember, be saves to the uttermost all that come
through Christ unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 13](lev013)

</div>
