<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev005)  [Next](lev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 6:0</span></span>

Laws relative to detention of property entrusted to the care of another,
to robbery, and deceit, [Lev 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001), [Lev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002); finding of goods lost, keeping
them from their owner, and swearing falsely, [Lev
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003). Such a person shall not only
restore what he has thus unlawfully gotten, but shall add a fifth part
of the value of the property besides, [Lev
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004), [Lev
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005); and bring a ram without blemish,
for a trespass-offering to the Lord, [Lev
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006), [Lev
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#007). Laws relative to the
burnt-offering and the perpetual fire, [Lev
6:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008). Law of the meat-offering, and
who may lawfully eat of it, [Lev
6:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014). Laws relative to the
offerings of Aaron and his sons and their successors, on the day of
their anointing, [Lev 6:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019). Laws
relative to the sin-offering, and those who might eat of it, [Lev
6:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#024).

[Leviticus 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 6:2</span></span>

Lie unto his neighbor, etc. - This must refer to a case in which a
person delivered his property to his neighbor to be preserved for him,
and took no witness to attest the delivery of the goods; such a person
therefore might deny that he had ever received such goods, for he who
had deposited them with him could bring no proof of the delivery. On the
other hand, a man might accuse his neighbor of detaining property which
had never been confided to him, or, after having been confided, had been
restored again; hence the law here is very cautious on these points: and
because in many cases it was impossible to come at the whole truth
without a direct revelation from God, which should in no common case be
expected, the penalties are very moderate; for in such cases, even when
guilt was discovered, the man might not be so criminal as appearances
might intimate. See the law concerning this laid down and explained on
[Exo 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007) (note), etc.

[Leviticus 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 6:3</span></span>

Have found that which was lost - The Roman lawyers laid it down as a
sound maxim of jurisprudence, "that he who found any property and
applied it to his own use, should be considered as a thief whether he
knew the owner or not; for in their view the crime was not lessened,
supposing the finder was totally ignorant of the right owner." Qui
alienum quid jacens lucri faciendi causa sustulit, furti obstringitur,
sive scit, cujus sit, sive ignoravit; nihil enim ad furtum minuendum,
facit, quod, cujus sit, ignoret - Digestor, lib. xlvii., Tit. ii., de
furtis, Leg. xliii., sec. 4. On this subject every honest man must say,
that the man who finds any lost property, and does not make all due
inquiry to find out the owner, should, in sound policy, be treated as a
thief. It is said of the Dyrbaeans, a people who inhabited the tract
between Bactria and India, that if they met with any lost property, even
on the public road, they never even touched it. This was actually the
case in this kingdom in the time of Alfred the Great, about a. d. 888;
so that golden bracelets hung up on the public roads were untouched by
the finger of rapine. One of Solon's laws was, Take not up what you laid
not down. How easy to act by this principle in case of finding lost
property: "This is not mine, and it would be criminal to convert it to
my use unless the owner be dead and his family extinct." When all due
inquiry is made, if no owner can be found, the lost property may be
legally considered to be the property of the finder.

[Leviticus 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 6:5</span></span>

All that about which he hath sworn falsely - This supposes the case of a
man who, being convicted by his own conscience, comes forward and
confesses his sin.

Restore it in the principal - The property itself if still remaining, or
the full value of it, to which a fifth part more was to be added.

[Leviticus 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 6:6</span></span>

With thy estimation - See Clarke's note on [Lev
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015).

[Leviticus 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 6:8</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses - At this verse the Jews begin the 25th
section of the law; and here, undoubtedly, the 6th chapter should
commence, as the writer enters upon a new subject, and the preceding
verses belong to the fifth chapter. The best edited Hebrew Bibles begin
the 6th chapter at this verse.

[Leviticus 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 6:9</span></span>

This is the law of the burnt-offering - This law properly refers to that
burnt-offering which was daily made in what was termed the morning and
evening sacrifice; and as he had explained the nature of this
burnt-offering in general, with its necessary ceremonies, as far as the
persons who brought them were concerned, he now takes up the same in
relation to the priests who were to receive them from the hands of the
offerer, and present them to the Lord on the altar of burnt-offerings.

Because of the burning upon the altar all night - If the burnt-offering
were put all upon the fire at once, it could not be burning all night.
We may therefore reasonably conclude that the priests sat up by turns
the whole night, and fed the fire with portions of this offering till
the whole was consumed, which they would take care to lengthen out till
the time of the morning sacrifice. The same we may suppose was done with
the morning sacrifice; it was also consumed by piecemeal through the
whole day, till the time of offering the evening sacrifice. Thus there
was a continual offering by fire unto the Lord; and hence in [Lev
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013) it is said: The fire shall ever
be burning upon the altar, it shall never go out. If at any time any
extraordinary offerings were to be made, the daily sacrifice was
consumed more speedily, in order to make room for such extra offerings.
See more on this subject in Clarke's note on [Lev
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#023) (note). The Hebrew doctors teach
that no sacrifice was ever offered in the morning before the morning
sacrifice; and none, the passover excepted, ever offered in the evening
after the evening sacrifice; for all sacrifices were made by day-light.
The fat seems to have been chiefly burned in the night season, for the
greater light and convenience of keeping the fire alive, which could not
be so easily done in the night as in the day time.

[Leviticus 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 6:11</span></span>

And put on other garments - The priests approached the altar in their
holiest garments; when carrying the ashes, etc., from the altar, they
put on other garments, the holy garments being only used in the holy
place.

Clean place - A place where no dead carcasses, dung, or filth of any
kind was laid; for the ashes were holy, as being the remains of the
offerings made by fire unto the Lord.

[Leviticus 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 6:13</span></span>

The fire shall ever be burning - See on [Lev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009) (note) and [Lev
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020) (note). In imitation of this
perpetual fire, the ancient Persian Magi, and their descendants the
Parses, kept up a perpetual fire; the latter continue it to the present
day. This is strictly enjoined in the Zend Avesta, which is a code of
laws as sacred among them as the Pentateuch is among the Jews. A Sagnika
Brahmin preserves the fire that was kindled at his investiture with the
poita, and never suffers it to go out, using the same fire at his
wedding and in all his burnt-offerings, till at length his body is burnt
with it - Ward's Customs.

[Leviticus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 6:14</span></span>

The meat-offering - See Clarke on [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001) (note), etc.

[Leviticus 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 6:15</span></span>

His handful of the flour - An omer of flour, which was the tenth part of
an ephah, and equal to about three quarts of our measure, was the least
quantity that could be offered even by the poorest sort, and this was
generally accompanied with a log of oil, which was a little more than
half a pint. This quantity both of flour and oil might be increased at
pleasure, but no less could be offered.

[Leviticus 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 6:20</span></span>

In the day when he is anointed - Not only in that day, but from that day
forward, for this was to them and their successors a statute for ever.
See [Lev 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022).

[Leviticus 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 6:23</span></span>

For every meat-offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt - Whatever
the priest offered was wholly the Lord's, and therefore must be entirely
consumed: the sacrifices of the common people were offered to the Lord,
but the priests partook of them; and thus they who ministered at the
altar were fed by the altar. Had the priests been permitted to live on
their own offerings as they did on those of the people, it would have
been as if they had offered nothing, as they would have taken again to
themselves what they appeared to give unto the Lord. Theodoret says that
this marked "the high perfection which God required in the ministers of
his sanctuary," as his not eating of his own sin-offering supposes him
to stand free from all sin; but a better reason is given by Mr.
Ainsworth: "The people's meat-offering was eaten by the priests that
made atonement for them, [Lev 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015),
[Lev 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016), [Lev
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#007); but because no priest, being a
sinner, could make atonement for himself, therefore his meat-offering
might not be eaten, but all burnt on the altar, to teach him to expect
salvation, not by his legal service or works, but by Christ; for the
eating of the sin-offering figured the bearing of the sinner's
iniquity;" [Lev 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017).

[Leviticus 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 6:25</span></span>

In the place where the burnt-offering is killed, etc. - The place here
referred to was the north side of the altar. See [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011).

[Leviticus 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 6:26</span></span>

The priest - shall eat it - From the expostulation of Moses with Aaron,
[Lev 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017), we learn that the priest,
by eating the sin-offering of the people, was considered as bearing
their sin, and typically removing it from them: and besides, this was a
part of their maintenance, or what the Scripture calls their
inheritance; see [Eze 44:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#027). This
was afterwards greatly abused; for improper persons endeavored to get
into the priest's office merely that they might get a secular provision,
which is a horrible profanity in the sight of God. See [Sa1
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#036); [Jer
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#012); [Eze
34:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002); and [Hos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008).

[Leviticus 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 6:27</span></span>

Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy - The following
note of Mr. Ainsworth is not less judicious than it is pious: -

"All this rite was peculiar to the sin-offering, (whether it were that
which was to be eaten, or that which was to be burnt), above all the
other most holy things. As the sin-offering in special sort figured
Christ, who was made sin for us, ([Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)), so this ordinance for all that
touched the flesh of the sin-offering to be holy, the garments sprinkled
with the blood to be washed, the vessels wherein the flesh was boiled to
be broken, or scoured and rinsed - taught a holy use of this mystery of
our redemption, whereof they that are made partakers ought to be washed,
cleansed, and sanctified by the Spirit of God; that we possess our
vessels in holiness and honor, and yield not our members as instruments
of unrighteousness unto sin," [Th1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004); [Rom
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013).

[Leviticus 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 6:28</span></span>

The earthen vessel - shall be broken - Calmet states that this should be
considered as implying the vessels brought by individuals to the court
of the temple or tabernacle, and not of the vessels that belonged to the
priests for the ordinary service. That the people dressed their
sacrifices sometimes in the court of the tabernacle, he gathers from
[Sa1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#013), [Sa1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#014), to which the reader is desired
to refer. In addition to what has been already said on the different
subjects in this chapter, it may be necessary to notice a few more
particulars. The perpetual meat-offering, מנחה תמיד minchah tamid, [Lev
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020), the perpetual fire, אש תמיד esh
tamid, [Lev 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013), and the perpetual
burnt-offering, עלת תמיד olath tamid, [Exo
29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042), translated by the Septuagint
θυσια διαπαντος, πυο διαπαντος, and ὁλοκαυτωσις and ὁλοκαυτωμα
διαπαντος, all cast much light on [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025), where it is said, Christ is able
to save them to the uttermost (εις το παντελες, perpetually, to all
intents and purposes) that come unto God by him; seeing he ever liveth
(παντοτε ζων, he is perpetually living) to make intercession for them;
in which words there is a manifest allusion to the perpetual minchah,
the perpetual fire, and the perpetual burnt-offering, mentioned here by
Moses. As the minchah, or gratitude-offering should be perpetual, so our
gratitude for the innumerable mercies of God should be perpetual. As the
burnt-offering must be perpetual, so should the sacrifice of our blessed
Lord be considered as a perpetual offering, that all men, in all ages,
should come unto God through him who is ever living, in his sacrificial
character, to make intercession for men; and who is therefore
represented even in the heavens as the Lamb just slain, standing before
the throne, [Rev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006); [Heb
10:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019). And as the fire on the altar
must be perpetual, so should the influences of the Holy Spirit in every
member of the Church, and the flame of pure devotion in the hearts of
believers, be ever energetic and permanent. A continual sacrifice for
continual successive generations of sinners was essentially necessary.
Continual influences of the Holy Spirit on the souls of men were
essentially necessary to apply and render effectual this atonement, to
the salvation of the soul. And incessant gratitude for the ineffable
love of God, manifested by his unspeakable gift, is surely required of
all those who have tasted that the Lord is gracious. Reader, dost thou
feel thy obligations to thy Maker? Does the perpetual fire burn on the
altar of thy heart? Art thou ever looking unto Jesus, and beholding, by
faith, the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world? And dost
thou feel the influences of his Spirit, at all times witnessing with thy
spirit that thou art his child, and exciting thee to acts of gratitude
and obedience? If not, of what benefit has the religion of Christ been
to thee to the present day? Of a contrary state to that referred to
above, it may be well said, This is not the way to heaven, for the way
of life is above to the wise, that they may depart from the snares of
death beneath. Arise, therefore, and shake thyself from the dust; and
earnestly call upon the Lord thy God, that he may save thy soul, and
that thou fall not into the bitter pains of an eternal death.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 7](lev007)

</div>
