<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk017)  [Next](luk019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 18:0</span></span>

The parable of the importunate widow, [Luk
18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001). Of the Pharisee and the
publican, [Luk 18:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009). Infants
brought to Christ, [Luk 18:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015). The
ruler who wished to know how he might inherit eternal life, [Luk
18:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018). Our Lord's reflections on
his case, [Luk 18:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#024). What they
shall receive who follow Christ, [Luk
18:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#028). He foretells his approaching
passion and death, [Luk 18:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031). He
restores a blind man to sight at Jericho, [Luk
18:35-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035).

[Luke 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 18:1</span></span>

Men ought always to pray - Therefore the plain meaning and moral of the
parable are evident; viz. that as afflictions and desolations were
coming on the land, and they should have need of much patience and
continual fortitude, and the constant influence and protection of the
Almighty, therefore they should be instant in prayer. It states,
farther, that men should never cease praying for that the necessity of
which God has given them to feel, till they receive a full answer to
their prayers. No other meaning need be searched for in this parable:
St. Luke, who perfectly knew his Master's meaning, has explained it as
above.

[Luke 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 18:2</span></span>

A judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man - It is no wonder
that our Lord calls this person an unrighteous judge, [Luk
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#006). No person is worthy to be put in
the sacred office of a judge who does not deeply fear God, and tenderly
respect his fellow creatures. Because this person feared not God, he
paid no attention to the calls of justice; and because he respected not
man, he was unmoved at the complaint of the widow. Even among the
heathens this was the character of a man totally abandoned to all evil.
So Dion Cassius says of Vitellius, that he neither regarded gods nor men
- ουτε των ανθρωπων, ουτε των θεων εφροντιζεν.

[Luke 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 18:3</span></span>

Avenge me of mine adversary - The original, εκδικησον με απο του
αντιδικου μου, had better be translated, Do me justice against, or
vindicate me from, my adversary. If the woman had come to get revenge,
as our common translation intimates, I think our blessed Lord would
never have permitted her to have the honor of a place in the sacred
records. She desired to have justice, and that only; and by her
importunity she got that which the unrighteous judge had no inclination
to give, but merely for his own ease.

[Luke 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 18:4</span></span>

He said within himself - How many actions which appear good have neither
the love of God, nor that of our neighbor, but only self-love of the
basest kind, for their principle and motive!

[Luke 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 18:5</span></span>

She weary me - Ὑπωπιαζῃ με, Stun me. A metaphor taken from boxers, who
bruise each other, and by beating each other about the face blacken the
eyes. See [Co1 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027).

[Luke 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 18:6</span></span>

Hear what the unjust judge saith - Our blessed Lord intimates that we
should reason thus with ourselves: "If a person of such an infamous
character as this judge was could yield to the pressing and continual
solicitations of a poor widow, for whom he felt nothing but contempt,
how much more ready must God be, who is infinitely good and merciful,
and who loves his creatures in the tenderest manner, to give his utmost
salvation to all them who diligently seek it!"

[Luke 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 18:7</span></span>

And shall not God avenge his own elect - And will not God the righteous
Judge do justice for his chosen? Probably this may refer to the cruel
usage which his disciples had met with, and were still receiving, from
the disobedient and unbelieving Jews; and which should be finally
visited upon them in the destruction of their city, and the calamities
which should follow. But we may consider the text as having a more
extensive meaning. As God has graciously promised to give salvation to
every soul that comes unto him through his Son, and has put his Spirit
in their hearts, inducing them to cry unto him incessantly for it; the
goodness of his nature and the promise of his grace bind him to hear the
prayers they offer unto him, and to grant them all that salvation which
he has led them by his promise and Spirit to request.

Which cry day and night unto him, etc. - This is a genuine
characteristic of the true elect or disciples of Christ. They feel they
have neither light, power, nor goodness, but as they receive them from
him; and, as he is the desire of their soul, they incessantly seek that
they may be upheld and saved by him.

Though he bear long with them? - Rather, and He is compassionate towards
Them, and consequently not at all like to the unrighteous judge. Instead
of μακροθυμων, and be long-suffering, as in our translation, I read
μακροθυμει, he is compassionate, which reading is supported by ABDLQ,
and several others. The reason which our Lord gives for the success of
his chosen, is,

1\. They cry unto him day and night.

2\. He is compassionate towards Them.

In consequence of the first, they might expect justice even from an
unrighteous judge; and, in consequence of the second, they are sure of
salvation, because they ask it from that God who is towards them a
Father of eternal love and compassion. There was little reason to expect
justice from the unrighteous judge.

1\. Because he was unrighteous; and

2\. Because he had no respect for man: no, not even for a poor desolate
widow.

But there is all the reason under heaven to expect mercy from God:

1\. Because he is righteous, and he has promised it; and

2\. Because he is compassionate towards his creatures; being ever prone
to give more than the most enlarged heart can request of him.

Every reader must perceive that the common translation is so embarrassed
as to be almost unintelligible; while that in this note, from the above
authorities, is as plain as possible, and shows this beautiful parable
to be one of the most invaluable pieces in the word of God.

[Luke 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 18:8</span></span>

He will avenge them speedily - Or, He will do them justice speedily - εν
ταχει, instantly, in a trice.

1\. Because he has promised it; and

2\. Because he is inclined to do it.

When the Son of man cometh - To require the produce of the seed of the
kingdom sown among this people.

Shall he find faith on the earth? - Or rather, Shall he find fidelity in
this land? Shall he find that the soil has brought forth a harvest
proportioned to the culture bestowed on it? No! And therefore he
destroyed that land.

[Luke 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 18:9</span></span>

Despised - Εξουθενουντας, Disdained, made nothing of others, treated
them with sovereign contempt. Our Lord grants that the Pharisees made
clean the outside: but, alas! what pride, vain glory, and contempt for
others, were lodged within!

[Luke 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 18:10</span></span>

A Pharisee - For a description of the Pharisees and their tenets, see on
[Mat 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001) (note).

Publican - See an account of these on [Mat
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046) (note). Both these persons went
to the temple to pray, i.e. to worship God: they were probably both
Jews, and felt themselves led by different motives to attend at the
temple, at the hour of prayer: the one to return thanks for the mercies
he had received; the other to implore that grace which alone could
redeem him from his sins.

[Luke 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 18:11</span></span>

Stood and prayed thus with himself - Or, stood by himself and prayed, as
some would translate the words. He probably supposed it disgraceful to
appear to have any connection with this penitent publican: therefore his
conduct seemed to say, "Stand by thyself; I am more holy than thou." He
seems not only to have stood by himself, but also to have prayed by
himself; neither associating in person nor in petitions with his poor
guilty neighbor.

God, I thank thee, etc. - In [Mat
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020), our Lord says, Unless your
righteousness abound more than that of the scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall not enter into the kingdom of God: see the note there. Now, the
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees is described here by a
Pharisee himself. We find it was twofold:

1\. It consisted in doing no harm to others.

2\. In attending all the ordinances of God, then established in the
Jewish economy; and in these things they were not like other men, the
bulk of the inhabitants of the land paying little or no attention to
them.

That the Pharisees were in their origin a pure and holy people can admit
of little doubt; but that they had awfully degenerated before our Lord's
time is sufficiently evident. They had lost the spirit of their
institution, and retained nothing else than its external regulations.
See on [Mat 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001) (note).

1\. This Pharisee did no harm to others - I am not rapacious, nor
unjust, nor an adulterer. I seize no man's property through false
pretences. I take the advantage of no man's ignorance in buying or
selling. I avoid every species of uncleanness. In a word, I do to others
as I wish them to do to me. How many of those called Christians are not
half as good as this Pharisee! And, yet, he was far from the kingdom of
God.

2\. He observed the ordinances of religion - I fast twice in the week.
The Jewish days of fasting, in each week, were the second and fifth;
what we call Monday and Thursday. These were instituted in remembrance
of Moses' going up to the mount to give the law, which they suppose to
have been on the fifth day; and of his descent, after he had received
the two tables, which they suppose was on the second day of the week.

[Luke 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 18:12</span></span>

I give tithes of all that I possess - Or, of all I acquire, κτωμαι.

Raphelius has well observed, that this verb, in the present tense,
signifies to acquire - in the preter, to possess: the Pharisee's meaning
seems to be, "As fast as I gain any thing, I give the tenth part of it
to the house of God and to the poor." Those who dedicate a certain part
of their earnings to the Lord should never let it rest with themselves,
lest possession should produce covetousness. This was the Pharisee's
righteousness, and the ground on which he builded his hope of final
salvation. That the Pharisees had a strong opinion of their own
righteousness, the following history will prove: -

"Rabbi Simeon, the son of Jochai, said: The whole world is not worth
thirty righteous persons, such as our father Abraham. If there were only
thirty righteous persons in the world, I and my son should make two of
them; but if there were but twenty, I and my son would be of the number;
and if there were but ten, I and my son would be of the number: and if
there were but five, I and my son would be of the five; and if there
were but two, I and my son would be those two; and if there were but
one, myself should be that one." Bereshith Rabba, s. 35, fol. 34. This
is a genuine specimen of Pharisaic pride. No wonder that our Lord
accused these of pride and vain glory: they were far from humility, and
consequently far from righteousness.

[Luke 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 18:13</span></span>

The publican, standing afar off - Not because he was a heathen, and
dared not approach the holy place; (for it is likely he was a Jew); but
because he was a true penitent, and felt himself utterly unworthy to
appear before God.

Would not lift up - his eyes - Holding down the head, with the eyes
fixed upon the earth, was,

1\. A sign of deep distress.

2\. Of a consciousness and confession of guilt. And,

3\. It was the very posture that the Jewish rabbins required in those
who prayed to God.

See [Ezr 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006); and Mishna, in
Berachoth, chap. v.; and Kypke's note here. So the Pharisee appears to
have forgotten one of his own precepts.

But smote upon his breast - Smiting the breast was a token of excessive
grief, commonly practised in all nations. It seems to intimate a desire,
in the penitent, to punish that heart through the evil propensities of
which the sin deplored had been committed. It is still used among the
Roman Catholics in their general confessions.

God be merciful to me - Ἱλασθητι μοι - Be propitious toward me through
sacrifice - or, let an atonement be made for me. I am a sinner, and
cannot be saved but in this way. The Greek word ἱλασκω, or ἱλασκομαι,
often signifies to make expiation for sin; and is used by the
Septuagint, [Psa 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004); [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038); [Psa
79:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#009), for כפר kipper, he made an
atonement. So ἱλασμος a propitiation, is used by the same, for חטאה
chataah, a sacrifice for sin, [Eze
44:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#027); and ἱλαστηριον, the mercy seat,
is, in the above version, the translation of כפרת kapporeth, the lid of
the ark of the covenant, on and before which the blood of the expiatory
victim was sprinkled, on the great day of atonement. The verb is used in
exactly the same sense by the best Greek writers. The following from
Herodotus, lib. i. p. 19, edit. Gale, is full in point. Θυσιῃσι μεγαλῃσι
τον εν Δελφοισι θεον ἹΛΑΣΚΕΤΟ, Croesus appeased, or made an atonement
to, the Delphic god by immense sacrifices. We see then, at once, the
reason why our blessed Lord said that the tax-gatherer went down to his
house justified rather than the other: - he sought for mercy through an
atonement for sin, which was the only way in which God had from the
beginning purposed to save sinners. As the Pharisee depended on his
doing no harm, and observing the ordinances of religion for his
acceptance with God, according to the economy of grace and justice, he
must be rejected: for as all had sinned and come short of the glory of
God, and no man could make an atonement for his sins, so he who did not
take refuge in that which God's mercy had provided must be excluded from
the kingdom of heaven. This was no new doctrine: it was the doctrine
publicly and solemnly preached by every sacrifice offered under the
Jewish law. Without shedding of blood there is no remission, was the
loud and constant cry of the whole Mosaic economy. From this we may see
what it is to have a righteousness superior to that of the scribes and
Pharisees. We must humble ourselves before God, which they did not: we
must take refuge in the blood of the cross, which they would not; and be
meek and humble of heart, which they were not.

Many suppose that the Pharisees thought they could acquire righteousness
of themselves, independently of God, and that they did not depend on him
for grace or power: but let us not make them worse than they were - for
this is disclaimed by the Pharisee in the text, who attributes all the
good he had to God: O God, I thank thee, that I am not as others - it is
thou who hast made me to differ. But this was not sufficient:
restraining grace must not be put in the place of the great atonement.
Guilt he had contracted - and this guilt must be blotted out; and that
there was no way of doing this, but through an atonement, the whole
Jewish law declared. See the note on [Mat
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020).

[Luke 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 18:14</span></span>

Went down to his house justified - His sin blotted out; and himself
accepted.

Rather than the other - Η εκεινος: that is, the other was not accepted,
because he exalted himself - he made use of the mercies which he
acknowledged he owed to God, to make claims on the Divine approbation,
and to monopolize the salvation of the Most High! He was abased, because
he vainly trusted that he was righteous, and depended on what he had
been enabled to do, and looked not for a change of heart, nor for
reconciliation to God. It is a strange perversion of the human mind, to
attempt to make God our debtor by the very blessings which his mere
mercy has conferred upon us! It was a maxim among the Jews, that whoever
brought a sacrifice to the temple returned justified. But our Lord shows
that this depended on the state of mind - if they were not humbled under
a sense of sin, they were not justified, though they had even offered a
sacrifice.

[Luke 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 18:15</span></span>

They brought unto him also infants - On these verses the reader is
requested to consult the notes on [Mat
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013) (note), [Mat
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014) (note), and on [Mar
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#016) (note).

When a spiritual guide (a gooroo) visits his disciple, the latter takes
his child to him for his blessing, forcing the head of the child down to
the gooroo's feet, who gives what is called his blessing in some such
words as these, Live long! - Be learned! - Be rich!

[Luke 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 18:18</span></span>

A certain ruler - See the case of this person largely explained on [Mat
19:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016) (note), and [Mar
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#021), [Mar
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#022) (note).

[Luke 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 18:24</span></span>

How hardly shall they that have riches, etc. - See the notes on this
discourse of our Lord, on [Mat
19:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021) (note), and [Mar
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030) (note).

[Luke 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 18:25</span></span>

It as easier for a camel - Instead of καμηλον, a camel, S, and four
other MSS., read καμιλον, a cable. See the same reading noticed on the
parallel place, [Mat 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024) (note).

[Luke 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 18:28</span></span>

We have left all - Our trades, our houses, and families. The reader is
desired to consult the notes on [Mat
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#020) (note); [Mat
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027) (note), etc.

[Luke 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 18:29</span></span>

That hath left house, or parents, etc. - See on [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028), [Mat
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029) (note), and [Mar
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#029), [Mar
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030) (note).

Or brethren - Η αδελφας, Or Sisters, is added by the Cod. Bezae, and
some others.

[Luke 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 18:31</span></span>

Behold, we go up to Jerusalem - See the notes on this discourse, [Mat
20:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017) (note), and [Mar
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032) (note).

[Luke 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 18:33</span></span>

And the third day he shall rise again - See [Hos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002); and let the reader observe that
the passage should be read thus: In the third day he will raise Him up,
(יקמנו) and we shall live before him: his resurrection shall be the
pledge, token, and cause of ours.

[Luke 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 18:34</span></span>

They understood none of these things - Notwithstanding all the
information which Christ had given them concerning this awful subject,
they could not as yet fully comprehend how the Messiah should suffer; or
how their Master, whose power they knew was unlimited, should permit the
Jews and Gentiles to torment and slay him as he here intimates they
would.

[Luke 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 18:35</span></span>

A certain blind man - Bartimeus. See this transaction explained at
large, on [Mat 20:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029) (note), and
[Mar 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046) (note), etc.

[Luke 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 18:40</span></span>

And when he was come near - See the remarkable account of the negro and
white man, related on [Mar 10:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#050)
(note).

[Luke 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 18:43</span></span>

And all the people - gave: praise unto God - They saw the finger of God
in what was done; and they gave him that praise which was due to his
name. The Pharisees either saw not, or would not acknowledge this. The
common people are often better judges of the work of God than the
doctors themselves. They are more simple, are not puffed up with the
pride of learning, and are less liable to be warped by prejudice or
self-interest. Happy are those spiritually blind persons, to whom Christ
has given eyes, that they may know him: feet, that they may follow him:
a tongue, that they may praise him: and a heart, that they may love him!
A true conversion, which no way contradicts itself, but is followed by
an edifying life, makes known the majesty and power of God in a more
eminent manner than the greatest external miracles. Quesnel.

For a practical use of the principal subjects in this chapter, see the
parallel places in Matthew and Mark. How shall I be justified? is a most
important question, which the parable of the Pharisee and the publican
most distinctly answers. A deep consciousness of sin, humiliation of
heart, and taking refuge by faith in the great atonement, is the way,
and the only way. Even the worst transgressors, coming thus to God, are
accepted. Blessed news for penitent sinners! - for though they cannot
boast of a righteousness equal to that of the scribes and Pharisees, yet
they find they can, coming as the publican, be justified freely, through
the blood of the cross, from all things, from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses. If this be so, how shall they escape who
neglect so Great a Salvation!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 19](luk019)

</div>
