<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk018)  [Next](luk020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 19:0</span></span>

The conversion of Zaccheus, [Luk
19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md). The parable of the nobleman,
his ten servants, and the ten pounds, vv. 11-27. Christ sends his
disciples for a colt on which he rides into Jerusalem, [Luk
19:28-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028.md). He weeps over the city, and
foretells its destruction, [Luk
19:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041.md). Goes into the temple, and
casts out the buyers and sellers, [Luk
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045.md), [Luk
19:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#046.md). The chief priests and the
scribes seek to destroy him, but are afraid of the people, who hear him
attentively, [Luk 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#047.md), [Luk
19:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#048.md).

[Luke 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 19:1</span></span>

Entered and passed through - Was passing through. Our Lord had not as
yet passed through Jericho - he was only passing through it; for the
house of Zaccheus, in which he was to lodge, [Luk
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#005.md), was in it.

[Luke 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 19:2</span></span>

Zaccheus - It is not unlikely that this person was a Jew by birth, see
[Luk 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009.md); but because he had engaged
in a business so infamous, in the eyes of the Jews, he was considered as
a mere heathen, [Luk 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007.md).

Chief among the publicans - Either a farmer-general of the taxes, who
had subordinate collectors under him: or else the most respectable and
honorable man among that class at Jericho.

He was rich - And therefore the more unlikely to pay attention to an
impoverished Messiah, preaching a doctrine of universal mortification
and self-denial.

[Luke 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 19:3</span></span>

And he sought to see Jesus who he was - So the mere principle of
curiosity in him led to his conversion and salvation, and to that of his
whole family, [Luk 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009.md).

[Luke 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 19:4</span></span>

He ran before - The shortness of his stature was amply compensated by
his agility and invention. Had he been as tall as the generality of the
crowd, he might have been equally unnoticed with the rest. His getting
into the tree made him conspicuous: had he not been so low of stature he
would not have done so. Even the imperfections of our persons may become
subservient to the grace of God in our eternal salvation. As the
passover was at hand, the road was probably crowded with people going to
Jerusalem; but the fame of the cure of the blind man was probably the
cause of the concourse at this time.

[Luke 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 19:5</span></span>

Make haste, and come down - With this invitation, our blessed Lord
conveyed heavenly influence to his heart; hence he was disposed to pay
the most implicit and cheerful obedience to the call, and thus he
received not the grace of God in vain.

[Luke 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 19:6</span></span>

Received him joyfully - He had now seen Who he was, and he wished to
hear What he was; and therefore he rejoiced in the honor that God had
now conferred upon him. How often does Christ make the proposal of
lodging, not only in our house, but in our heart, without its being
accepted! We lose much because we do not attend to the visitations of
Christ: he passes by - he blesses our neighbors and our friends; but,
often, neither curiosity nor any other motive is sufficient to induce us
to go even to the house of God, to hear of the miracles of mercy which
he works in behalf of those who seek him.

[Luke 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 19:7</span></span>

To be guest with a man that is a sinner - Meaning either that he was a
heathen, or, though by birth a Jew, yet as bad as a heathen, because of
his unholy and oppressive office. See the note on [Luk
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037.md).

[Luke 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 19:8</span></span>

The half of my goods I give to the poor - Probably he had already done
so for some time past; though it is generally understood that the
expressions only refer to what he now purposed to do.

If I have taken any thing - by false accusation - Εσυκοφαντησα, from
συκον, a fig, and φαινω, I show or declare; for among the primitive
Athenians, when the use of that fruit was first found out, or in the
time of a dearth, when all sorts of provisions were exceedingly scarce,
it was enacted that no figs should be exported from Attica; and this law
(not being actually repealed, when a plentiful harvest had rendered it
useless, by taking away the reason of it) gave occasion to ill-natured
and malicious fellows to accuse all persons they found breaking the
letter of it; and from them all busy informers have ever since been
branded with the name of sycophants. Potter's Antiq. vol. i. c. 21, end.

I restore him fourfold - This restitution the Roman laws obliged the
tax-gatherers to make, when it was proved they had abused their power by
oppressing the people. But here was no such proof: the man, to show the
sincerity of his conversion, does it of his own accord. He who has
wronged his fellow must make restitution, if he have it in his power. He
that does not do so cannot expect the mercy of God. See the observations
at the end of Genesis 42 (note), and [Num
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#007) (note.md).

[Luke 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 19:9</span></span>

Jesus said unto him - Bishop Pearce observes: "Probably Luke wrote
αυτους, not αυτον, said unto them, i.e. to those who had before called
Zaccheus a sinner; ([Luk 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007).md); for
Jesus here speaks of Zaccheus in the third person, he also is a son of
Abraham, and therefore he was not then speaking to him." This conjecture
of this respectable prelate is supported by the margin of the later
Syriac, and by every copy of the Itala but two.

To this house - Τῳ οικῳ τουτῳ, To this very house or family. As if he
had said: "If he be a sinner, he stands in the greater need of
salvation, and the Son of man is come to seek and save what was lost,
[Luk 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010.md); and therefore to save this
lost soul is a part of my errand into the world." See the sentiment
contained in this verse explained on [Mat
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011) (note.md).

[Luke 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 19:11</span></span>

And as they heard these things - I believe the participle of the present
tense, here, is used for the participle of the past, or rather that the
participle of the present conveys sometimes the sense of the past; for
this discourse appears to have taken place the next day after he had
lodged at the house of Zaccheus; for the text says that he was then
drawing nigh to Jerusalem, from which Jericho was distant nineteen
miles. I have not ventured to translate it so, yet I think probably the
text should be read thus: And after they had heard these things, he
proceeded to speak a parable, because they were nigh to Jerusalem.

Immediately appear - Perhaps the generality of his followers thought
that, on his arrival at Jerusalem, he would proclaim himself king.

[Luke 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 19:12</span></span>

A certain nobleman - In the following parable there are two distinct
morals intended; let it be viewed in these two points of light. 1. The
behavior of the citizens to the nobleman; and, 2. The behavior of his
own servants to him.

1\. By the behavior of the citizens, and their punishment, ([Luk
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014.md), [Luk
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027).md), we are taught that the Jews,
who were the people of Christ, would reject him, and try to prevent his
reigning over them in his spiritual kingdom, and would for that crime be
severely punished by the destruction of their state. And this moral is
all that answers to the introductory words, [Luk
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011.md). And they thought that the
kingdom of God should immediately appear.

2\. The other moral extends itself through the whole of the parable,
viz. that the disciples of Christ, who are his servants; and who made a
good improvement of the favors granted them by the Gospel, should be
rewarded in proportion to the improvement made under the means of grace.
This latter moral is all that is intended by Matthew in [Mat
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014.md), etc., who mentions this parable
as spoken by Christ after his triumphant entry into Jerusalem; though
Luke has here placed that event after the parable. See Bishop Pearce.

The meaning of the different parts of this parable appears to be as
follows.

A certain nobleman - The Lord Jesus, who was shortly to be crucified by
the Jews.

Went into a far country - Ascended to the right hand of the Divine
Majesty.

To receive a kingdom - To take possession of the mediatorial kingdom,
the right to which, as Messiah, he had acquired by his sufferings: see
[Phi 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md), [Phi
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009.md); [Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md), [Heb
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#008.md), [Heb
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009.md). In these words there is an
allusion to the custom of those days, when they who had kingdoms or
governments given unto them went to Rome to receive that dignity from
the emperors. Bishop Pearce. In proof of this, see Josephus, Ant. l.
xiv. c. xiv., where we find Herod went to Rome to receive the sanction
and authority of the Roman emperor. And, from lib. xvii. c. 3, we learn
that his successors acted in the same way.

And to return - To judge and punish the rebellious Jews.

[Luke 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 19:13</span></span>

Ten servants - All those who professed to receive his doctrine. Ten was
a kind of sacred number among the Hebrews, as well as seven. See [Luk
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#031.md); [Luk
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#008.md); [Mat
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001.md).

Ten pounds - Ten minas. The Septuagint use the original word μναα for
the Hebrew מנה maneh, from which it is evidently derived; and it appears
from [Eze 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012.md), to have been equal to
sixty shekels in money. Now suppose we allow the shekel, with Dean
Prideaux, to be 3s., then the mina or maneh was equal to 9 English
money. The impropriety of rendering the original word pound, will easily
be seen by the most superficial reader. We should therefore retain the
original word for the same reason so often before assigned. Suidas says,
"The talent was sixty minas, the mina one hundred drachms, the drachm
six oboli, the obolus six chalci, the chalcus seven mites or lepta."

By the ten minas given to each, we may understand the Gospel of the
kingdom given to every person who professes to believe in Christ, and
which he is to improve to the salvation of his soul. The same word is
given to all, that all may believe and be saved.

[Luke 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 19:14</span></span>

His citizens - Or countrymen - the Jewish people, who professed to be
subjects of the kingdom of God.

Hated him - Despised him for the meanness of his birth, his crucifixion
to the world, and for the holiness of his doctrine. Neither
mortification nor holiness suits the dispositions of the carnal mind.

Sent a message after him - As, in [Luk
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012.md), there is an allusion to a
person's going to Rome, when elected to be ruler of a province or
kingdom, to receive that dignity from the hand of the emperor, so it is
here intimated that, after the person went to receive this dignity, some
of the discontented citizens took the opportunity to send an embassy to
the emperor, to prevent him from establishing the object of their hatred
in the government.

We will not have this man, etc. - The Jews rejected Jesus Christ, would
not submit to his government, and, a short time after this, preferred
even a murderer to him. Like cleaves to like. No wonder that those who
murdered the Lord of glory should prefer a murderer, one of their own
temper, to the Redeemer of their souls.

[Luke 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 19:15</span></span>

When he was returned - When he came to punish the disobedient Jews; and
when he shall come to judge the world. See the parable of the talents,
[Mat 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014) (note.md), etc.

[Luke 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 19:16</span></span>

Lord, thy pound hath gained ten - The principal difference between this
parable and that of the talents above referred to is, that the mina
given to each seems to point out the gift of the Gospel, which is the
same to all who hear it; but the talents distributed in different
proportions, according to each man's ability, seem to intimate that God
has given different capacities and advantages to men, by which this one
gift of the Gospel may be differently improved.

[Luke 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 19:17</span></span>

Over ten cities - This is to be understood as referring to the new
kingdom which the nobleman had just received. His former trustiest and
most faithful servants he now represents as being made governors, under
him, over a number of cities, according to the capacity he found in
each; which capacity was known by the improvement of the minas.

[Luke 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 19:20</span></span>

Lord, behold, here is thy pound - See [Mat
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#018.md).

[Luke 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 19:23</span></span>

With usury? - Συν τοκῳ, With its produce, i.e. what the loan of the
money is fairly worth, after paying the person sufficiently for using
it: for, in lent money, both the lender and borrower are supposed to
reap profit.

[Luke 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 19:25</span></span>

And they said unto him, Lord, he hath ten pounds - This whole verse is
omitted by the Codex Bezae, a few others, and some copies of the Itala.
It is probably an observation that some person made while our Lord was
delivering the parable, with a design to correct him in the
distribution: as if he had said, "Why give the mina to that person? he
has got ten already; give it to one of those who has fewer."

[Luke 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 19:26</span></span>

And from him that hath not - See this particularly explained [Mat
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012) (note.md). Perhaps it would be
well, with Bishop Pearce, to supply the word gained - give it to him who
hath gained ten minas; for I say unto you, That unto every one who hath
gained shall be given; and, from him who hath not gained, even that
which he hath received, shall be taken away.

[Luke 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 19:27</span></span>

Those - enemies - bring hither - the Jews, whom I shall shortly slay by
the sword of the Romans.

[Luke 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 19:28</span></span>

He went before - Joyfully to anticipate his death, say some. Perhaps it
means that he walked at the head of his disciples; and that he and his
disciples kept on the road before other companies who were then also on
their way to Jerusalem, in order to be present at the feast.

[Luke 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 19:29</span></span>

See this triumphal entry into Jerusalem explained at large on [Mat
21:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001) (note.md), and [Mar
11:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001) (note.md).

[Luke 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 19:38</span></span>

Glory in the highest - Mayst thou receive the uttermost degrees of
glory! See on [Mat 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009) (note.md).

[Luke 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 19:40</span></span>

If these should hold their peace, the stones would - cry out - Of such
importance is my present conduct to you and to others, being expressly
predicted by one of your own prophets, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md), as pointing out the triumph of
humility over pride, and of meekness over rage and malice, as signifying
the salvation which I bring to the lost souls of men, that, if this
multitude were silent, God would give even to the stones a voice, that
the advent of the Messiah might be duly celebrated.

[Luke 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 19:41</span></span>

And wept over it - See [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037.md).

[Luke 19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 19:42</span></span>

The things which belong unto thy peace! - It is very likely that our
Lord here alludes to the meaning of the word Jerusalem, ירושלים from ירה
yereh, he shall see, and שלום shalom, peace or prosperity. Now, because
the inhabitants of it had not seen this peace and salvation, because
they had refused to open their eyes, and behold this glorious light of
heaven which shone among them, therefore he said, Now they are hidden
from thine eyes, still alluding to the import of the name.

[Luke 19:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 19:43</span></span>

Cast a trench about thee - This was literally fulfilled when this city
was besieged by Titus. Josephus gives a very particular account of the
building of this wall, which he says was effected in three days, though
it was not less than thirty-nine furlongs in circumference; and that,
when this wall and trench were completed, the Jews were so enclosed on
every side that no person could escape out of the city, and no provision
could be brought in, so that they were reduced to the most terrible
distress by the famine which ensued. The whole account is well worth the
reader's attention. See Josephus, War, book v. chap. xxii. sec. 1, 2, 3.

[Luke 19:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 19:44</span></span>

The time of thy visitation - That is, the time of God's gracious offers
of mercy to thee. This took in all the time which elapsed from the
preaching of John the Baptist to the coming of the Roman armies, which
included a period of above forty years.

[Luke 19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 19:45</span></span>

Went into the temple - See all this transaction explained, [Mat
21:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012) (note.md).

[Luke 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 19:47</span></span>

And he taught daily in the temple - This he did for five or six days
before his crucifixion. Some suppose that it was on Monday in the
passion week that he thus entered into Jerusalem, and purified the
temple; and on Thursday he was seized late at night: during these four
days he taught in the temple, and lodged each night at Bethany. See the
note on [Mat 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#017.md).

[Luke 19:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 19:48</span></span>

Were very attentive to hear him - Or, They heard him with the utmost
attention, εξεκρεματο αυτου ακουων, literally, They hung upon him,
hearing. The same form of speech is used often by both Greek and Latin
writers of the best repute. -

Ex vultu dicentis, pendet omnium vultus.

The face of every man hung on the face of the speaker.

\- Pendetque iterum narrantis ab ore.

Virg. Aen. iv. 79

And she hung again on the lips of the narrator.

The words of the evangelist mark, not only the deepest attention because
of the importance of the subject, but also the very high gratification
which the hearers had from the discourse. Those who read or hear the
words of Christ, in this way, must inevitably become wise to salvation.

The reader is requested to refer to Matthew 24 (note), and to [Mat
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014) (note.md), for more extensive
information on the different subjects in this chapter, and to the other
parallel places. The prophecy relative to the destruction of Jerusalem
is one of the most circumstantial, and the most literally fulfilled, of
any prediction ever delivered. See this particularly remarked at the
conclusion of Matthew 24 (note), where the whole subject is amply
reviewed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 20](luk020.md)

</div>
