<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk004)  [Next](luk006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 5:0</span></span>

The miraculous draught of fishes at the lake of Gennesaret, [Luk
5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001). Christ heals a leper, [Luk
5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#012). His fame being published
abroad, he withdraws to the desert, [Luk
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#015), [Luk
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#016). He heals a paralytic person, at
which the scribes and Pharisees murmur, but the people glorify God, [Luk
5:17-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#017). He calls the publican Levi,
who makes a feast for Christ, to which he invites a great number of
publicans and others, at which the scribes and Pharisees murmur, and our
Lord vindicates his conduct, [Luk
5:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#027). The question about fasting
answered, [Luk 5:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#033). The parable of
the new piece of cloth put on the old garment, and the new wine in old
bottles, [Luk 5:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#036).

[Luke 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 5:1</span></span>

The people pressed upon him - There was a glorious prospect of a
plentiful harvest, but how few of these blades came to full corn in the
ear! To hear with diligence and affection is well; but a preacher of the
Gospel may expect that, out of crowds of hearers, only a few,
comparatively, will fully receive the truth, and hold out to the end.

To hear the word of God - Του λογον του Θεου, The doctrine of God, or,
the heavenly doctrine.

The lake of Gennesaret - Called also the sea of Galilee, [Mat
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018), and [Mar
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016); and the sea of Tiberias, [Joh
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001). It was, according to Josephus,
forty furlongs in breadth, and one hundred and forty in length. No
synagogue could have contained the multitudes who attended our Lord's
ministry; and therefore he was obliged to preach in the open air. But
this also some of the most eminent rabbins were in the habit of doing;
though among some of their brethren it was not deemed reputable.

[Luke 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 5:2</span></span>

Two ships - Δυο πλοια, Two vessels, It is highly improper to term these
ships. They appear to have been only such small boats as are used to
manage nets on flat smooth beaches: one end of the net is attached to
the shore; the fishermen row out, and drop the net as they go, making a
kind of semicircle from the shore; they return, and bring the rope
attached to the other end with them, and then the net is hauled on
shore; and, as it was sunk with weights to the bottom, and floated with
corks at the top, all the fish in that compass were included, and drawn
to shore.

[Luke 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 5:3</span></span>

And taught - out of the ship - They pressed so much upon him on the
land, through their eagerness to hear the doctrine of life, that he
could not conveniently speak to them, and so was obliged to get into one
of the boats; and, having pushed a little out from the land, he taught
them. The smooth still water of the lake must have served excellently to
convey the sounds to those who stood on the shore;

[Luke 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 5:5</span></span>

Simon - said - Master - ΕπιϚατα. This is the first place where this word
occurs; it is used by none of the inspired penmen but Luke, and he
applies it only to our blessed Lord. It properly signifies a prefect, or
one who is set over certain affairs or persons: it is used also for an
instructer, or teacher. Peter considered Christ, from what he had heard,
as teacher of a Divine doctrine, and as having authority to command,
etc. He seems to comprise both ideas in this appellation; he listened
attentively to his teaching, and readily obeyed his orders. To hear
attentively, and obey cheerfully, are duties we owe, not only to the
sovereign Master of the world, but also to ourselves. No man ever took
Jesus profitably for his teacher, who did not at the same time receive
him as his Lord.

We have toiled all the night - They had cast the net several times in
the course of the night, and drew it to shore without success, and were
now greatly disheartened. I have seen several laborious draughts of this
kind made without fruit. All labor must be fruitless where the blessing
of God is not; but especially that of the ministry. It is the presence
and influence of Christ, in a congregation, that cause souls to be
gathered unto himself: without these, whatever the preacher's eloquence
or abilities may be, all will be night, and fruitless labor.

At thy word I will let down the net - He who assumes the character of a
fisher of men, under any authority that does not proceed from Christ, is
sure to catch nothing; but he who labors by the order and under the
direction of the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, cannot labor in
vain.

[Luke 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 5:6</span></span>

Their net brake - Or, began to break, διερῥηγνυτο, or, was likely to be
broken. Had it broke, as our version states, they could have caught no
fish. Grammarians give the following rule concerning words of this kind.
Verba completiva inchoative intelligenda. Verbs which signify the
accomplishment of a thing, are often to be understood as only signifying
the beginning of that accomplishment. Raphelius gives some very
pertinent examples of this out of Herodotus.

[Luke 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 5:7</span></span>

They beckoned unto their partners - Had not these been called in to
assist, the net must have been broken, and all the fish lost. What a
pity there should be such envious separation among the different sects
that profess to believe in Christ Jesus! Did they help each other in the
spirit of Christian fellowship, more souls would be brought to the
knowledge of the truth. Some will rather leave souls to perish than
admit of partners in the sacred work. It is an intolerable pride to
think nothing well done but what we do ourselves; and a diabolic envy to
be afraid lest others should be more successful than we are.

They - filled both the ships - Both the boats had as many as they could
carry, and were so heavily laden that they were ready to sink. As one
justly observes, "There are fish plenty to be taken, were there skillful
hands to take, and vessels to contain them. Many are disputing about the
size, capacity, and goodness of their nets and their vessels, while the
fish are permitted to make their escape." Did the faithful fishers in
both the vessels in these lands (the established Church, and the various
branches of the dissenting interest) join heartily together, the nations
might be converted to God; but, while the ridiculous disputes for and
against particular forms last, there can be no unity. Were men as
zealous to catch souls, as they are to support their particular creeds,
and forms of worship, the state of Christianity would be more
flourishing than it is at present. But the wall of separation is
continually strengthened, each party fortifying it on his own side.

[Luke 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 5:8</span></span>

Depart from me; for I am a sinful man - Εξελθε απ' εμου, Go out from me,
i.e. from my boat. Peter was fully convinced that this draught of fish
was a miraculous one; and that God himself had particularly interfered
in this matter, whose presence and power he reverenced in the person of
Jesus. But as he felt himself a sinner, he was afraid the Divine purity
of Christ could not possibly endure him; therefore he wished for a
separation from that power, which he was afraid might break forth and
consume him. It seems to have been a received maxim among the Jews, that
whoever had seen a particular manifestation of God should speedily die.
Hence Jacob seemed astonished that his life should have been preserved,
when he had seen God face to face, [Gen
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030). So the nobles of Israel saw
God, and yet did eat and drink; for on them he had laid not his hand,
i.e. to destroy them, though it appears to have been expected by them,
in consequence of this discovery which he made of himself. See [Exo
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010), [Exo
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#011) (note), and the notes there.
This supposition of the Jews seems to have been founded on the authority
of God himself, [Exo 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020) : There
shall no man see my Face and Live. So Moses, [Deu
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026) : Who is there of all flesh that
hath heard the voice of the living God, speaking out of the midst of the
fire as we have, and Lived? So Gideon expected to be immediately slain,
because he had seen an angel of the Lord, and a miracle performed by
him. See [Jdg 6:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#021). So likewise
Manoah and his wife, [Jdg 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#022) : We
shall surely Die, for we have Seen God. These different passages
sufficiently show in what sense these words of Peter are to be
understood.

[Luke 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 5:10</span></span>

Thou shalt catch men - Ανθρωπους εσῃ ζωγρων, Thou shalt catch men alive;
this is the proper signification of the word. Fear not: these
discoveries of God tend to life, not to death; and ye shall become the
instruments of life and salvation to a lost world. These fish are taken
to be killed and fed on; but those who are converted under your ministry
shall be preserved unto eternal life. See on [Mat
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018) (note), etc., where this subject
is considered more at large.

[Luke 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 5:11</span></span>

They forsook all, and followed him - God expects this from every person,
and especially from those in whose hearts, or in whose behalf, he has
wrought a miracle of grace or of providence. Jesus intended to call
Peter, James, and John, to become his disciples; and that they might see
the propriety and importance of the call, he: -

1st. Teaches in their presence, that they may know his doctrine.

2dly. He Works a Miracle before their eyes, that they might see and be
convinced of his power.

3dly. He Calls them to go forth with this doctrine, and through this
power, that they might teach the ignorant, and be successful in their
work.

[Luke 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 5:12</span></span>

A certain city - This was some city of Galilee; probably Chorazin or
Bethsaida.

A man full of leprosy - See this disease, and the cure, largely
explained on [Mat 8:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002) (note); and
see it particularly applied to the use of public preaching, [Mar
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#040) (note), etc. See also the notes
on Leviticus 13 (note), and 14 (note).

[Luke 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 5:14</span></span>

And offer for thy cleansing - A Hindoo, after recovering from sickness,
presents the offerings he had vowed when in distress, as a goat,
sweetmeats, milk, or any thing directed by the Shaster. All nations
agreed in these gratitude-offerings for benefits received from the
object of their worship.

[Luke 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 5:16</span></span>

And he withdrew himself into the wilderness - Or rather, He frequently
withdrew into the desert. This I believe to be the import of the
original words, ην ὑποχωρων. He made it a frequent custom to withdraw
from the multitudes for a time, and pray, teaching hereby the ministers
of the Gospel that they are to receive fresh supplies of light and power
from God by prayer, that they may be the more successful in their work;
and that they ought to seek frequent opportunities of being in private
with God and their books. A man can give nothing unless he first receive
it; and no man can be successful in the ministry who does not constantly
depend upon God, for the excellence of the power is all from him. Why is
there so much preaching, and so little good done? Is it not because the
preachers mix too much with the world, keep too long in the crowd, and
are so seldom in private with God? Reader! Art thou a herald for the
Lord of hosts? Make full proof of thy ministry! Let it never be said of
thee, "He forsook all to follow Christ, and to preach his Gospel, but
there was little or no fruit of his labor; for he ceased to be a man of
prayer, and got into the spirit of the world." Alas! alas! is this
luminous star, that was once held in the right hand of Jesus, fallen
from the firmament of heaven, down to the Earth!

[Luke 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 5:17</span></span>

On a certain day - This was when he was at Capernaum. See [Mar
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#001).

The power of the Lord - Δυναμις Κυριου The mighty or miraculous power of
the Lord, i.e. of Jesus, was there to heal them - as many as were
diseased either in body or soul. Where the teaching of Christ is, there
also is the power of Christ to redeem and save.

[Luke 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 5:18</span></span>

A man - taken with a palsy - See this case described on [Mat
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001) (note), etc., and [Mar
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#001) (note), etc.

[Luke 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 5:19</span></span>

Went upon the housetop - See on [Mat
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#017) (note).

[Luke 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 5:21</span></span>

Who can forgive sins, but God alone? - If Jesus were not God, he could
not forgive sins; and his arrogating this authority would have been
blasphemy against God, in the most proper sense of the word. That these
scribes and Pharisees might have the fullest proof of his Godhead, he
works in their presence three miracles, which from their nature could
only be effected by an omniscient and omnipotent Being. The miracles
are:

1\. The remission of the poor man's sins.

2\. The discernment of the secret thoughts of the scribes.

3\. The restoration of the paralytic in an instant to perfect soundness.

See on [Mat 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005), [Mat
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006) (note).

[Luke 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 5:26</span></span>

Strange things - Παραδοξα, paradoxes. A paradox is something that
appears false and absurd, but is not really so: or, something contrary
to the commonly received opinion. We have seen wonders wrought which
seem impossible; and we should conclude them to be tricks and illusions,
were it not for the indisputable evidence we have of their reality.

[Luke 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 5:27</span></span>

Levi - See on [Mat 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009) (note); [Mar
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#014) (note).

[Luke 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 5:28</span></span>

And he left all - Καταλιπων - completely abandoning his office, and
every thing connected with it. He who wishes to preach the Gospel, like
the disciples of Christ, must have no earthly entanglement. If he have,
his whole labor will be marred by it. The concerns of his own soul, and
those of the multitudes to whom he preaches, are sufficient to engross
all his attention, and to employ all his powers.

[Luke 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 5:29</span></span>

A great feast - Δοχην μεγαλην, A splendid entertainment. The word refers
more properly to the number of the guests, and the manner in which they
were received, than to the quality or quantity of the fare. A great
number of his friends and acquaintance was collected on the occasion,
that they might be convinced of the propriety of the change he had made,
when they had the opportunity of seeing and hearing his heavenly
teacher.

[Luke 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 5:30</span></span>

Why do ye eat and drink, etc. - See what passed at this entertainment
considered at large on [Mat 9:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010)
(note); [Mar 2:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#015) (note).

[Luke 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 5:37</span></span>

The new wine will burst the bottles - These old bottles would not be
able to stand the fermentation of the new wine, as the old sewing would
be apt to give way. It is scarcely necessary to remark, that the eastern
bottles are made of skins; generally those of goats.

[Luke 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 5:39</span></span>

The old is better - ΧρηϚοτερος - Is more agreeable to the taste or
palate. Herodotus, the scholiast on Aristophanes, and Homer, use the
word in this sense. See Raphelius. The old wine, among the rabbins, was
the wine of three leaves; that is, wine three years old; because, from
the time that the vine had produced that wine, it had put forth its
leaves three times. See Lightfoot.

1\. The miraculous draught of fishes, the cleansing of the leper, the
healing of the paralytic person, the calling of Levi, and the parable of
the old and new bottles, and the old and new wine - all related in this
chapter, make it not only very entertaining, but highly instructive.
There are few chapters in the New Testament from which a preacher of the
Gospel can derive more lessons of instruction; and the reader would
naturally expect a more particular explanation of its several parts, had
not this been anticipated in the notes and observations on Matthew 9, to
which chapter it will be well to refer.

2\. The conduct as well as the preaching of our Lord is highly edifying.
His manner of teaching made every thing he spoke interesting and
impressive. He had many prejudices to remove, and he used admirable
address in order to meet and take them out of the way. There is as much
to be observed in the manner of speaking the truth, as in the truth
itself, in order to make it effectual to the salvation of them who hear
it. A harsh, unfeeling method of preaching the promises of the Gospel,
and a smiling manner of producing the terrors of the Lord, are equally
reprehensible. Some preachers are always severe and magisterial: others
are always mild and insinuating: neither of these can do God's work; and
it would take two such to make one Preacher.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 6](luk006)

</div>
