<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk002)  [Next](luk004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 3:0</span></span>

The time in which John the Baptist began to preach, [Luk
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001.md). The prophecies which were
fulfilled in him, [Luk 3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#004.md). The
matter and success of his preaching, [Luk
3:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007.md); among the people, [Luk
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#010.md), [Luk
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#011.md); among the publicans, [Luk
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#012.md), [Luk
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#013.md); among the soldiers, [Luk
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014.md). His testimony concerning Christ,
[Luk 3:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#015.md). The reason why Herod put
him afterwards in prison, [Luk 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#019.md),
[Luk 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#020.md). He baptizes Christ, on whom
the Spirit of God descends, [Luk 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021.md),
[Luk 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#022.md). Our Lord's genealogy, vv.
23-38.

[Luke 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 3:1</span></span>

Fifteenth year - This was the fifteenth of his principality and
thirteenth of his monarchy: for he was two years joint emperor,
previously to the death of Augustus.

Tiberius Caesar - This emperor succeeded Augustus, in whose reign Christ
was born. He began his reign August 19, a.d. 14, reigned twenty-three
years, and died March 16, a.d. 37, aged seventy eight years. He was a
most infamous character. During the latter part of his reign especially,
he did all the mischief he possibly could; and that his tyranny might
not end with his life, he chose Caius Caligula for his successor, merely
on account of his bad qualities; and of whom he was accustomed to say,
This young prince will be a Serpent to the Roman people, and a Phaethon
to the rest of mankind.

Herod - This was Herod Antipas, the son of Herod the Great who murdered
the innocents. It was the same Herod who beheaded John Baptist, and to
whom our Lord was sent by Pilate. See the account of the Herod family in
the notes on [Mat 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001) (note.md).

Iturea and Trachonitis - Two provinces of Syria, on the confines of
Judea.

Abilene - Another province of Syria, which had its name from Abila, its
chief city.

These estates were left to Herod Antipas and his brother Philip by the
will of their father, Herod the Great; and were confirmed to them by the
decree of Augustus.

That Philip was tetrarch of Trachonitis, in the fifteenth year of
Tiberius, we are assured by Josephus, who says that Philip the brother
of Herod died in the twentieth year of Tiberius, after he had governed
Trachonitis, Batanea, and Gaulonitis thirty-seven years. Antiq. b.
xviii. c. 5, s. 6. And Herod continued tetrarch of Galilee till he was
removed by Caligula, the successor of Tiberius. Antiq. b. xviii. c. 8,
s. 2.

That Lysanius was tetrarch of Abilene is also evident from Josephus. He
continued in this government till the Emperor Claudius took it from him,
a.d. 42, and made a present of it to Agrippa. See Antiq. b. xix. c. 5,
s. 1.

Tetrarch signifies the ruler of the fourth part of a country. See the
note on [Mat 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001.md).

[Luke 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 3:2</span></span>

Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests - Caiaphas was the son-in-law
of Annas or Ananias, and it is supposed that they exercised the high
priest's office by turns. It is likely that Annas only was considered as
high priest; and that Caiaphas was what the Hebrews termed כהן משנה
cohen mishneh, or סגן כהנים sagan cohanim, the high priest's deputy, or
ruler of the temple. See the note on [Mat
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004.md), and on [Joh
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013.md).

The facts which St. Luke mentions here tend much to confirm the truth of
the evangelical history. Christianity differs widely from philosophic
system; it is founded in the goodness and authority of God; and attested
by historic facts. It differs also from popular tradition, which either
has had no pure origin, or which is lost in unknown or fabulous
antiquity. It differs also from pagan and Mohammedan revelations, which
were fabricated in a corner, and had no witnesses. In the above verses
we find the persons, the places, and the times marked with the utmost
exactness. It was under the first Caesars that the preaching of the
Gospel took place; and in their time, the facts on which the whole of
Christianity is founded made their appearance: an age the most
enlightened, and best known from the multitude of its historic records.
It was in Judea, where every thing that professed to come from God was
scrutinized with the most exact and unmerciful criticism. In writing the
history of Christianity, the evangelists appeal to certain facts which
were publicly transacted in such places, under the government and
inspection of such and such persons, and in such particular times. A
thousand persons could have confronted the falsehood, had it been one!
These appeals are made - a challenge is offered to the Roman government,
and to the Jewish rulers and people - a new religion has been introduced
in such a place, at such a time - this has been accompanied with such
and such facts and miracles! Who can disprove this? All are silent. None
appears to offer even an objection. The cause of infidelity and
irreligion is at stake! If these facts cannot be disproved, the religion
of Christ must triumph. None appears because none could appear. Now let
it be observed, that the persons of that time, only, could confute these
things had they been false; they never attempted it; therefore these
facts are absolute and incontrovertible truths: this conclusion is
necessary. Shall a man then give up his faith in such attested facts as
these, because, more than a thousand years after, an infidel creeps out,
and ventures publicly to sneer at what his iniquitous soul hopes is not
true!

The word of God came unto John - That is, the Holy Spirit that revealed
to him this doctrine of salvation. This came upon him in the desert,
where he was living in such a state of austerity as gave him full right
to preach all the rigours of penitence to others. Thus we find that the
first preachers, historians, and followers of the doctrines of the
Gospel were men eminent for the austerity of their lives, the simplicity
of their manners, and the sanctity of their conduct; they were
authorized by God, and filled with the most precious gifts of his
Spirit. And what are the apostles which the new philosophy sends us?
Philosophers full of themselves, not guided by the love of truth or
wisdom, but ever seeking their own glory; in constant hostility among
themselves, because of their separate pretensions to particular
discoveries, of the honor of which they would almost as soon lose life
as be deprived. Who are they? Men of a mortified life and unblamable
conversation? No, they are poets and poetasters; composers of romances,
novels, intrigues, farces, comedies, etc., full of extravagance and
impurity. They are pretended moralists that preach up pleasure and
sensual gratification, and dissolve, as far as they can, the sacred and
civil ties that unite and support society. They are men whose guilt is
heightened by their assuming the sacred name of philosophers, and
dignifying their impure system with a name at which Philosophy herself
blushes and bleeds.

[Luke 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 3:3</span></span>

The baptism of repentance - See on [Mat
3:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004) (note.md), and [Mar
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001) (note), etc., and Mark 16 (note.md)
at the end.

[Luke 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 3:4</span></span>

Prepare ye the way - It was customary for the Hindoo kings, when on
journeys, to send a certain class of the people two or three days before
them, to command the inhabitants to clear the ways. A very necessary
precaution where there are no public roads. - Ward.

[Luke 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 3:5</span></span>

Every they shall be filled - All hinderances shall be taken out of the
way: a quotation from the Greek version of [Isa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#004.md), containing an allusion to the
preparations made in rough countries to facilitate the march of mighty
kings and conquerors. See the instance produced on [Mat
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#003) (note.md).

[Luke 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 3:7</span></span>

On this account of the Baptist's mode of preaching, see the notes on
[Mat 3:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007) (note.md).

[Luke 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 3:10</span></span>

What shall we do then? - The preaching of the Baptist had been
accompanied with an uncommon effusion of that Spirit which convinces of
sin, righteousness, and judgment. The people who heard him now earnestly
begin to inquire what they must do to be saved? They are conscious that
they are exposed to the judgments of the Lord, and they wish to escape
from the coming wrath.

[Luke 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 3:11</span></span>

He that hath two coats, etc. - He first teaches the great mass of the
people their duty to each other. They were uncharitable and oppressive,
and he taught them not to expect any mercy from the hand of God, while
they acted towards others in opposition to its dictates. If men be
unkind and uncharitable towards each other, how can they expect the
mercy of the Lord to be extended towards themselves?

[Luke 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 3:12</span></span>

Then came also publicans - He next instructs the tax-gatherers in the
proper discharge of their duty: though it was an office detested by the
Jews at large, yet the Baptist does not condemn it. It is only the abuse
of it that he speaks against. If taxes be necessary for the support of a
state, there must be collectors of them; and the collector, if he
properly discharge his duty, is not only a useful, but also a
respectable officer. But it seems the Jewish tax-gatherers exacted much
more from the people than government authorized them to do, [Luk
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#013.md), and the surplus they pocketed.
See the conduct of many of our surveyors and assessors. They are
oppressors of the people, and enrich themselves by unjust surcharges.
This, I am inclined to think, is too common an evil; and the executive
government is often the people's scape-goat, to bear the crimes of its
officers, crimes in which it has no concern. For an account of the
publicans, see the note on [Mat 5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046.md).

[Luke 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 3:14</span></span>

The soldiers likewise demanded of him - He, thirdly, instructs those
among the military. They were either Roman soldiers, or the soldiers of
Herod or Philip. Use no violence to any, μηδενα διασεισητε, do not
extort money or goods by force or violence from any. This is the import
of the words neminein concutite, used here by the Vulgate, and points
out a crime of which the Roman soldiers were notoriously guilty, their
own writers being witnesses. Concussio has the above meaning in the
Roman law. See Raphelius in loco.

Neither accuse any falsely - Or, on a frivolous pretense - μηδε
συκοφαντησητε, be not sycophants, like those who are base flatterers of
their masters, who to ingratiate themselves into their esteem, malign,
accuse, and impeach the innocent. Bishop Pearce observes that, when the
concussio above referred to did not produce the effect they wished, they
often falsely accused the persons, which is the reason why this advice
is added. See the note on [Luk 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007.md).

Be content with your wages - Οψωνιοις. The word signifies not only the
money which was allotted to a Roman soldier, which was two oboli, about
three halfpence per day, but also the necessary supply of wheat, barley,
etc. See Raphelius.

[Luke 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 3:15</span></span>

Whether he were the Christ - So general was the reformation which was
produced by the Baptist's preaching that the people were ready to
consider him as the promised Messiah. Thus John came in the spirit and
power of Elijah, and reformed all things; showed the people, the
tax-gatherers, and the soldiers, their respective duties, and persuaded
them to put away the evil of their doings. See the note on [Mat
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011.md).

[Luke 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 3:16</span></span>

On these verses see [Mat 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md), [Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md), and [Mar
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#007.md), [Mar
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#008.md), and particularly the note on [Joh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005) (note.md).

[Luke 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 3:19</span></span>

Herod the tetrarch - See this subject explained at large, [Mat
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001) (note.md), etc., and [Mar
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#021.md), [Mar
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#023) (note.md).

[Luke 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 3:21</span></span>

Jesus - being baptized - See on [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md), [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017) (note.md).

[Luke 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 3:23</span></span>

Thirty years of age - This was the age required by the law, to which the
priests must arrive before they could be installed in their office: see
[Num 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003.md).

Being (as was supposed) the son of Joseph - This same phrase is used by
Herodotus to signify one who was only reputed to be the son of a
particular person: τουτου παις νομιζεται he was Supposed to be this
man's son. Much learned labor has been used to reconcile this genealogy
with that in St. Matthew, Matthew 1:1-17, and there are several ways of
doing it; the following, which appears to me to be the best, is also the
most simple and easy. For a more elaborate discussion of the subject,
the reader is referred to the additional observations at the end of the
chapter. Matthew, in descending from Abraham to Joseph, the spouse of
the blessed virgin, speaks of Sons properly such, by way of natural
generation: Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, etc. But Luke,
in ascending from the Savior of the world to God himself, speaks of sons
either properly or improperly such: on this account he uses an
indeterminate mode of expression, which may be applied to sons either
putatively or really such. And Jesus himself began to be about thirty
years of age, being, as was Supposed the son of Joseph - of Heli - of
Matthat, etc. This receives considerable support from Raphelius's method
of reading the original ων (ὡς ενομιζετο υἱος Ιωσηφ) του Ἡλι, being
(when reputed the son of Joseph) the son of Heli, etc. That St. Luke
does not always speak of sons properly such, is evident from the first
and last person which he names: Jesus Christ was only the supposed son
of Joseph, because Joseph was the husband of his mother Mary: and Adam,
who is said to be the son of God, was such only by creation. After this
observation it is next necessary to consider, that, in the genealogy
described by St. Luke, there are two sons improperly such: i.e. two
sons-in-law, instead of two sons. As the Hebrews never permitted women
to enter into their genealogical tables, whenever a family happened to
end with a daughter, instead of naming her in the genealogy, they
inserted her husband, as the son of him who was, in reality, but his
father-in-law. This import, bishop Pearce has fully shown, νομιζεσθαι
bears, in a variety of places - Jesus was considered according to law,
or allowed custom, to be the son of Joseph, as he was of Heli. The two
sons-in-law who are to be noticed in this genealogy are Joseph the
son-in-law of Heli, whose own father was Jacob, [Mat
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#016.md); and Salathiel, the son-in-law of
Neri, whose own father was Jechonias: [Ch1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#017.md), and [Mat
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#012.md). This remark alone is sufficient
to remove every difficulty. Thus it appears that Joseph, son of Jacob,
according to St. Matthew, was son-in-law of Heli, according to St. Luke.
And Salathiel, son of Jechonias, according to the former, was son-in-law
of Neri, according to the latter. Mary therefore appears to have been
the daughter of Heli; so called by abbreviation for Heliachim, which is
the same in Hebrew with Joachim. Joseph, son of Jacob, and Mary;
daughter of Heli, were of the same family: both came from Zerubbabel;
Joseph from Abiud, his eldest son, [Mat
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#013.md), and Mary by Rhesa, the youngest.
See [Luk 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#027.md). Salathiel and
Zorobabel, from whom St. Matthew and St. Luke cause Christ to proceed,
were themselves descended from Solomon in a direct line: and though St.
Luke says that Salathiel was son of Neri, who was descended from Nathan,
Solomon's eldest brother, [Ch1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005.md),
this is only to be understood of his having espoused Nathan's daughter,
and that Neri dying, probably, without male issues the two branches of
the family of David, that of Nathan and that of Solomon, were both
united in the person of Zerubbabel, by the marriage of Salathiel, chief
of the regal family of Solomon, with the daughter of Neri, chief and
heretrix of the family of Nathan. Thus it appears that Jesus, son of
Mary, reunited in himself all the blood, privileges, and rights of the
whole family of David; in consequence of which he is emphatically
called, The son of David. It is worthy of being remarked that St.
Matthew, who wrote principally for the Jews, extends his genealogy to
Abraham through whom the promise of the Messiah was given to the Jews;
but St. Luke, who wrote his history for the instruction of the Gentiles,
extends his genealogy to Adam, to whom the promise of the Redeemer was
given in behalf of himself and of all his posterity. See the notes on
[Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md), etc.

[Luke 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 3:36</span></span>

Of Cainan - This Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, and father of Sala, is not
found in any other Scripture genealogy. See [Gen
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#024.md); [Gen
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#012.md); [Ch1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#018.md), [Ch1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#024.md), where Arphaxad is made the
father of Sala, and no mention at all made of Cainan. Some suppose that
Cainan was a surname of Sala, and that the names should be read together
thus, The son of Heber, the son of Salacainan, the son of Arphaxad, etc.
If this does not untie the knot, it certainly cuts it; and the reader
may pass on without any great scruple or embarrassment. There are many
sensible observations on this genealogy in the notes at the end of
Bishop Newcome's Harmony.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 4](luk004.md)

</div>
