<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal002)  [Next](mal004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 3:0</span></span>

In allusion to the custom of sending pioneers to prepare the way for the
march of an eastern monarch, the coming of Christ's forerunner is
described, and then the coming of Christ himself, [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); with the terrible judgments which
were to accompany that event, in order to refine and purify his people
and his priests, [Mal 3:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002). The
following verses reprehend them for withholding the legal tithes and
offerings, with large promises in case of their repentance and
amendments, [Mal 3:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#007). The prophet
expostulates with the people for their hard and profane speeches against
the conduct of Providence, and declares God will one day make a fearful
and final distinction between the righteous and the wicked, whose
different characters are in the mean time carefully recorded, [Mal
3:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#013).

[Malachi 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 3:1</span></span>

Behold, I will send my messenger - מלאכי Malachi, the very name of the
prophet. But this speaks of John the Baptist. I, the Messiah, the Seed
of God, mentioned above, will send my messenger, John the Baptist.

He shall prepare the way - Be as a pioneer before me; a corrector of
civil abuses, and a preacher of righteousness.

And the Lord, whom ye seek - The Messiah, whom ye expect, from the
account given by the prophet Daniel, in his seventy weeks, [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024).

Shall suddenly come to his temple - Shall soon be presented before the
Lord in his temple; cleanse it from its defilement, and fill it with his
teaching and his glory.

The Messenger of the covenant - He that comes to fulfill the great
design, in reference to the covenant made with Abram, that in his seed
all the families of the earth should be blessed. See the parallel texts
in the margin, and the notes on them.

[Malachi 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 3:2</span></span>

But who may abide the day of his coming? - Only they who shall believe
on his name; for they that will not, shall be blinded, and the
unbelieving nations shall be destroyed by the Romans.

Like fuller's soap - כברית keborith, from ברר barar, to cleanse, any
thing that deterges. Kali, or fern ashes, or such things. I doubt
whether the composition which we call soap, was known in ancient times.

[Malachi 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 3:3</span></span>

He shall sit as a refiner - Alluding to the case of a refiner of metals,
sitting at his fire; increasing it when he sees necessary, and watching
the process of his work.

The sons of Levi - Those who minister in their stead under the New
covenant, for the Old Levitical institutions shall be abolished; yet,
under the preaching of our Lord, a great number of the priests became
obedient to the faith, [Act 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007); and,
as to the others that did not believe, this great Refiner threw them as
dross into the Roman fire, that consumed both Jerusalem and the temple.

[Malachi 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 3:5</span></span>

I will come near to you to judgment - And what fearful cases does he get
to judge! Sorcerers, adulterers, false swearers, defrauders of the wages
of the hireling, oppressors of widows and orphans, and perverters of the
stranger and such as do not fear the Lord: a horrible crew; and the land
at that time was full of them. Several were converted under the
preaching of Christ and his apostles, and the rest the Romans destroyed
or carried into captivity.

[Malachi 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 3:6</span></span>

I am the Lord, I change not - The new dispensation of grace and
goodness, which is now about to be introduced, is not the effect of any
change in my counsels; it is, on the contrary, the fulfillment of my
everlasting purposes; as is also the throwing aside of the Mosaic
ritual, which was only intended to introduce the great and glorious
Gospel of my Son.

And because of this ancient covenant, ye Jews are not totally consumed;
but ye are now, and shall be still, preserved as a distinct people -
monuments both of my justice and mercy.

[Malachi 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mal 3:7</span></span>

Gone away from mine ordinances - Never acting according to their spirit
and design.

Return unto me - There is still space to repent.

Wherein shall we return? - Their consciences were seared, and they knew
not that they were sinners.

[Malachi 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mal 3:8</span></span>

Will a man rob God? - Here is one point on which ye are guilty; ye
withhold the tithes and offerings from the temple of God, so that the
Divine worship is neglected.

[Malachi 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mal 3:9</span></span>

Ye are cursed with a curse - The whole nation is under my displeasure.
The curse of God is upon you.

[Malachi 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 3:10</span></span>

Bring ye all the tithes - They had so withheld these that the priests
had not food enough to support life, and the sacred service was
interrupted. See [Neh 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#010).

And prove me now herewith - What ye give to God shall never lessen your
store. Give as ye should, and see whether I will not so increase your
store by opening the windows of heaven - giving you rain and fruitful
seasons - that your barns and granaries shall not be able to contain the
abundance of your harvests and vintage.

[Malachi 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mal 3:11</span></span>

I wilt rebuke the devourer - The locusts, etc., shall not come on your
crops; and those that are in the country I will disperse and destroy.

Neither shall your vine cast her fruit - Every blossom shall bear fruit,
and every bunch of grapes come to maturity.

[Malachi 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mal 3:12</span></span>

All nations shall call you blessed - They shall see that a peculiar
blessing of God rests upon you, and your land shall be delightsome; like
Paradise, the garden of the Lord.

[Malachi 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 3:13</span></span>

Your words have been stout against me - He speaks here to open infidels
and revilers.

What have we spoken - They are ready either to deny the whole, or
impudently to maintain and defend what they had spoken!

[Malachi 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 3:14</span></span>

Ye have said, It is vain to serve God - They strove to destroy the
Divine worship; they asserted that it was vanity; that, if they
performed acts of worship, they should be nothing the better; and if
they abstained, they should be nothing the worse. This was their
teaching to the people.

Walked mournfully - Even repentance they have declared to be useless.
This was a high pitch of ungodliness; but see what follows; behold the
general conclusions of these reprobates: -

[Malachi 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mal 3:15</span></span>

And now we call the proud happy - Proud and insolent men are the only
happy people, for they domineer everywhere, and none dares to resist
them.

They that work wickedness are set up - The humble and holy are depressed
and miserable; the proud and wicked are in places of trust and profit.
Too often it is so.

They that tempt God are even delivered - Even those who despise God, and
insult his justice and providence, are preserved in and from dangers;
while the righteous fall by them.

[Malachi 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mal 3:16</span></span>

They that feared the Lord - There were a few godly in the land, who,
hearing the language and seeing the profligacy of the rebels above,
concluded that some signal mark of God's vengeance must fall upon them;
they, therefore, as the corruption increased, cleaved the closer to
their Maker. There are three characteristics given of this people, viz.:
-

1\. They feared the Lord. They had that reverence for Jehovah that
caused them to depart from evil, and to keep his ordinances.

2\. They spake often one to another. They kept up the communion of
saints. By mutual exhortation they strengthened each other's hands in
the Lord.

3\. They thought on his name. His name was sacred to them; it was a
fruitful source of profound and edifying meditation. The name of God is
God himself in the plenitude of his power, omniscience, justice,
goodness, mercy, and truth. What a source for thinking and
contemplation! See how God treats such persons: The Lord hearkened to
their conversation, heard the meditations of their hearts; and so
approved of the whole that a book of remembrance was written before the
Lord - all their names were carefully registered in heaven. Here is an
allusion to records kept by kings, [Est
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001), of such as had performed signal
services, and who should be the first to be rewarded.

[Malachi 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mal 3:17</span></span>

They shall be mine - I will acknowledge them as my subjects and
followers; in the day, especially, when I come to punish the wicked and
reward the righteous.

When I make up my jewels - סגלה segullah, my peculium, my proper
treasure; that which is a man's own, and most prized by him. Not jewels;
for in no part of the Bible does the word mean a gem or precious stone
of any kind. The interpretations frequently given of the word in this
verse, comparing saints to jewels, are forced and false.

I will spare them - When I come to visit the wicked, I will take care of
them. I will act towards them as a tender father would act towards his
most loving and obedient son.

[Malachi 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mal 3:18</span></span>

Then shall ye return - To your senses, when perhaps too late; and
discern - see the difference which God makes, between the righteous and
the wicked, which will be most marked and awful.

Between him that serveth God - Your obedience to whom, ye said, would be
unprofitable to you.

And hits that serveth him not - Of whom ye said, his disobedience would
be no prejudice to him. You will find the former received into the
kingdom of glory; and the latter, with yourselves, thrust down into the
bitter pains of an eternal death. Reader, ponder these things.

In the great day of the Lord, at least, if not long before, it will be
fully discovered who have been the truly wise people; those who took up
their cross and followed Christ; or those who satisfied the flesh, with
its affections and desires, following a multitude to do evil.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 4](mal004)

</div>
