<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal003)  [Next](mat000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 4:0</span></span>

God's awful judgments on the wicked, [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001). Great blessedness of the
righteous, [Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002), [Mal
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#003). The prophet then, with a
solemnity becoming the last of the prophets, closes the Sacred Canon
with enjoining the strict observance of the law till the forerunner
already promised should appear, in the spirit of Elijah, to introduce
the Messiah, and begin a new and everlasting dispensation, [Mal
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004).

[Malachi 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 4:1</span></span>

Behold, the day cometh, that shall burn as an oven - The destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans.

And all the proud - This is in reference to [Mal
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015) of the preceding chapter.

The day that cometh shall burn them up - Either by famine, by sword, or
by captivity. All those rebels shall be destroyed.

It shall leave them neither root nor branch - A proverbial expression
for total destruction. Neither man nor child shall escape.

[Malachi 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 4:2</span></span>

You that fear my name - The persons mentioned in the sixteenth verse of
the preceding chapter, ye that look for redemption through the Messiah.

The Sun of righteousness - The Lord Jesus, the promised Messiah; the
Hope of Israel.

With healing in his wings - As the sun, by the rays of light and heat,
revives, cheers, and fructifies the whole creation, giving, through God,
light and life everywhere; so Jesus Christ, by the influences of his
grace and Spirit, shall quicken, awaken, enlighten, warm, invigorate
heal, purify, and refine every soul that believes in him, and, by his
wings or rays, diffuse these blessings from one end of heaven to
another; everywhere invigorating the seeds of righteousness, and
withering and drying up the seeds of sin. The rays of this Sun are the
truths of his Gospel, and the influences of his Spirit. And at present
these are universally diffused.

And ye shall go forth - Ye who believe on his name shall go forth out of
Jerusalem when the Romans shall come up against it. After Cestius Gallus
had blockaded the city for some days, he suddenly raised the siege. The
Christians who were then in it, knowing, by seeing Jerusalem encompassed
with armies, that the day of its destruction was come, when their Lord
commanded them to flee into the mountains, took this opportunity to
escape from Jerusalem, and go to Pella, in Coelesyria; so that no
Christian life fell in the siege and destruction of this city.

But these words are of more general application and meaning; "ye shall
go forth" in all the occupations of life, but particularly in the means
of grace; and: -

Grow up as calves of the stall - Full of health, of life, and spirits;
satisfied and happy.

[Malachi 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 4:3</span></span>

Ye shall tread down - This may be the commission given to the Romans:
Tread down the wicked people, tread down the wicked place; set it on
fire, and let the ashes be trodden down under your feet.

[Malachi 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mal 4:4</span></span>

Remember ye the law of Moses - Where all these things are predicted. The
Septuagint, Arabic, and Coptic, place this verse the last.

[Malachi 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 4:5</span></span>

Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet - This is meant alone of John
the Baptist, as we learn from [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017) (note), in whose spirit and power
he came.

[Malachi 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 4:6</span></span>

And he shall turn (convert) the heart of the fathers (על al, with) the
children - Or, together with the children; both old and young. Lest I
come, and, finding them unconverted, smote the land with a curse, חרם
cherem, utter extinction. So we find that, had the Jews turned to God,
and received the Messiah at the preaching of John the Baptist and that
of Christ and his apostles, the awful חרם cherem of final excision and
execration would not have been executed upon them. However, they filled
up the cup of their iniquity, and were reprobated, and the Gentiles
elected in their stead. Thus, the last was first, and the first was
last. Glory to God for his unspeakable gift!

There are three remarkable predictions in this chapter: -

1\. The advent of John Baptist, in the spirit and authority of Elijah.

2\. The manifestation of Christ in the flesh, under the emblem of the
Sun of righteousness.

3\. The final destruction of Jerusalem, represented under the emblem of
a burning oven, consuming every thing cast into it.

These three prophecies, relating to the most important facts that have
ever taken place in the history of the world, announced here nearly four
hundred years before their occurrence, have been most circumstantially
fulfilled.

In most of the Masoretic Bibles the fifth verse is repeated after the
sixth - "Behold, I send unto you Elijah the prophet, before the great
and terrible day of Jehovah come;" for the Jews do not like to let their
sacred book end with a curse; and hence, in reading, they immediately
subjoin the above verse, or else the fourth - "Remembering ye the law of
Moses my servant."

In one of my oldest MSS. the fifth verse is repeated, and written at
full length: "Behold, I send you Elijah the prophet, before the coming
of the great and dreadful day of the Lord." In another, only these words
are added: "Behold, I will send you Elijah." It is on this ground that
the Jews expect the reappearance of Elijah the prophet, and at their
marriage-feast always set a chair and knife and fork for this prophet,
whom they suppose to be invisibly present. But we have already seen that
John the Baptist, the forerunner of our Lord, was the person designed;
for he came in the spirit and power of Elijah, (see on [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001) (note)), and has fulfilled this
prophetic promise. John is come, and the Lord Jesus has come also; he
has shed his blood for the salvation of a lost world; he has ascended on
high; he has sent forth his Holy Spirit; he has commissioned his
ministers to proclaim to all mankind redemption in his blood; and he is
ever present with them, and is filling the earth with righteousness and
true holiness. Hallelujah! The kingdoms of this world are about to
become the kingdoms of God and our Lord Jesus! And now, having just
arrived at the end of my race in this work, and seeing the wonderful
extension of the work of God in the earth, my heart prays: - O Jesus,
ride on, till all are subdued, Thy mercy make known, and sprinkle thy
blood; Display thy salvation, and teach the new song, To every nation,
and people, and tongue!

In most MSS. and printed Masoretic Bibles there are only three chapters
in this prophet, the fourth being joined to the third, making it
twenty-four verses.

In the Jewish reckonings the Twelve Minor Prophets make but one book;
hence there is no Masoretic note found at the end of any of the
preceding prophets, with accounts of its verses, sections etc.; but, at
the end of Malachi we find the following table, which, though it gives
the number of verses in each prophet, yet gives the total sum, middle
verse, and sections, at the end of Malachi, thereby showing that they
consider the whole twelve as constituting but one book.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Introduction](mat000)

</div>
