<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar010)  [Next](mar012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 11:0</span></span>

Christ rides triumphantly into Jerusalem, [Mar
11:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001). The barren fig tree cursed,
[Mar 11:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#012). He cleanses the temple,
[Mar 11:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#015). The scribes and chief
priests are enraged, [Mar 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#018).
Reflections on the withered fig tree, [Mar
11:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#019). Directions concerning prayer
and forgiveness, [Mar 11:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#024). The
chief priests, etc., question him by what authority he did his works,
[Mar 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#027), [Mar
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#028). He answers, and confounds them,
[Mar 11:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#029).

[Mark 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 11:1</span></span>

He sendeth - two of his disciples - This was done but a few days before
the passover. See our Lord's entry into Jerusalem illustrated, on
Matthew 21:1-17 (note).

[Mark 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 11:2</span></span>

Whereon never man sat - No animal was allowed to be employed in sacred
uses, even among the heathen, that had previously been used for any
domestic or agricultural purpose; and those which had never been yoked
were considered as sacred. See several proofs of this in the note on
[Num 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002) (note), and add this from
Ovid: -

Bos tibi, Phoebus ait, solis occurret in arvis,

Nullum passa jugum curvique immunis aratri

Met. lib. iii. v. 10

The Delphic oracles this answer give: -

Behold among the fields a lonely cow,

Unworn with yokes, unbroken to the plough.

[Mark 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 11:3</span></span>

And straightway he will send him hither - From the text, I think it is
exceedingly plain, that our Lord did not beg, but borrow, the colt;
therefore the latter clause of this verse should be understood as the
promise of returning him. Is not the proper translation the following?
And if any one say to you, Why do ye this? Say, the Lord hath need of
him, and will speedily send him back hither - και ευθεως αυτον
αποστελλει ὡδε. Some eminent critics take the same view of the passage.

[Mark 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 11:6</span></span>

And they let them go - Having a full assurance that the beast should be
safely and speedily restored.

[Mark 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 11:10</span></span>

In the name of the Lord - Omitted by BCDLU, some others, and several
versions. Griesbach leaves it out.

Hosanna in the highest! - See on [Mat
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009) (note).

[Mark 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 11:11</span></span>

When he had looked round about upon all things - He examined every thing
- to see if the matters pertaining to the Divine worship were properly
conducted; to see that nothing was wanting - nothing superfluous.

And now the eventide was come - The time in which he usually left
Jerusalem, to go to Bethany.

[Mark 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 11:13</span></span>

For the time of figs was not yet - Rather, For it was not the season of
gathering figs yet. This I am fully persuaded is the true sense of this
passage, ου γαρ ην καιρος συκων. For a proof that καιρος here signifies
the time of gathering the figs, see the Lxx. in [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003). He bringeth forth his fruit, εν
καιρω αυτου, in his season; i.e. in the time in which fruit should be
ripe, and fit for gathering. See also [Mar
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#002) : - And at the season, τῳ καιρῳ,
the time of gathering the fruits of the vineyard. [Mat
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#034) : - When the time of the fruit
drew near; ὁ καιρος των καρπων, the time in which the fruits were to be
gathered, for it was then that the Lord of the vineyard sent his
servants to receive the fruits; i.e. so much of them as the holder of
the vineyard was to pay to the owner by way of rent; for in those times
rent was paid in kind.

To the above may be added, [Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026) :
- Thou shalt come to thy grave in Full Age, like as a shock of corn
cometh in his season; κατα καιρον, in the time in which it should be
reaped.

When our Lord saw this fig tree by the way-side, apparently flourishing,
he went to it to gather some of the figs: being on the way-side, it was
not private, but public property; and any traveler had an equal right to
its fruit. As it was not as yet the time for gathering in the fruits,
and yet about the time when they were ready to be gathered, our Lord
with propriety expected to find some. But as this happened about five
days before that passover on which Christ suffered, and the passover
that year fell on the beginning of April, it has been asked, "How could
our Lord expect to find ripe figs in the end of March?" Answer, Because
figs were ripe in Judea as early as the passover. Besides, the fig tree
puts forth its fruit first, and afterwards its leaves. Indeed, this
tree, in the climate which is proper for it, has fruit on it all the
year round, as I have often seen. All the difficulty in the text may be
easily removed by considering that the climate of Judea is widely
different from that of Great Britain. The summer begins there in March,
and the harvest at the passover, as all travelers into those countries
testify; therefore, as our Lord met with this tree five days before the
passover, it is evident, - 1st. That it was the time of ripe figs: and,
2ndly. That it was not the time of gathering them, because this did not
begin till the passover, and the transaction here mentioned took place
five days before.

For farther satisfaction on this point, let us suppose: -

I. That this tree was intended to point out the state of the Jewish
people.

1\. They made a profession of the true religion.

2\. They considered themselves the peculiar people of God, and despised
and reprobated all others.

3\. They were only hypocrites, having nothing of religion but the
profession - leaves, and no fruit.

II\. That our Lord's conduct towards this tree is to be considered as
emblematical of the treatment and final perdition which was to come upon
this hypocritical and ungodly nation.

1\. It was a proper time for them to have borne fruit: Jesus had been
preaching the doctrine of repentance and salvation among them for more
than three years; the choicest influences of Heaven had descended upon
them; and every thing was done in this vineyard that ought to be done,
in order to make it fruitful.

2\. The time was now at hand in which God would require fruit, good
fruit; and, if it did not produce such, the tree should be hewn down by
the Roman axe.

Therefore,

1\. The tree is properly the Jewish nation.

2\. Christ's curse the sentence of destruction which had now gone out
against it; and,

3\. Its withering away, the final and total ruin of the Jewish state by
the Romans.

His cursing the fig tree was not occasioned by any resentment at being
disappointed at not finding fruit on it, but to point out unto his
disciples the wrath which was coming upon a people who had now nearly
filled up the measure of their iniquity.

A fruitless soul, that has had much cultivation bestowed on it, may
expect to be dealt with as God did with this unrighteous nation. See on
[Mat 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019) (note), etc.

[Mark 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 11:15</span></span>

And they come - Several MSS. and versions have παλιν, again. This was
the next day after our Lord's triumphant entry into Jerusalem; for on
the evening of that day he went to Bethany, and lodged there, [Mar
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#011), and [Mat
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#017), and returned the next morning
to Jerusalem.

[Mark 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 11:16</span></span>

Should carry any vessel - Among the Jews the word כלי keli, vessel, had
a vast latitude of meaning; it signified arms, [Jer
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004); [Eze
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001); clothes, [Deu
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#005), and instruments of music, [Psa
71:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#022). It is likely that the
evangelist uses the Greek word σκευος in the same sense, and by it
points out any of the things which were bought and sold in the temple.

[Mark 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 11:17</span></span>

And he taught - them - See on [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012) (note).

[Mark 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 11:19</span></span>

He went out of the city - To go to Bethany.

[Mark 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 11:22</span></span>

Have faith in God - Εχετε πιϚιν θεου is a mere Hebraism: have the faith
of God, i.e. have strong faith, or the strongest faith, for thus the
Hebrews expressed the superlative degree; so the mountains of God mean
exceeding great mountains - the hail of God, exceeding great hail, etc.

[Mark 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 11:25</span></span>

When ye stand praying - This expression may mean no more than, When ye
are disposed, or have a mind, to pray, i.e. whenever ye perform that
duty. And it is thus used and explained in the Koran, Surat. v. ver. 7.
See on [Mat 21:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#020) (note). But the
Pharisees loved to pray standing, that they might be seen of men.

[Mark 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 11:26</span></span>

At the end of this verse, the 7th and 8th verses of Matthew 7. Ask and
ye shall receive, etc., are added by M, and sixteen other MSS. The 26th
verse is wanting in BLS, seven others, some editions, the Coptic, one
Itala, and Theophylact.

[Mark 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 11:27</span></span>

See on [Mat 21:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#023) (note).

[Mark 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 11:32</span></span>

They feared the people - Or rather, We fear, etc. Instead of εφοβουντο,
they feared; the Codex Bezae, seven others, later Syriac, Arabic,
Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate, and all the Itala, read φοβουμεν,
or φοβουμεθα. The common reading appearing to me quite improper.

We fear the people. Εαν, if, before ειπωμεν, we shall say, is omitted by
ABCEFGHLS, and more than fifty others. Bengel leaves it out of the text,
and puts a note of interrogation after Εξ ανθρωπων; and then the whole
passage reads thus: But shall we say, Of men? They feared the people,
etc. This change renders the adoption of φοβουμεν, we fear, unnecessary.
Several critics prefer this mode of distinguishing the text. However the
critics may be puzzled with the text, the scribes, chief priests, and
elders were worse puzzled with our Lord's question. They must convict
themselves or tell a most palpable falsehood. - They told the lie, and
so escaped for the present.

1\. Envy, malice, and double dealing have always a difficult part to
act, and are ultimately confounded by their own projects and ruined by
their own operations. On the other hand, simplicity and sincerity are
not obliged to use a mask, but always walk in a plain way.

2\. The case of the barren fig-tree which our Lord cursed has been
pitifully misunderstood and misapplied. The whole account of this
transaction, as stated above, I believe to be correct; it is so much in
our Lord's usual manner that the propriety of it will scarcely be
doubted. He was ever acting the part of the philosopher, moralist, and
divine, as well as that of the Savior of sinners. In his hand, every
providential occurrence and every object of nature, became a means of
instruction: the stones of the desert, the lilies of the field, the
fowls of heaven, the beasts of the forest, fruitful and unfruitful
trees, with every ordinary occurrence, were so many grand texts, from
which he preached the most illuminating and impressive sermons, for the
instruction and salvation of his audience. This wisdom and condescension
cannot be sufficiently admired. But shall the example of the fruitless
fig tree be lost on us as well as on the Jews? God forbid! Let us
therefore take heed, lest having been so long unfruitful, God should
say, Let no fruit appear on thee hereafter for ever! and in consequence
of this, we wither and die away! See Clarke on [Mar
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#027) (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 12](mar012)

</div>
