<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar009)  [Next](mar011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 10:0</span></span>

The Pharisees question our Lord concerning divorce, [Mar
10:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001). Little children are brought
to him, [Mar 10:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#013). The person who
inquired how he might inherit eternal life, [Mar
10:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017). How difficult it is for a
rich man to be saved, [Mar 10:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#023).
What they shall receive who have left all for Christ and his Gospel,
[Mar 10:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#028). He foretells his death,
[Mar 10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032). James and John desire
places of pre-eminence in Christ's kingdom, [Mar
10:35-41](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035). Christ shows them the
necessity of humility, [Mar 10:42-46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#042).
Blind Bartimeus healed, [Mar 10:46-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046).

[Mark 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 10:1</span></span>

He arose - Κακειθεν αναϚας may be translated, he departed thence. The
verb ανιϚημι has this sense in some of the purest Greek writers. See
Kypke. Many transactions took place between those mentioned in the
preceding chapter, and these that follow, which are omitted by Matthew
and Mark; but they are related both by Luke and John. See Lightfoot, and
Bishop Newcome.

[Mark 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 10:2</span></span>

Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife? - See this question about
divorce largely explained on [Mat
19:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003) (note).

[Mark 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 10:12</span></span>

And if a woman shall put away her husband - From this it appears that in
some cases, the wife assumed the very same right of divorcing her
husband that the husband had of divorcing his wife; and yet this is not
recorded any where in the Jewish laws, as far as I can find, that the
women had such a right. Indeed, were the law which gives the permission
all on one side, it would be unjust and oppressive; but where it is
equally balanced, the right being the same on each side, it must serve
as a mutual check, and prevent those evils it is intended to cure. Among
the Jews there are several instances of the women having taken other
men, even during the life of their own husbands. Nor do we find any law
by which they were punished. Divorce never should be permitted but on
this ground - "The parties are miserable together, and they are both
perfectly willing to be separated." Then, if every thing else be proper,
let them go different ways, that they may not ruin both themselves and
their hapless offspring.

[Mark 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 10:13</span></span>

And they brought young children - See on [Mat
19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013) (note).

[Mark 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 10:16</span></span>

And he took them up in his arms - One of the Itala reads in sinu suo -
"in his bosom." Jesus Christ loves little children; and they are objects
of his most peculiar care. Who can account for their continual
preservation and support, while exposed to so many dangers, but on the
ground of a peculiar and extraordinary providence?

And blessed them - Then, though little children, they were capable of
receiving Christ's blessing. If Christ embraced them, why should not his
Church embrace them? Why not dedicate them to God by baptism? - whether
that be performed by sprinkling, washing, or immersion; for we need not
dispute about the mode: on this point let every one be fully persuaded
in his own mind. I confess it appears to me grossly heathenish and
barbarous, to see parents who profess to believe in that Christ who
loves children, and among them those whose creed does not prevent them
from using infant baptism, depriving their children of an ordinance by
which no soul can prove that they cannot be profited, and, through an
unaccountable bigotry or carelessness, withholding from them the
privilege of even a nominal dedication to God; and yet these very
persons are ready enough to fly for a minister to baptize their child
when they suppose it to be at the point of death! It would be no crime
to pray that such persons should never have the privilege of hearing, My
father! or, My mother! from the lips of their own child. See on [Mat
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006) (note), and on [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016) (note).

[Mark 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 10:17</span></span>

There came one running - See the case of this rich young man largely
explained on [Mat 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016) (note), etc.

[Mark 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 10:21</span></span>

Then Jesus, beholding him - Looking earnestly, εμβλεψας, or
affectionately upon him, loved him, because of his youth, his
earnestness, and his sincerity.

One thing thou lackest - What was that? A heart disengaged from the
world, and a complete renunciation of it and its concerns, that he might
become a proper and successful laborer in the Lord's vineyard. See [Mat
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021). To say that it was something
else he lacked, when Christ explains here his own meaning, is to be wise
above what is written.

[Mark 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 10:22</span></span>

And he was sad at that saying - This young man had perhaps been a saint,
and an eminent apostle, had he been poor! From this, and a multitude of
other cases, we may learn that it is oftentimes a misfortune to be rich:
but who is aware of this? - and who believes it?

[Mark 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 10:29</span></span>

And the Gospel's - Read, for the sake of the Gospel. I have with
Griesbach adopted ἑνεκεν, for the sake, on the authority of BCDEGHKMS,
V, sixty others, and almost all the versions.

[Mark 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 10:30</span></span>

In this time - Εν τῳ καιρῳ τουτῳ, In this very time. Though Jews and
Gentiles have conspired together to destroy both me and you, my
providence shall so work that nothing shall be lacking while any thing
is necessary.

And fathers. This is added by K, upwards of sixty others, Ethiopic,
Gothic, Slavonic, Saxon, Armenian, Coptic, and in one of my own MSS. of
the Vulgate.

Some have been greatly embarrassed to find out the literal truth of
these promises; and, some in flat opposition to the text, have said they
are all to be understood spiritually. But thus far is plain, that those
who have left all for the sake of Christ do find, among genuine
Christians, spiritual relatives, which are as dear to them as fathers,
mothers, etc.; yet they have the promise of receiving a hundredfold
often literally fulfilled: for, wherever a Christian travels among
Christians, the shelter of their houses, and the product of their lands,
are at his service as far as they are requisite. Besides, these words
were spoken primarily to the disciples, and pointed out their itinerant
manner of life; and how, travelling about from house to house, preaching
the Gospel of the grace of God, they should, among the followers of
Christ, be provided with every thing necessary in all places, as if the
whole were their own. I have often remarked that the genuine messengers
of God, in the present day have, as noted above, this promise literally
fulfilled.

With persecutions - For while you meet with nothing but kindness from
true Christians, you shall be despised, and often afflicted, by those
who are enemies to God and goodness; but, for your comfort, ye shall
have in the world to come, αιωνι τῳ ερχομενῳ, the coming world, (that
world which is on its way to meet you), eternal life.

[Mark 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 10:32</span></span>

And he took again the twelve - Or thus: For having again taken the
twelve, etc. I translate και for, which signification it often bears;
see [Luk 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#022); [Joh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035), and elsewhere. This gives the
reason of the wonder and fear of the disciples, For he began to tell
them on the way, what was to befall him. This sense of και, I find, is
also noticed by Rosenmuller. See on [Mat
20:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017) (note).

[Mark 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 10:35</span></span>

And James and John - come unto him - The request here mentioned, Matthew
says, [Mat 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020), was made by Salome
their mother; the two places may be easily reconciled thus: - The mother
introduced them, and made the request as if from herself; Jesus knowing
whence it had come, immediately addressed himself to James and John, who
were standing by; and the mother is no farther concerned in the
business. See the note on [Mat 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020).

[Mark 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mar 10:37</span></span>

In thy glory - In the kingdom of thy glory - three MSS. Which kingdom
they expected to be established on earth.

And be baptized - Or, be baptized. Instead of και and η or, is the
reading of BCDL, five others, Coptic, Armenian, later Syriac in the
margin, Vulgate, all the Itala, and Origen. See the note on [Mat
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022).

[Mark 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mar 10:40</span></span>

Is not mine to give - See on [Mat
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023) (note).

[Mark 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 10:41</span></span>

When the ten heard it - See [Mat
20:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024).

[Mark 10:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mar 10:46</span></span>

Blind Bartimeus - בר bar in Syriac signifies son. It appears that he was
thus named because Timeus, Talmeus or Talmai, was the name of his
father, and thus the son would be called Bar-talmeus, or Bartholomew.
Some suppose υἱος Τιμαιου, the son of Timeus, to be an interpolation.
Bartimeus the son of Timeus, ὁ τυφλος, The blind man. It was because he
was the most remarkable that this evangelist mentions him by name, as a
person probably well known in those parts.

[Mark 10:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mar 10:50</span></span>

And he, casting away his garment - He cast off his outward covering, a
blanket, or loose piece of cloth, the usual upper garment of an Asiatic
mendicant, which kept him from the inclemency of the weather, that he
might have nothing to hinder him from getting speedily to Christ. If
every penitent were as ready to throw aside his self-righteousness and
sinful incumbrances, as this blind man was to throw aside his garment,
we should have fewer delays in conversions than we now have; and all
that have been convinced of sin would have been brought to the knowledge
of the truth. The reader will at least pardon the introduction of the
following anecdote, which may appear to some as illustrative of the
doctrine grounded on this text.

A great revival of religion took place in some of the American States,
about the year 1773, by the instrumentality of some itinerant preachers
sent from England. Many, both whites and blacks, were brought to an
acquaintance with God who bought them. Two of these, a white man and a
negro, meeting together, began to speak concerning the goodness of God
to their souls, (a custom which has ever been common among truly
religious people). Among other things they were led to inquire how long
each had known the salvation of God; and how long it was, after they
were convinced of their sin and danger, before each got a satisfactory
evidence of pardoning mercy. The white man said, "I was three months in
deep distress of soul, before God spoke peace to my troubled, guilty
conscience." "But it was only a fortnight," replied the negro, "from the
time I first heard of Jesus, and felt that I was a sinner, till I
received the knowledge of salvation by the remission of sins." "But what
was the reason," said the white man, "that you found salvation sooner
than I did?" "This is the reason," replied the other; "you white men
have much clothing upon you, and when Christ calls, you cannot run to
him; but we poor negroes have only this, (pointing to the mat or cloth
which was tied round his waist), and when we hear the call, we throw it
off instantly, and run to him."

Thus the poor son of Ham illustrated the text without intending it, as
well as any doctor in the universe. People who have been educated in the
principles of the Christian religion imagine themselves on this account
Christians; and, when convinced of sin, they find great difficulty to
come as mere sinners to God, to be saved only through the merits of
Christ. Others, such as the negro in question, have nothing to plead but
this, We have never heard of thee, and could not believe in thee of whom
we had not heard; but this excuse will not avail now, as the true light
is come - therefore they cast off this covering, and come to Jesus. See
this miraculous cure explained at large on [Mat
20:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029).

[Mark 10:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mar 10:51</span></span>

Lord, that I might, etc. - The Codex Bezae, and some copies of the
Itala, have, Κυριε ῥαββει, O Lord, my teacher.

[Mark 10:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mar 10:52</span></span>

Followed Jesus in the way - Instead of τῳ Ιησου, Jesus, several eminent
critics read αυτω, him. This is the reading of ABCDL, fourteen others,
Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, later Syriac in the margin, two Persic,
Vulgate, all the Itala, and Origen once. Jesus is the common reading;
but this sacred name having occurred so immediately before, there could
be no necessity for repeating it here, nor would the repetition have
been elegant.

This very remarkable cure gives us another proof, not only of the
sovereign power, but of the benevolence, of Christ: nor do we ever see
that sovereign power used, but in the way of benevolence. How slow is
God to punish! - how prone to spare! To his infinite benevolence, can it
be any gratification to destroy any of the children of men? No! We must
take great heed not to attribute to his sovereignty, acts which are
inconsistent with his benevolence and mercy. I am afraid this is a
prevailing error; and that it is not confined to any religious party
exclusively.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 11](mar011)

</div>
