<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar006)  [Next](mar008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#001.md)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 7:0</span></span>

The Pharisees find fault with the disciples for eating with unwashen
hands, [Mar 7:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#001.md). Christ exposes
their hypocrisy, and shows that they had made the word of God of no
effect by their traditions, [Mar
7:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#006.md). He shows what things defile
men, [Mar 7:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#014.md); and teaches his
disciples in private, that the sin of the heart alone, leading to
vicious practices, defiles the man, [Mar
7:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#017.md). The account of the
Syrophoenician woman, [Mar 7:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024.md). He
heals a man who was dumb, and had an impediment in his speech, [Mar
7:31-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#031.md).

[Mark 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 7:1</span></span>

Came from Jerusalem - Probably for the express purpose of disputing with
Christ, that they might entangle him in his talk. Malice and envy are
never idle - they incessantly hunt the person they intend to make their
prey.

[Mark 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 7:2</span></span>

They found fault - This is wanting in ABEHLV, nineteen others, and
several versions: Mill and Bengel approve the omission, and Griesbach
rejects the word. If the 3d and 4th verses be read in a parenthesis, the
2d and 5th verses will appear to be properly connected, without the
above clause.

[Mark 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 7:3</span></span>

Except they wash their hands - πυγμῃ, the hand to the wrist - Unless
they wash the hand up to the wrist, eat not. Several translations are
given of this word; that above is from Dr. Lightfoot, who quotes a
tradition from the rabbins, stating that the hands were to be thus
washed. This sort of washing was, and still continues to be, an act of
religion in the eastern countries. It is particularly commanded in the
Koran, Surat v. ver. 7, "O believers, when ye wish to pray, wash your
faces, and your hands up to the elbows - and your feet up to the
ankles." Which custom it is likely Mohammed borrowed from the Jews. The
Jewish doctrine is this: "If a man neglect the washing, he shall be
eradicated from this world." But instead of πυγμῃ, the fist or hand, the
Codex Bezae has πυκνῃ, frequently: and several of the Itala have words
of the same signification. Bathing is an indispensable prerequisite to
the first meal of the day among the Hindoos; and washing the hands and
the feet is equally so before the evening meal. Ward's Customs.

[Mark 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 7:4</span></span>

And when they come - This clause is added by our translators, to fill up
the sense; but it was probably a part of the original: for εαν ελθωσι is
the reading of the Codex Bezae, Vulgate, Armenian, and most of the
Itala. The clause in my old MS. Bible is read thus: And thei turninge
agein fro chepinge. The words seem essentially necessary to a proper
understanding of the text; and, if not admitted on the above authority,
they must be supplied in italics, as in our common translation.

Except they wash - Or dip; for βαπτισωνται may mean either. But instead
of the word in the text, the famous Codex Vaticanus; (B), eight others,
and Euthymius, have ῥαντισωνται, sprinkle. However, the Jews sometimes
washed their hands previously to their eating: at other times, they
simply dipped or plunged them into the water.

Of cups - Ποτηριων; any kind of earthen vessels.

Pots - Of measures - ξεϚων, from the singular ξεϚης, a measure for
liquids, formed from the Latin sextarius, equal to a pint and a half
English. See this proved by Wetstein on this place. My old MS. renders
it cruetis.

Of brazen vessels - Χαλκιων. These, if polluted, were only to be washed,
or passed through the fire; whereas the earthen vessels were to be
broken.

And of tables - Beds, couches - και κλινων. This is wanting in BL, two
others, and the Coptic. It is likely it means no more than the forms, or
seats, on which they sat to eat. A bed or a couch was defiled, if any
unclean person sat or leaned on it - a man with an issue - a leper - a
woman with child, etc. As the word βαπτισμους, baptisms, is applied to
all these, and as it is contended that this word, and the verb whence it
is derived, signify dipping or immersion alone, its use in the above
cases refutes that opinion and shows that it was used, not only to
express dipping or immersion, but also sprinkling and washing. The cups
and pots were washed; the beds and forms perhaps sprinkled; and the
hands dipped up to the wrist.

[Mark 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mar 7:5</span></span>

Why walk not thy disciples - See on [Mat
15:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002) (note.md).

[Mark 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 7:6</span></span>

Honoreth me - Με τιμᾳ - but the Codex Bezae, and three copies of the
Itala, have με αγαπᾳ, loveth me: - the Ethiopic has both readings.

[Mark 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 7:8</span></span>

Washing of pots and cups, etc. - This whole clause is wanting in BL,
five others, and the Coptic: one MS. omits this and the whole of the
ninth verse. The eighth verse is not found in the parallel place of [Mat
15:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#007.md).

[Mark 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mar 7:9</span></span>

Full well - Καλως, - a strong irony. How noble is your conduct! From
conscientious attachment to your own traditions ye have annihilated the
commandments of God!

That ye may keep - But στησητε, that ye may establish, is the reading of
D, three others, Syriac, all the Itala, with Cyprian, Jerome, and Zeno.
Griesbach thinks it should be received instead of the other. God's law
was nothing to these men, in comparison of their own: hear a case in
point. "Rabba said, How foolish are most men! They observe the precepts
of the Divine law, and neglect the statutes of the rabbins!" Maccoth,
fol. 22.

[Mark 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 7:10</span></span>

For Moses said, etc. - See all these verses, from this to the 23d,
explained Matthew 15:3-20 (note).

[Mark 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 7:13</span></span>

Your tradition - D, later Syriac in the margin, Saxon, and all the Itala
but one, add τῃ μωρᾳ, by your Foolish tradition, your foolish law: -
Anglo-Saxon.

[Mark 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 7:14</span></span>

When he had called all the people - But instead of παντα, all, παλιν,
again, is the reading of BDL, later Syriac in the margin, Coptic,
Ethiopic, Saxon, Vulgate, all the Itala but one. Mill and Griesbach
approve of this reading.

[Mark 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 7:19</span></span>

Into the draught - See on [Mat 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017.md)
(note).

Purging all meats? - For what is separated from the different aliments
taken into the stomach, and thrown out of the body, is the innutritious
parts of all the meats that are eaten; and thus they are purged, nothing
being left behind but what is proper for the support of the body.

[Mark 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mar 7:24</span></span>

Into the borders of Tyre and Sidon - Or, into the country between Tyre
and Sidon. I have adopted this translation from Kypke, who proves that
this is the meaning of the word μεθορια, in the best Greek writers.

[Mark 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 7:25</span></span>

A certain woman - See this account of the Syrophoenician woman explained
at large, [Mat 15:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021) (note.md).

[Mark 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 7:26</span></span>

The woman was a Greek - Rosenmuller has well observed, that all heathens
or idolaters were called Ἑλληνες, Greeks, by the Jews; whether they were
Parthians, Medes, Arabs, Indians, or Ethiopians. Jews and Greeks divided
the whole world at this period.

[Mark 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 7:30</span></span>

Laid upon the bed - The demon having tormented her, so that her bodily
strength was exhausted, and she was now laid upon the couch to take a
little rest. The Ethiopic has a remarkable reading here, which gives a
very different, and, I think, a better sense. And she found her daughter
Clothed, Sitting upon the couch, and the demon gone out.

[Mark 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 7:32</span></span>

They bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his
speech - Though from the letter of the text, it does not appear that
this man was absolutely deprived of speech; for μογιλαλος literally
signifies, one that cannot speak plainly - a stammerer; yet it is
certain also that the word means a dumb person; and it is likely that
the person in question was dumb, because he was deaf; and it is
generally found that he who is totally deaf is dumb also. Almost all the
versions understand the word thus: and the concluding words seem to
confirm this - He maketh both the deaf to hear, and the Dumb, κωφους, to
speak.

[Mark 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 7:33</span></span>

And he spit, and touched his tongue - This place is exceedingly
difficult. There is scarcely an action of our Lord's life but one can
see an evident reason for, except this. Various interpretations are
given of it - none of them satisfies my mind. The Abbe Giradeau
spiritualizes it thus: -

1\. He took him aside from the multitude - When Christ saves a sinner,
he separates him from all his old evil companions, and from the spirit
and maxims of an ungodly world.

2\. He put his fingers in his ears - to show that they could be opened
only by the finger, i.e. the power, of God, and that they should be shut
to every word and voice, but what came from him.

3\. Spitting out he touched his tongue - to show that his mental taste
and relish should be entirely changed: that he should detest those
things which he before esteemed, and esteem those which he before hated.

4\. Looking up to heaven - to signify that all help comes from God, and
to teach the new convert to keep continually looking to and depending
upon him.

5\. He groaned - to show the wretched state of man by sins and how
tenderly concerned God is for his present and eternal welfare; and to
intimate that men should seek the salvation of God in the spirit of
genuine repentance, with strong crying and tears.

6\. He said, Be opened - Sin is a shutting of the ears against the words
of God; and a tying of the tongue, to render it incapable of giving God
due praise. But when the all-powerful grace of Christ reaches the heart,
the ear is unstopped, and the man hears distinctly - the tongue is
unloosed, and the man speaks correctly.

After all, it is possible that what is attributed here to Christ belongs
to the person who was cured. I will give my sense of the place in a
short paraphrase.

And Jesus took him aside from the multitude: and \[the deaf man\] put
his fingers into his ears, intimating thereby to Christ that they were
so stopped that he could not hear; and having spat out, that there might
be nothing remaining in his mouth to offend the sight when Christ should
look at his tongue, he touched his tongue, showing to Christ that it was
so bound that he could not speak: and he looked up to heaven, as if to
implore assistance from above: and he groaned, being distressed because
of his present affliction, and thus implored relief: for, not being able
to speak, he could only groan and look up, expressing by these signs, as
well as he could, his afflicted state, and the desire he had to be
relieved. Then Jesus, having compassion upon him, said, Be opened: and
immediately his ears were opened, so that he could hear distinctly; and
the impediment to his speaking was removed, so that he spake properly.
The original will admit of this interpretation; and this, I am inclined
to believe, is the true meaning of this otherwise (to me and many
others) unaccountable passage.

[Mark 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 7:34</span></span>

Ephphatha - Ethphathach, Syriac. It is likely that it was in this
language that our Lord spoke to this poor man: and because he had
pronounced the word Ephphathach with peculiar and authoritative
emphasis, the evangelist thought proper to retain the original word;
though the last letter in it could not be expressed by any letter in the
Greek alphabet.

[Mark 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 7:35</span></span>

He spake plain - Ορθως, distinctly, without stammering. One MS. has, And
he spoke, praising God. There is no doubt of this: but the evangelist, I
think, did not write these words.

[Mark 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mar 7:36</span></span>

Tell no man - See on [Mat 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004) (note.md).
This miracle is not mentioned by any other of the evangelists. Another
proof that Mark did not abridge Matthew. For a practical review of the
different important subjects of this chapter, see Matthew 15:1-39
(note), and particularly the observations at the end.

[Mark 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mar 7:37</span></span>

He hath done all things well - This has been, and ever will be, true of
every part of our Lord's conduct. In creation, providence, and
redemption he hath done all things well. The wisest philosophers are
agreed that, considering creation as a whole, it would be impossible to
improve it. Every thing has been made in number, weight, and measure;
there really is nothing deficient, nothing redundant; and the good of
the creature seems evidently more consulted than the glory of the
Creator. The creature's good is every where apparent; but to find out
how the Creator is glorified by these works requires the eye of the
philosopher. And as he has done all things well in creation, so has he
in providence: here also every thing is in number, weight, measure, and
time. As creation shows his majesty, so providence shows his bounty. He
preserves every thing he has made; all depend upon him; and by him are
all things supported. But how glorious does he appear in the work of
redemption! How magnificent, ample, and adequate the provision made for
the salvation of a lost world! Here, as in providence, is enough for
all, a sufficiency for each, and an abundance for eternity. He loves
every man, and hates nothing that he has made; nor can the God of all
grace be less beneficent than the Creator and Preserver of the universe.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 8](mar008.md)

</div>
