<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar015)  [Next](luk000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001.md)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 16:0</span></span>

Early in the morning after the Sabbath, the three Marys come to the
sepulcher, bringing sweet spices to embalm the body, [Mar
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001.md). They see an angel who
announces the resurrection of our Lord, [Mar
16:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005.md). Jesus appears to Mary
Magdalene, who goes and tells the disciples, [Mar
16:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009.md). He appears also to the two
disciples who were going into the country, who also tell it to the rest,
[Mar 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012.md), [Mar
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#013.md). Afterwards he appears unto the
eleven, and commissions them to preach the Gospel to all mankind, [Mar
16:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014.md). And promises to endue them
with power to work miracles, [Mar
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017.md), [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018.md). He is received up into heaven,
[Mar 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019.md). And they go forth to
preach and work miracles, [Mar 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020.md).

[Mark 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 16:1</span></span>

And anoint him - Rather, to embalm him. This is a proof that they had
not properly understood what Christ had so frequently spoken, viz. that
he would rise again the third day. And this inattention or unbelief of
theirs is a proof of the truth of the resurrection.

[Mark 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 16:2</span></span>

Very early in the morning, - This was the time they left their own
houses, and by the rising of the sun they got to the tomb. As the
preceding day was the Sabbath, they could not, consistently with the
observances of that day, approach the tomb. See the concluding notes at
the end of John.

The following observations from Lightfoot will serve to illustrate this
subject.

"The distinction of the twilight among the rabbins was this: -

"I. איילחא השחרא The hinde of the morning - the first appearance. R.
Chaiia Rab, and R. Simeon ben Chalaphta, travelling together on a
certain morning in the valley of Arbel, saw the hinde of the morning,
that its light spread the sky. R. Chaiia said, Such shall be the
redemption of Israel. First, it goes forward by degrees, and by little
and little; but by how much the more it shall go forward, by so much the
more it shall increase. It was at that time that Christ arose, namely,
in the first morning, as may be gathered from the words of St. Matthew.
And to this the title of the 22d Psalm seems to have respect - על איילת
השחר. See also [Rev 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016.md), I am the
bright and morning star. And now you may imagine the women went out of
their houses towards the sepulchre.

"II. משיכיר בי הכלת ללב When one may distinguish between purple color
and white. From what time do they recite their phylacterical prayers in
the morning? From that time that one may distinguish between purple
color and white. R. Eliezer saith, Between purple color and green.
Before this time was obscurum adhue caeptae lucis, the obscurity of the
begun light, as Tacitus's expression is.

"III. משיארו המזרח When the east begins to lighten.

"IV. בנץ החמה Sunrise; from the hinde of the morning going forth, until
the east begins to lighten; and from the time the east begins to
lighten, until sunrise, etc.

"According to these four parts of time, one might not improperly suit
the four phrases of the evangelists. According to the first, Matthew's,
Τῃ επιφωσκουσῃ, As it began to dawn. According to the second, John's,
Πρωΐ σκοτιας ετι ουσης, Early in the morning when it was yet dark. To
the third, Luke's, Ορθρου βαθεως, Very early in the morning. To the
fourth, Mark's, Λιαν πρωΐ, Very early in the morning. And yet,
Ανατειλαντος του ἡλιου, At the rising of the sun. For the women came
twice to the sepulchre, as St. John teaches, by whom the other
evangelists are to be explained; which being well considered, the
reconciling them together is very easy."

[Mark 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 16:4</span></span>

For it was very great - This clause should be read immediately after the
third verse, according to D, three copies of the Itala, Syriac, Hier.,
and Eusebius. "Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the
sepulchre? for it was very great. And when they looked, they saw that
the stone was rolled away." They knew that the stone was too heavy for
them to roll away; and, unless they got access to the body, they could
not apply the aromatics which they had brought to finish the embalming.

[Mark 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 16:6</span></span>

Jesus of Nazareth - The Jews had given this name to Christ by way of
reproach, [Mat 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023.md); but as it was
under this name that he was crucified, [Joh
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019.md), the angel here, and the
apostles after, have given him the same name, [Act
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010.md), etc. Names which the world, in
derision, fixes all the followers of God, often become the general
appellatives of religious bodies: thus Quakers, Puritans, Pietists, and
Methodists, have in their respective times been the nicknames, given in
derision by the world, to those who separated themselves from its
corruptions. Our Lord, by continuing to bear the name of the Nazarene,
teaches us not to be too nice or scrupulous in fixing our own
appellation. No matter what the name may be, as long as it implies no
particular evil, and serves sufficiently to mark us out. Let us be
contented to bear it, and thus carry about with us the reproach of
Christ; always taking care to keep our garments unspotted from the
world.

[Mark 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 16:7</span></span>

Tell his disciples and Peter - Why is not Peter included among the
disciples? For this plain reason, - he had forfeited his discipleship,
and all right to the honor and privileges of an apostle, by denying his
Lord and Master. However, he is now a penitent: - tell him that Jesus is
risen from the dead, and is ready to heal his backsliding, and love him
freely; so that, after being converted, he may strengthen his brethren.

[Mark 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mar 16:9</span></span>

Now when Jesus was risen, etc. - This, to the conclusion of the Gospel,
is wanting in the famous Codex Vaticanus, and has anciently been wanting
in many others. See Wetstein and Griesbach. In the margin of the later
Syriac version, there is a remarkable addition after this verse; it is
as follows: - And they declared briefly all that was commanded, to them
that were with Peter. Afterward Jesus himself published by them, from
east to west, the holy and incorruptible preaching of eternal salvation.
Amen.

Mary Magdalene - It seems likely that, after this woman had carried the
news of Christ's resurrection to the disciples, she returned alone to
the tomb; and that it was then that Christ appeared to her, [Joh
20:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001.md); and a little after he
appeared to all the women together, [Mat
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#009.md); [Luk
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#016.md).

[Mark 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 16:10</span></span>

Them that had been with him - Not only the eleven disciples, but several
others who had been the occasional companions of Christ and the
apostles.

Mourned and wept - Because they had lost their Lord and Master, and had
basely abandoned him in his extremity.

[Mark 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 16:12</span></span>

He appeared - unto two of them - These were the two who were going to
Emmaus. The whole account is given by Luke, 24:13-34, where see the
notes.

Dr. Lightfoot's criticism upon this passage is worthy of notice.

"That, in the verses immediately going before, the discourse is of the
two disciples going to Emmaus, is without all controversy. And then how
do these things consist with that relation in Luke, who saith, That they
two, returning to Jerusalem, found the eleven gathered together, and
they that were with them; who said, The Lord is risen indeed, and has
appeared to Simon? [Luk 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#034.md). The
word λεγοντας, saying, evidently makes those to be the words των ενδεκα,
of the eleven, and of those that were gathered together with them;
which, when you read the versions, you would scarcely suspect. For when
that word is rendered by the Syriac, cad amrin; by the Arabic, wehom
yekolon; by the Vulgate, dicentes; by the Italian, dicendo; by the
French, disans; by the English, saying; who, I pray, would take it in
another sense, than that those two that returned from Emmaus said, The
Lord is risen indeed, etc.? But in the original Greek, when it is the
accusative case, it is plainly to be referred to the eleven disciples,
and those that were together with them; as if they had discoursed among
themselves of the appearance made to Peter, either before, or now in the
very access of those two coming from Emmaus. And yet, says this our
evangelist, that when those two had related the whole business, they
gave no credit to them; so that, according to Luke, they believed Christ
was risen, and had appeared to Simon, before they told their story; but,
according to Mark, they believed it not, no, not when they had told it.
The reconciling therefore of the evangelists is to be fetched thence,
that those words pronounced by the eleven, Ὁτι ηγερθη ὁ Κυριος οντως,
etc., The Lord is risen indeed, etc., do not manifest their absolute
confession of the resurrection of Christ, but a conjectural reasoning of
the sudden and unexpected return of Peter. I believe that Peter was
going with Cleophas into Galilee, and that being moved with the words of
Christ, told him by the women, Say to his disciples and Peter, I go
before you into Galilee - think with yourself how doubtful Peter was,
and how he fluctuated within himself after his threefold denial, and how
he gasped to see the Lord again, if he were risen, and to cast himself
an humble suppliant at his feet. When therefore he heard these things
from the women, (and he had heard it indeed from Christ himself, while
he was yet alive, that when he arose he would go before them into
Galilee), and when the rest were very little moved with the report of
his resurrection, nor as yet stirred from that place, he will try a
journey into Galilee, and Alpheus with him; which, when it was well
known to the rest, and they saw him return so soon and so unexpectedly -
Certainly, say they, the Lord is risen, and hath appeared to Peter,
otherwise he had not so soon come back again. And yet, when he and
Cleophas open the whole matter, they do not yet believe even them."

[Mark 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 16:14</span></span>

And upbraided them with their unbelief - Never were there a people so
difficult to be persuaded of the truth of spiritual things as the
disciples. It may be justly asserted, that people of so skeptical a turn
of mind would never credit any thing till they had the fullest evidence
of its truth. The unbelief of the disciples is a strong proof of the
truth of the Gospel of God. See the addition at the end.

[Mark 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 16:15</span></span>

Go ye into all the world - See on [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019) (note.md).

And preach the Gospel to every creature - Proclaim the glad tidings - of
Christ crucified; and raised from the dead - to all the creation, πασῃ
τῃ κτισει - to the Gentile world; for in this sense בריות berioth, is
often understood among the rabbins; because He, through the grace of
God, hath tasted death for Every man, [Heb
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009.md). And on the rejection of the
Gospel by the Jews, it was sent to the whole Gentile world.

[Mark 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 16:16</span></span>

He that believeth - He that credits this Gospel as a revelation from
God: and is baptized - takes upon him the profession of it, obliging
himself to walk according to its precepts: he shall be saved - redeemed
from sin here, and brought at last to the enjoyment of my eternal glory.
But he that believeth not, shall be damned - because he rejects the only
provision that could be effectual to his soul's salvation.

[Mark 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 16:17</span></span>

These signs shall follow - Or rather, accompany; this is the proper
import of the original word παρακολουθησει, from παρα with, and
ακολουθεω, I follow.

Them that believe - The believers, as we express it; i.e. the apostles,
and all those who in those primitive times were endued with miraculous
powers, for the confirmation of the doctrines they preached.

In my name - That is, by the authority and influence of the almighty
Jesus.

Cast out devils - Whose kingdom Jesus Christ was manifested to destroy.

Speak with new tongues - This was most literally fulfilled on the day of
pentecost, Acts 2:4-19.

[Mark 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 16:18</span></span>

Take up serpents - Several MSS. add εν ταις χερσιν, in their hands -
shall be enabled to give, when such a proof may be serviceable to the
cause of truth, this evidence of their being continually under the power
and protection of God, and that all nature is subject to him. This also
was literally fulfilled in the case of Paul, [Act
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005.md).

If they drink any deadly thing - Θανασιμον (φαρμακον) being understood -
if they should through mistake, or accident, drink any poisonous matter,
their constant preserver will take care that it shall not injure them.
See a similar promise, [Isa 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002.md).

They shall lay hands on the sick - And I will convey a healing power by
their hands, so that the sick shall recover, and men shall see that
these are sent and acknowledged by the Most High. Several instances of
this kind are found in the Acts of the Apostles.

That the apostles of our Lord should not lose their lives by poison is
most fully asserted in this verse, and there is neither record nor
tradition to disprove this. But it is worthy of remark, that Mohammed,
who styled himself The Apostle Of God, lost his life by poison; and had
he been a true apostle of God, he could not have fallen by it. Al Kodai,
Abul Feda, and Al Janabi, give the following account.

When Mohammed, in the seventh year of the Hejra, a.d. 628, had taken the
city of Kheebar, from the Arab Jews, he took up his lodgings at the
house of Hareth, the father of Marhab the Jewish general, who had been
slain at the taking of the city by Alee, the son-in-law of Mohammed.
Zeenab the daughter of Hareth, who was appointed to dress the prophet's
dinner, to avenge the fall of her people, and the death of her brother,
put poison in a roasted lamb which was provided for the occasion.
Bashar, one of his companions, falling on too hastily, fell dead on the
spot. Mohammed had only chewed one mouthful, but had not swallowed it:
though, on perceiving that it was poisoned, he immediately spat it out,
yet he had swallowed a sufficiency of the juice to lay the foundation of
his death; though this did not take place till about three years after:
but that it was the cause of his death then, his dying words related by
Al Janabi, and others, sufficiently testify. When the mother of Bashar
came to see him in his dying agonies, he thus addressed her: "O mother
of Bashar, I now feel the veins of my heart bursting through the poison
of that morsel which I ate with thy son at Kheebar."

Abul Feda, Ebnol Athir, and Ebn Phares say, that the prophet
acknowledged on his death-bed, that the poison which he had taken at
Kheebar had tormented him from that time until then, notwithstanding
blisters were applied to his shoulders, and every thing done in the
beginning to prevent its effects. Al Kodai and Al Janabi relate, that
when Zeenab was questioned why she did this, she answered to this
effect: "I said in my heart, If he be a king, we shall hereby be freed
from his tyranny; and if he be a prophet, he will easily perceive it,
and consequently receive no injury." To support his credit, he pretended
that the lamb spoke to him, and said that it was infected with poison!
See Elmakin, p. 8. It was therefore policy in him not to put Zeenab to
death. It has pleased God that this fact should be acknowledged by the
dying breath of this scourge of the earth; and that several of even the
most partial Mohammedan historians should relate it! And, thus attested,
it stands for the complete and everlasting refutation of his pretensions
to the prophetic spirit and mission. Vide Specimen Hist. Arabum, a
Pocockio, p. 189, 190. Le Coran traduit par Savary, vol. i; p. 135, and
212. See also, The Life of Mohammed by Prideaux, 93, 101.

[Mark 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 16:19</span></span>

After the Lord had spoken - These things, and conversed with them for
forty days, he was taken up into heaven, there to appear in the presence
of God for us.

[Mark 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mar 16:20</span></span>

The Lord working with them - This co-operation was twofold, internal and
external. Internal, illuminating their minds, convincing them of the
truth, and establishing them in it. External, conveying their word to
the souls that heard it, by the demonstration of the Holy Ghost;
convincing them of sin, righteousness, and judgment; justifying them by
his blood, and sanctifying them by his Spirit. Though miraculous powers
are not now requisite, because the truth of the Gospel has been
sufficiently confirmed, yet this co-operation of God is indispensably
necessary, without which no man can be a successful preacher; and
without which no soul can be saved.

With signs following - Επακολουθουντων σημειων, the accompanying signs:
viz. those mentioned in the 17th and 18th verses, and those others just
now spoken of, which still continue to be produced by the energy of God,
accompanying the faithful preaching of his unadulterated word.

Amen - This is added here by many MSS. and versions; but is supposed not
to have made a part of the text originally. Griesbach, Bengel, and
others, leave it out.

St. Jerome mentions certain Greek copies, which have the following
remarkable addition to [Mar 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014.md),
after these words - and reproached them for their unbelief and hardness
of heart, because they did not believe those who had seen him after he
was raised up: Et illi satisfaciebant dicentes: seculum istud
iniquitatis et incredulitatis substantia est, quae non sinit per
immundos spiritus verem Dei apprehendi virtutem. Idcirco, jam nunc
revela justitiam tuam. "And they confessed the charge, saying: This age
is the substance of iniquity and unbelief, which, through the influence
of impure spirits, does not permit the true influence of God to be
apprehended. Therefore, even now, reveal thy righteousness."

There are various subscriptions to this book in the MSS. and versions;
the principal are the following: "The holy Gospel according to Mark is
ended written by him - in Egypt - in Rome - in the Latin tongue -
directed by Peter the 10th-12th year after the ascension of Christ -
preached in Alexandria, and all its coasts." Dr. Lardner supposes this
Gospel to have been composed a.d. 64 or 65, and published before the end
of the last mentioned year. See the Preface.

The Gospel according to Mark, if not an abridgment of the Gospel
according to Matthew, contains a neat, perspicuous abridgment of the
history of our Lord; and, taken in this point of view, is very
satisfactory; and is the most proper of all the four Gospels to be put
into the hands of young persons, in order to bring them to an
acquaintance with the great facts of evangelical history. But as a
substitute for the Gospel by Matthew, it should never be used. It is
very likely that it was written originally for the use of the Gentiles,
and probably for those of Rome. Of this, there seem to be several
evidences in the work itself. Of the other Gospels it is not only a
grand corroborating evidence, but contains many valuable hints for
completing the history of our Lord, which have been omitted by the
others; and thus, in the mouths of Four witnesses, all these glorious
and interesting facts are established.

One thing may be observed, that this Gospel has suffered more by the
carelessness and inaccuracy of transcribers than any of the others: and
hence the various readings in the MSS. are much more numerous, in
proportion, than in the other evangelists. Every thing of this
description, which I judged to be of real importance, I have carefully
noted.

Though the matter of St. Mark's work came from the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, yet the language seems to be entirely his own: it is very
plain, simple, and unadorned; and sometimes appears to approach to a
degree of rusticity or inelegance. Whoever reads the original must be
struck with the very frequent, and often pleonastic, occurrence of
ευθεως, immediately, and παλιν, again, and such like; but these detract
nothing from the accuracy and fidelity of the work. The Hebraisms which
abound in it may be naturally expected from a native of Palestine,
writing in Greek. The Latinisms which frequently occur are accounted for
on the ground of this Gospel being written for the Gentiles, and
particularly for the Roman people: this, it must be confessed, is only
theory, but it is a theory which stands supported by many arguments, and
highly presumptive facts. However this may be, the Gospel according to
Mark is a very important portion of Divine revelation, which God has
preserved by a chain of providences, from the time of its promulgation
until now; and for which no truly pious reader will hesitate to render
due praise to that God whose work is ever perfect. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Introduction](luk000.md)

</div>
