<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar014)  [Next](mar016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 15:0</span></span>

Jesus is brought before Pilate, examined, and accused, but makes no
answer, [Mar 15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001). The multitude
clamor for the release of Barabbas, and the crucifixion of Christ, [Mar
15:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#006). Pilate consents, and he is
led away, mocked, insulted, and nailed to the cross, [Mar
15:15-26](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015). Two thieves are crucified
with him, [Mar 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#027), [Mar
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028). While hanging on the cross, he
is mocked and insulted, [Mar 15:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#029).
The miraculous darkness and our Lord's death, [Mar
15:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033). The rending of the veil, and
the confession of the centurion, [Mar
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#038), [Mar
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#039). Several women attend and behold
his death, [Mar 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040), [Mar
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#041). Joseph of Arimathea begs the
body from Pilate, and buries it, [Mar
15:42-46](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042). Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of Joses, note the place of his burial, [Mar
15:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#047).

[Mark 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 15:1</span></span>

In the morning - See [Mat 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001), etc.

[Mark 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 15:8</span></span>

The multitude crying aloud - Αναβοησας. The word itself strongly marks
the vociferations, or, to come nearer the original word, the bellowing
of the multitude. It signifies, properly, a loud and long cry, such as
Christ emitted on the cross. See the whole history of these proceedings
against our Lord treated at large, on Matthew 27 (note).

[Mark 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 15:17</span></span>

And platted a crown of thorns - In the note on [Mat
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029) (note), I have ventured to
express a doubt whether our Lord was crowned with thorns, in our sense
of the word; this crown being designed as an instrument of torture. I am
still of the same opinion, having considered the subject more closely
since writing that note. As there I have referred to Bishop Pearce, a
man whose merit as a commentator is far beyond my praise, and who, it is
to be regretted, did not complete his work on the New Testament, I think
it right to insert the whole of his note here.

"The word ακανθων may as well be the plural genitive case of the word
ακανθος as of ακανθη: if of the latter, it is rightly translated, of
thorns; but the former would signify what we call bear's-foot, and the
French, branche ursine. This is not of the thorny kind of plants, but is
soft and smooth. Virgil calls it mollis acanthus, Ecl. iii. 45, Geor.
iv. 137. So does Pliny, sec. Epist. ver. 6. And Pliny the elder, in his
Nat. Hist. xxii. 22, p. 277, edit. Hard., says that it is laevis,
smooth; and that it is one of those plants that are cultivated in
gardens. I have somewhere read, but cannot at present recollect where,
that this soft and smooth herb was very common in and about Jerusalem. I
find nothing in the New Testament said concerning this crown, which
Pilate's soldiers put on the head of Jesus, to incline one to think that
it was of thorns, and intended, as is usually supposed, to put him to
pain. The reed put into his hand, and the scarlet robe on his back, were
only meant as marks of mockery and contempt. One may also reasonably
judge, by the soldiers being said to plat this crown, that it was not
composed of such twigs and leaves as were of a thorny nature. I do not
find that it is mentioned by any of the primitive Christian writers as
an instance of the cruelty used towards our Savior, before he was led to
his crucifixion, till the time of Tertullian, who lived after Jesus's
death at the distance of above 160 years. He indeed seems to have
understood ακανθων in the sense of thorns, and says, De Corona Militar.
sect. xiv. edit. Pamel. Franck. 1597, Quale, oro te, Jesus Christus
sertum pro utroque sexu subiit? Ex spinis, opinor, et tribulis. The
total silence of Polycarp, Barnabas, Clem. Romanus, and all the other
Christian writers whose works are now extant, and who wrote before
Tertullian, in particular, will give some weight to incline one to think
that this crown was not platted with thorns. But as this is a point on
which we have not sufficient evidence, I leave it almost in the same
state of uncertainty in which I found it. The reader may see a
satisfactory account of acanthus, bear's-foot, in Quincy's English
Dispensatory, part ii. sect. 3, edit. 8, 1742."

This is the whole of the learned and judicious prelate's note; on which
I have only to observed that the species of acanthus described by Virgil
and the two Plinys, as mollis and laevis, soft and smooth, is, no doubt,
the same as that formerly used in medicine, and described by Quincy and
other pharmacopaeists; but there are other species of the same plant
that are prickly, and particularly those called the acanthus spinosus,
and the ilicifolius, the latter of which is common in both the Indies:
this has leaves something like our common holly, the jagged edges of
which are armed with prickles; but I do not conceive that this kind was
used, nor indeed any other plant of a thorny nature, as the Roman
soldiers who platted the crown could have no interest in adding to our
Lord's sufferings; though they smote him with the rod, yet their chief
object was to render him ridiculous, for pretending, as they imagined,
to regal authority. The common wild acanthas or bear's-foot, which I
have often met in the dry turf bogs in Ireland, though it have the
appearance of being prickly, yet is not, in fact, so. Several shoots
grow from one root, about four or five inches long, and about as thick
as a little finger. A parcel of such branches, platted by their roots in
a string, night be made to look even ornamental, tied about the temples
and round the head. It would finely imitate a crown or diadem. But I
know not if this plant be a native of Judea.

[Mark 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 15:21</span></span>

A Cyrenian - One of Cyrene, a celebrated city in the Pentapolis of
Libya.

The father of Alexander and Rufus - It appears that these two persons
were well known among the first disciples of our Lord. It is not
unlikely that this is the same Alexander who is mentioned, [Act
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033), and that the other is the Rufus
spoken of by St. Paul, [Rom 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#013).

[Mark 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 15:25</span></span>

The third hour - It has been before observed, that the Jews divided
their night into four watches, of three hours each. They also divided
the day into four general parts. The first began at sunrise. The second
three hours after. The third at mid-day. The fourth three hours after,
and continued till sunset. Christ having been nailed to the cross a
little after mid-day, [Joh 19:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014),
[Joh 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017), and having expired about
three o'clock, [Mar 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033), the whole
business of the crucifixion was finished within the space of this third
division of the day, which Mark calls here the third hour. Commentators
and critics have found it very difficult to reconcile this third hour of
Mark, with the sixth hour of John, [Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014). It is supposed that the true
reading, in [Joh 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014), should be
τριτη, the third, instead of ἑκτη the sixth; a mistake which might have
readily taken place in ancient times, when the character γ gamma, which
was put for τριτη, three, might have been mistaken for Ϛ episema, or
sigma tau, which signifies six. And τριτη, the third, instead of ἑκτη,
the sixth, is the reading of some very eminent MSS. in the place in
question, [Joh 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014). See Bengel,
Newcome, Macknight, Lightfoot, Rosenmuller, etc., on this perplexing
point.

[Mark 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 15:27</span></span>

Two thieves - A copy of the Itala tells their names: One on the right
hand - named Zoathon; and one on the left hand - named Chammatha.

[Mark 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 15:28</span></span>

The scripture was fulfilled - All this verse is wanting in many MSS.,
some versions, and several of the fathers.

[Mark 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 15:32</span></span>

And believe - In him is added by DFGHPBHV, and upwards of sixty others;
as also the Armenian, Slavonic, and four Itala.

[Mark 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 15:34</span></span>

My God, my God, etc. - See on [Mat
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046) (note).

[Mark 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mar 15:37</span></span>

Gave up the ghost - This was about three o'clock, or what was termed by
the Jews the ninth hour; about the time that the paschal lamb was
usually sacrificed. The darkness mentioned here must have endured about
two hours and a half. Concerning this eclipse, see on [Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045) (note).

[Mark 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mar 15:40</span></span>

Joses - Some MSS. and versions read Joset, others Joseph. See on [Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056) (note).

[Mark 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 15:42</span></span>

The day before the Sabbath - What we would call Friday evening. As the
law of Moses had ordered that no criminal should continue hanging on a
tree or gibbet till the setting of the sun, Joseph, fearing that the
body of our Lord might be taken down, and thrown into the common grave
with the two robbers, came and earnestly entreated Pilate to deliver it
to him, that he might bury it in his own new tomb. See on [Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056), [Mat
27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060) (note).

[Mark 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 15:43</span></span>

Went in boldly unto Pilate - He who was a coward before now acts a more
open, fearless part, than any of the disciples of our Lord! This the
Holy Spirit has thought worthy of especial notice. It needed no small
measure of courage to declare now for Jesus, who had been a few hours
ago condemned as a blasphemer by the Jews, and as a seditious person by
the Romans; and this was the more remarkable in Joseph, because
hitherto, for fear of the Jews, he had been only a secret disciple of
our Lord. See [Joh 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038).

The apostle says, We have Boldness to enter into the holiest through his
blood. Strange as it may appear, the death of Jesus is the grand cause
of confidence and courage to a believing soul.

[Mark 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mar 15:47</span></span>

Beheld where he was laid - The courage and affection of these holy women
cannot be too much admired. The strength of the Lord is perfected in
weakness; for here a timid man, and a few weak women, acknowledge Jesus
in death, when the strong and the mighty utterly forsook him.

Human strength and human weakness are only names in religion. The
mightiest Man, in the hour of trial, can do nothing without the strength
of God; and the weakest Woman can do all things, if Christ strengthen
her. These truths are sufficiently exemplified in the case of Peter and
all his brother disciples on the one hand; and Joseph of Arimathea and
the two Marys on the other. And all this is recorded, equally to prevent
both presumption and despair. Reader, let not these examples be produced
before thee in vain.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 16](mar016)

</div>
