<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat013)  [Next](mat015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 14:0</span></span>

Herod, having heard the fame of Christ, supposes him to be John the
Baptist, risen from the dead, [Mat
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001), [Mat
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002). A circumstantial account of the
beheading of John the Baptist, [Mat
14:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003). Five thousand men, besides
women and children, fed with five loaves and two fishes, [Mat
14:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013). The disciples take ship, and
Jesus stays behind, and goes privately into a mountain to pray, [Mat
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022), [Mat
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023). A violent storm arises, by
which the lives of the disciples are endangered, [Mat
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#024). In their extremity, Jesus
appears to them, walking upon the water, [Mat
14:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025). Peter, at the command of his
Master, leaves the ship, and walks on the water to meet Christ, [Mat
14:28-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028). They both enter the ship,
and the storm ceases, [Mat 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#032), [Mat
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#033). They come into the land of
Gennesaret, and he heals many diseased people, [Mat
14:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034).

[Matthew 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 14:1</span></span>

Herod the tetrarch - This was Herod Antipas, the son of Herod the Great.
See the notes on [Mat 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001), where an
account is given of the Herod family. The word tetrarch properly
signifies a person who rules over the fourth part of a country; but it
is taken in a more general sense by the Jewish writers, meaning
sometimes a governor simply, or a king; see [Mat
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#009). The estates of Herod the Great
were not, at his death, divided into four tetrarchies, but only into
three: one was given by the Emperor Augustus to Archelaus; the second to
Herod Antipas, the person in the text; and the third to Philip: all
three, sons of Herod the Great.

[Matthew 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 14:2</span></span>

This is John the Baptist - Ον εγω απεκεφαλισα, Whom I beheaded. These
words are added here by the Codex Bezae and several others, by the
Saxon, and five copies of the Itala. - See the power of conscience! He
is miserable because he is guilty; being continually under the dominion
of self-accusation, reproach, and remorse. No need for the Baptist now:
conscience performs the office of ten thousand accusers! But, to
complete the misery, a guilty conscience offers no relief from God -
points out no salvation from sin.

He is risen from the dead - From this we may observe:

1\. That the resurrection of the dead was a common opinion among the
Jews; and

2\. That the materiality of the soul made no part of Herod's creed.

Bad and profligate as he was, it was not deemed by him a thing
impossible with God to raise the dead; and the spirit of the murdered
Baptist had a permanent resurrection in his guilty conscience.

[Matthew 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 14:3</span></span>

For Herodias' sake - This infamous woman was the daughter of Aristobulus
and Bernice, and grand-daughter of Herod the Great. Her first marriage
was with Herod Philip, her uncle, by whom she had Salome: some time
after, she left her husband, and lived publicly with Herod Antipas, her
brother-in-law, who had been before married to the daughter of Aretas,
king of Arabia Petraea. As soon as Aretas understood that Herod had
determined to put away his daughter, he prepared to make war on him: the
two armies met, and that of Herod was cut to pieces by the Arabians; and
this, Josephus says, was supposed to be a judgment of God on him for the
murder of John the Baptist. See the account in Josephus, Antiq. lib.
xviii. c. 7.

[Matthew 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 14:4</span></span>

For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to have her. - Here is
an instance of zeal, fidelity, and courage, highly worthy of imitation.
Plainness, mildness, and modesty, are qualifications necessary to be
observed when we reprove the great. The best service a subject can
render his prince is to lay before him, in the plainest but most
respectful manner, what the law of God requires of him, and what it
forbids. How unutterable must the punishment of those be who are
chaplains to princes, or great men, and who either flatter them in their
vices, or wink at their sins!

[Matthew 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 14:5</span></span>

He feared the multitude - Miserable prince! who fears more to offend his
people, than to sin against his God, by shedding innocent blood. When a
man resists sin only by the help of human motives, he cannot long defend
himself.

[Matthew 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 14:6</span></span>

Herod's birth-day - Either the day in which he was born, or the day on
which he began to reign; for both were termed birth-days. See [Sa1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001), and [Hos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#005). The kings of Persia were
accustomed to reject no petition that was preferred to them during the
entertainment. See Herodotus in Calliope, and [Est
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#003).

The daughter - danced - This was Salome, mentioned before. Danced: by a
literal rendering of the saltavit of the Vulgate, in my old MS. of the
English Bible, the whole of this business seems to be treated with
sovereign contempt: for thus says the translator, Shee leped in the
myddle.

[Matthew 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 14:8</span></span>

Give me here John Baptist's head in a charger - The word charger
formerly signified a large dish, bowl, or drinking cup: the Saxon has a
dish, Tindal, a platter; any thing is better than charger, which never
conveyed much meaning, and now conveys none. The evangelist says she was
instructed before, by her mother, to ask the Baptist's head! What a most
infernal mother, to give such instructions to her child! and what a
promising daughter to receive them! What a present for a young lady! -
the bloody head of the murdered forerunner of Jesus! and what a
gratification for an adulterous wife, and incestuous mother! The
disturber of her illicit pleasures, and the troubler of her
brother-husband's conscience, is no more! Short, however, was their
glorying! See on [Mat 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003) (note).

[Matthew 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 14:9</span></span>

The king was sorry - He knew John to be a righteous man, and at first
did many things gladly which John told him it was his duty to perform:
[Mar 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#020).

Nevertheless, for the oath's sake - The Oaths, ορκους - he had probably
sworn again and again - one sin begets many.

And them which sat with him at meat - Who were probably such as himself,
and would have considered it a breach of honor if he had not fulfilled
his sworn promise: he therefore commanded it to be given!

[Matthew 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 14:11</span></span>

His head was given to the damsel: and she brought it to her mother -
There is no person so revengeful as a lascivious woman when reproved and
blamed. A preacher of the Gospel has most to fear from this quarter: -
the first of this profession lost his life for the sake of truth and
chastity; and others, especially those who have any thing to do with men
in power who are profligates, may learn what they are to expect in
return for a faithful discharge of their duty.

[Matthew 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 14:12</span></span>

His disciples came, and took up the Body - The Head was in the
possession of Herodias, who, 'tis probable, took a diabolic pleasure in
viewing that speechless mouth which had often been the cause of planting
thorns in her criminal bed; and in offering indignities to that tongue
from which she could no longer dread a reproof. Her character justifies
every bad conjecture that can well be formed on this head: and St.
Jerome positively says that, when she got it, she drew out the tongue,
and thrust it through with her bodkin. On the whole we may observe: -

That the diversions of the world, feasting and dancing, are but too
commonly the occasions of sin. After so fatal an example as this, can we
doubt whether balls are not snares for souls; destructive of chastity,
modesty, and sometimes even of humanity itself; and a pernicious
invention to excite the most criminal passions! How many on such
occasions have sacrificed their chastity, and then, to hide their shame,
have stifled the feelings of the human being and the parent, and, by
direct or indirect means, have put a period to the innocent offspring of
their connections! Unhappy mother, who exposes her daughter to the same
shipwreck herself has suffered, and makes her own child the instrument
of her lust and revenge! Behold here, ye professedly religious parents,
the fruits of what was doubtless called in those times, elegant breeding
and accomplished dancing! Fix your eyes on that vicious mother, that
prostituted daughter, and especially on that murdered ambassador of God,
and then send your children to genteel boarding-schools, to learn the
accomplishment of Dancing! where the fear of God makes no part of the
education.

[Matthew 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 14:13</span></span>

When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence - Had the blessed Jesus
continued in that place, it is probable the hand of this impure female
murderer would have been stretched out against him also: he withdrew,
therefore, not through fear, but to teach his messengers rather to yield
to the storm than expose themselves to destruction, where, from
circumstances, the case is evidently hopeless.

The people - followed him on foot - πεζη, or, by land, which is a common
acceptation of the word in the best Greek writers. See many examples in
Kypke.

[Matthew 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 14:14</span></span>

Jesus - was moved with compassion - Εσπλαγχνισθε, he was moved with
tender compassion, so I think the word should in general be translated:
see the note on [Mat 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036). As a verb,
it does not appear to have been used by any but ecclesiastical writers.
It always intimates that motion of the bowels, accompanied with extreme
tenderness and concern, which is felt at the sight of the miseries of
another.

[Matthew 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 14:15</span></span>

Send the multitude away, that they may go - and buy - The disciples of
Christ are solicitous for the people's temporal as well a spiritual
welfare: and he is not worthy to be called a minister of Christ, who
dues not endeavor to promote both to the uttermost of his power. The
preaching of Christ must have been accompanied with uncommon power to
these people's souls, to have induced them to leave their homes to
follow him from village to village, for they could never hear enough;
and to neglect to make use of any means for the support of their lives,
so that they might still have the privilege of hearing him. When a soul
is either well replenished with the bread of life, or hungry after it,
the necessities of the body are, for the time, little regarded.

[Matthew 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 14:16</span></span>

They need not depart - He that seeks first the kingdom of heaven is sure
to have every temporal requisite. When a man ensures the first, God
always takes care to throw the other into the bargain. He who has an
interest in Jesus has in him an inexhaustible treasure of spiritual and
temporal good. Though the means by which man may help his fellows have
failed, we are not to suppose that the bounty of God is exhausted. When
we are about to give up all hope of farther supply, the gracious word of
Christ still holds good - They need not depart; give ye them to eat.

Give ye them to eat - Should we say, Lord, how shall thy poor, feeble
ministering servants feed so many hungry souls as attend thy word! Begin
at the command of Jesus - make the attempt - divide what you have - and
the bread of God shall be multiplied in your hands, and all shall eat
and be satisfied.

[Matthew 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 14:17</span></span>

We have here but five loaves and two fishes - When we are deeply
conscious of our own necessities, we shall be led to depend on Jesus
with a firmer faith. God often permits his servants to be brought low,
that they may have repeated opportunities of proving the kindness and
mercy of their gracious Lord and Master.

[Matthew 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 14:18</span></span>

Bring them hither to me - No creature of God should be considered as
good or safe without the blessing of God in it. If thou have but even a
handful of meal and a few herbs, bring them to Christ by prayer and
faith, and he will make them a sufficiency for thy body, and a sacrament
to thy soul. Let the minister of the Gospel attend also to this - let
him bring all his gifts and graces to his Maker - let him ever know that
his word can be of no use, unless the blessing of Christ be in it.

[Matthew 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 14:19</span></span>

And took the five loaves, etc. - This was the act of the father of a
family among the Jews - his business it was to take the bread into his
hands, and render thanks to God, before any of the family was permitted
to taste of it.

Looking up to heaven - To teach us to acknowledge God as the Supreme
Good, and fountain of all excellence.

He blessed - The word God should, I think, be rather inserted here than
the word them, because it does not appear that it was the loaves which
Christ blessed, but that God who had provided them; and this indeed was
the Jewish custom, not to bless the food, but the God who gave it.

However, there are others who believe the loaves are meant, and that he
blessed them in order to multiply them. The Jewish form of blessing, or
what we term grace, before and after meat, was as follows: -

Before Meat

ברוך אתה אלהינו מלך העולם המוצא לחם מן הארץ

Baruc attah Elohinoo melec haolam hamotse lechem min haarets

Blessed art thou, our God, King of the universe, who bringest bread out
of the earth!

After Meat

ברוך אלהינו מלך העולם בורא פרי הגפן

Barnuc Elohinoo melec haolam bore peri hagephen

Blessed art thou, our God, King of the universe, the Creator of the
fruit of the vine!

And brake - We read often in the Scriptures of breaking bread, never of
cutting it: because the Jews made their bread broad and thin like cakes,
and to divide such, being very brittle, there was no need of a knife.

[Matthew 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 14:20</span></span>

They did all eat, and were filled - Little or much is the same in the
hands of Jesus Christ. Here was an incontestable miracle - five thousand
men, besides women and children, fed with five cakes and two fishes!
Here must have been a manifest creation of substance - the parts of the
bread were not dilated to make them appear large, nor was there any
delusion in the eating - for they all ate, and were all filled. Here
then is one miracle of our Lord attested by at least five thousand
persons! But did not this creation of bread prove the unlimited power of
Jesus? Undoubtedly: and nothing less than eternal power and Godhead
could have effected it.

They took up - twelve baskets - It was customary for many of the Jews to
carry a basket with them at all times: and Mr. Wakefield's conjecture
here is very reasonable: - "By the number here particularized, it should
seem that each apostle filled his own bread basket." Some think that the
Jews carried baskets in commemoration of their Egyptian bondage, when
they were accustomed to carry the clay and stubble to make the bricks,
in a basket that was hung about their necks. This seems to be what
Sidonius Apollinaris refers to in the following words, Epist. vii. 6.
Ordinis res est, ut, (dum in allegorica versamur Aegypto) Pharao incedat
cum diademate, Israelita cum Cophino.

These words of Alcimus Avitus, lib. v. 30, are to the same effect: -

Servitii longo lassatam pondere plebem,

Oppressos cophinis humeros, attritaque collo

It appears that a basket about the neck, and a bunch of hay, were the
general characteristic of this long enslaved and oppressed people in the
different countries where they sojourned.

Juvenal also mentions the Basket and the hay: -

Cum dedit ille locum, cophino faenoque relicto,

Arcanam Judaea tremens mendicat in aurem

Sat vi. 542

A gypsy Jewess whispers in your ear -

Her goods a basket, and old hay her bed,

She strolls, and telling fortunes, gains her bread

Dryden

And again, Sat iii. 13: -

Nunc sacri fontis nemus, et delubra locantur

Judaeis, quorum cophinus, faenumque supellex

Now the once hallowed fountain, grove, and fane,

Are let to Jews, a wretched, wandering train,

Whose wealth is but a basket stuff'd with hay

Gifford

The simple reason why the Jews carried baskets with them appears to be
this: - When they went into Gentile countries, they carried their own
provision with them, as they were afraid of being polluted by partaking
of the meat of heathens. This also obliged them probably to carry hay
with them to sleep on: and it is to this, in all likelihood, that
Juvenal alludes.

After five thousand were fed, twelve times as much, at least, remained,
as the whole multitude at first sat down to! See the note on [Luk
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016).

[Matthew 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 14:22</span></span>

Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship - Either they were
afraid to return into the jurisdiction of Herod, or they were unwilling
to embark without their Lord and Protector, and would not enter their
boat till Christ had commanded them to embark.

From this verse it appears that Christ gave some advices to the
multitudes after the departure of his disciples, which he did not wish
them to hear.

Unto the other side - Towards Capernaum, [Mat
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034). [Joh
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#016), [Joh
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#017), or Bethsaida, see on [Mar
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045) (note).

[Matthew 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 14:23</span></span>

He went up into a mountain apart, to pray - He whom God has employed in
a work of mercy had need to return, by prayer, as speedily, to his
Maker, as he can, lest he should be tempted to value himself on account
of that in which he has no merit - for the good that is done upon earth,
the Lord doth it alone. Some make this part of our Lord's conduct
emblematic of the spirit and practice of prayer, and observe that the
proper dispositions and circumstances for praying well are:

1\. Retirement from the world.

2\. Elevation of the heart to God.

3\. Solitude.

4\. The silence and quiet of the night.

It is certain that in this also Christ has left us an example that we
should follow his steps. Retirement from the world is often a means of
animating, supporting, and spiritualizing prayer. Other society should
be shut out, when a soul comes to converse with God.

[Matthew 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 14:24</span></span>

Tossed with waves - Grievously agitated. This is the proper meaning of
the word βασανιζομενον: but one MS. reads βαπτιζομενον, plunged under
the waves, frequently covered with them; the waves often breaking over
the vessel.

[Matthew 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 14:25</span></span>

The fourth watch - Anciently the Jews divided the night into three
watches, consisting of four hours each. The first watch is mentioned,
[Lam 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019) : the second, [Jdg
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#019); and the third, [Exo
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024); but a fourth watch is not
mentioned in any part of the Old Testament. This division the Romans had
introduced in Judea, as also the custom of dividing the day into twelve
hours: see [Joh 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009). The first watch
began at six o'clock in the evening, and continued till nine; the second
began at nine, and continued till twelve; the third began at twelve, and
continued till three next morning; and the fourth began at three, and
continued till six. It was therefore between the hours of three and six
in the morning that Jesus made his appearance to his disciples.

Walking on the sea - Thus suspending the laws of gravitation was a
proper manifestation of unlimited power. Jesus did this by his own
power; therefore Jesus showed forth his Godhead. In this one miracle we
may discover three: -

1\. Though at a distance from his disciples, he knew their distress.

2\. He found them out on the lake, and probably in the midst of
darkness.

3\. He walked upon the water.

Job, speaking of those things whereby the omnipotence of God was
demonstrated, says particularly, [Job
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008), He walketh upon the waves of the
sea: intimating that this was impossible to any thing but Omnipotence.

[Matthew 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 14:26</span></span>

It is a spirit - That the spirits of the dead might and did appear, was
a doctrine held by the greatest and holiest of men that ever existed;
and a doctrine which the caviliers, free-thinkers and bound-thinkers, of
different ages, have never been able to disprove.

[Matthew 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 14:27</span></span>

It is I; be not afraid - Nothing but this voice of Christ could, in such
circumstances, have given courage and comfort to his disciples: those
who are grievously tossed with difficulties and temptations require a
similar manifestation of his power and goodness. When he proclaims
himself in the soul, all sorrow, and fear, and sin are at an end.

[Matthew 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 14:28</span></span>

Bid me come unto thee on the water - A weak faith is always wishing for
signs and miracles. To take Christ at his word, argues not only the
perfection of faith, but also the highest exercise of sound reason. He
is to be credited on his own word, because he is the Truth, and
therefore can neither lie nor deceive.

[Matthew 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 14:29</span></span>

Peter - walked on the water - However impossible the thing commanded by
Christ may appear, it is certain he will give power to accomplish it to
those who receive his word by faith; but we must take care never to put
Christ's power to the proof for the gratification of a vain curiosity;
or even for the strengthening of our faith, when the ordinary means for
doing that are within our reach.

[Matthew 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 14:30</span></span>

When he saw the wind boisterous, he was afraid - It was by faith in the
power of Christ he was upheld; when that faith failed, by which the laws
of gravitation were suspended, no wonder that those laws returned to
their wonted action, and that he began to sink. It was not the violence
of the winds, nor the raging of the waves, which endangered his life,
but his littleness of faith.

[Matthew 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 14:31</span></span>

Jesus stretched forth his hand - Every moment we stand in need of
Christ: while we stand - we are upheld by his power only; and when we
are falling, or have fallen, we can be saved only by his mercy. Let us
always take care that we do not consider so much the danger to which we
are exposed, as the power of Christ by which we are to be upheld; and
then our mountain is likely to stand strong.

[Matthew 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 14:32</span></span>

The wind ceased - Jesus is the Prince of peace, and all is peace and
calm where he condescends to enter and abide.

[Matthew 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 14:33</span></span>

Thou art the Son of God - It is probable that these words were spoken
either by the sailors or passengers, and not by the disciples. Critics
have remarked that, when this phrase is used to denominate the Messiah,
both the articles are used, ἑ υιος του Θεου, and that the words without
the articles mean, in the common Jewish phrase, a Divine person. It
would have been a strange thing indeed, if the disciples, after all the
miracles they had seen Jesus work - after their having left all to
follow him, etc., were only now persuaded that he was the promised
Messiah. That they had not as yet clear conceptions concerning his
kingdom, is evident enough; but that they had any doubts concerning his
being the promised Messiah is far from being clear.

[Matthew 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 14:34</span></span>

The land of Gennesaret - It was from this country that the sea or lake
of Gennesaret had its name. In this district, on the western side of the
lake, were the cities of Capernaum and Tiberias.

[Matthew 14:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 14:35</span></span>

The men of that place had knowledge of him - i.e. They knew him again.
They had already seen his miracles; and now they collect all the
diseased people they can find, that he may have the same opportunity of
showing forth his marvellous power, and they of being the instruments of
relieving their friends and neighbors.

They brought unto him all that were diseased - And Jesus received and
healed every man and woman of them. And is not the soul, in the sight of
God, of more value than the body? and will he withhold his healing power
from the former, and grant it so freely to the latter? This cannot be.
Let a man come himself to Jesus, and he shall be saved and afterwards
let him recommend this Christ to the whole circle of his acquaintance,
and they, if they come, shall also find mercy.

[Matthew 14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 14:36</span></span>

That they might only touch the hem of his garment - What mighty
influence must the grace and Spirit of Christ have in the soul, when
even the border or hem of his garment produced such wonders in the
bodies of those who touched it! Here is a man who has turned from sin to
God through Christ, and the healing hand of Jesus is laid upon him.
Then, no wonder that he knows and feels his sins forgiven, his soul
purified, and his heart filled with the fullness of his Maker. Lord,
increase our faith! and we shall see greater manifestations of thy power
and glory! Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 15](mat015)

</div>
