<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat018)  [Next](mat020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001.md)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 19:0</span></span>

Jesus leaves Galilee, and comes into the coasts of Judea, and is
followed by great multitudes, whom he heals, [Mat
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001.md), [Mat
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#002.md). The question of the Pharisees
concerning divorce answered, and the doctrine of marriage explained,
[Mat 19:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003.md). The inquiry of the
disciples on this subject, [Mat 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#010.md).
Our Lord's answer, explaining the case of eunuchs, [Mat
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011.md), [Mat
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012.md). Little children brought to
Christ for his blessing, [Mat
19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md). The case of the young man
who wished to obtain eternal life, [Mat
19:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016.md). Our Lords reflections on
this case, in which he shows the difficulty of a rich man's salvation,
[Mat 19:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023.md). What they shall possess
who have left all for Christ's sake and the Gospel. [Mat
19:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md) How many of the first shall
be last, and the last first, [Mat
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030.md).

[Matthew 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 19:1</span></span>

Beyond Jordan - Or, by the side of Jordan. Matthew begins here to give
an account of Christ's journey (the only one he mentions) to Jerusalem,
a little before the passover, at which he was crucified. See [Mar
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#001.md); [Luk
9:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#051.md).

Jesus came from Galilee (which lay to the north of Judea) into the
coasts of Judea; and from thence, in his way to Jerusalem, he went
through Jericho, ([Mat 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017.md), [Mat
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029).md), which lay at the distance of
sixty furlongs, or seven miles and a half from Jordan, to the western
side of it. See Joseph. War, book iv. chap. 8. sect. 3. It seems,
therefore, most probable, that the course of Christ's journey led him by
the side of the river Jordan, not beyond it. That the Greek word περαν,
especially with a genitive case as here, has sometimes this
signification, see on [Joh 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#022.md)
(note); see also Bp. Pearce.

[Matthew 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 19:2</span></span>

Great multitudes followed him - Some to be instructed - some to be
healed - some through curiosity - and some to ensnare him.

[Matthew 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 19:3</span></span>

Tempting him - Trying what answer he would give to a question, which,
however decided by him, would expose him to censure.

Is it lawful - for every cause? - Instead of αιτιαν, fault, cause,
reason, three MSS. and the Coptic version read αμαρτιαν, sin or
transgression: this was probably the original reading - the first
syllable being lost, αρτιαν alone would remain, which a subsequent
transcriber would suppose to be a mistake for αιτιαν, and so wrote it;
hence this various reading. What made our Lord's situation at present so
critical in respect to this question was: At this time there were two
famous divinity and philosophical schools among the Jews, that of
Shammai, and that of Hillel. On the question of divorce, the school of
Shammai maintained, that a man could not legally put away his wife,
except for whoredom. The school of Hillel taught that a man might put
away his wife for a multitude of other causes, and when she did not find
grace in his sight; i.e. when he saw any other woman that pleased him
better. See the case of Josephus, mentioned in the note on [Mat
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031) (note.md), and Calmet's Comment,
vol. i. part ii. p. 379. By answering the question, not from Shammai or
Hillel, but from Moses, our blessed Lord defeated their malice, and
confounded their devices.

[Matthew 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 19:4</span></span>

He which made them at the beginning - When Adam and Eve were the first
of human kind.

Made them male and female - Merely through the design of matrimonial
union, that the earth might be thus peopled. To answer a case of
conscience, a man should act as Christ does here; pay no regard to that
which the corruption of manners has introduced into Divine ordinances,
but go back to the original will, purpose, and institution of God.
Christ will never accommodate his morality to the times, nor to the
inclinations of men. What was done at the beginning is what God judged
most worthy of his glory, most profitable for man, and most suitable to
nature.

[Matthew 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 19:5</span></span>

For this cause - Being created for this very purpose; that they might
glorify their Maker in a matrimonial connection. A man shall leave
(καταλειψαι, wholly give up) both father and mother - the matrimonial
union being more intimate and binding than even paternal or filial
affection; - and shall be closely united, προσκολληθησεται, shall be
firmly cemented to his wife. A beautiful metaphor, which most forcibly
intimates that nothing but death can separate them: as a well-glued
board will break sooner in the whole wood, than in the glued joint. So
also the Hebrew word דבק debak implies.

And they twain shall be one flesh? - Not only meaning, that they should
be considered as one body, but also as two souls in one body, with a
complete union of interests, and an indissoluble partnership of life and
fortune, comfort and support, desires and inclinations, joys and
sorrows. Farther, it appears to me, that the words in [Gen
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024.md), לבסר אחד lebasar achad, for one
flesh, which our Lord literally translates, mean also, that children,
compounded as it were of both, should be the product of the matrimonial
connection. Thus, they two (man and woman) shall be for the producing of
one flesh, the very same kind of human creature with themselves. See the
note on [Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024.md).

[Matthew 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 19:6</span></span>

What therefore God hath joined together - Συνεζευξεν, yoked together, as
oxen in the plough, where each must pull equally, in order to bring it
on. Among the ancients, when persons were newly married, they put a yoke
upon their necks, or chains upon their arms, to show that they were to
be one, closely united, and pulling equally together in all the concerns
of life. See Kypke in loco.

The finest allegorical representation of the marriage union I have met
with, is that antique gem representing the marriage of Cupid and Psyche,
in the collection of the duke of Marlborough: it may be seen also among
Baron Stoch's gems, and casts or copies of it in various other
collections.

1\. Both are represented as winged, to show the alacrity with which the
husband and wife should help, comfort and support each ether;
preventing, as much as possible, the expressing of a wish or want on
either side, by fulfilling it before it can be expressed.

2\. Both are veiled, to show that modesty is an inseparable attendant on
pure matrimonial connections.

3\. Hymen or Marriage goes before them with a lighted torch, leading
them by a chain, of which each has a hold, to show that they are united
together, and are bound to each other, and that they are led to this by
the pure flame of love, which at the same instant both enlightens and
warms them.

4\. This chain is not iron nor brass, (to intimate that the marriage
union is a state of thraldom or slavery), but it is a chain of pearls,
to show that the union is precious, beautiful, and delightful.

5\. They hold a dove, the emblem of conjugal fidelity, which they appear
to embrace affectionately, to show that they are faithful to each other,
not merely through duty, but by affection, and that this fidelity
contributes to the happiness of their lives.

6\. A winged Cupid, or Love, is represented as having gone before them,
preparing the nuptial feast; to intimate that active affections, warm
and cordial love, are to be to them a continual source of comfort and
enjoyment; and that this is the entertainment they are to meet with at
every step of their affectionate lives.

7\. Another Cupid, or genius of love comes behind, and places on their
heads a basket of ripe fruits; to intimate that a matrimonial union of
this kind will generally be blessed with children, who shall be as
pleasing to all their senses as ripe and delicious fruits to the smell
and taste.

8\. The genius of love that follows them has his wings shrivelled up, or
the feathers all curled, so as to render them utterly unfit for flight;
to intimate that love is to abide with them, that there is to be no
separation in affection, but that they are to continue to love one
another with pure hearts fervently. Thus love begins and continues this
sacred union; as to end, there can be none, for God hath yoked them
together.

A finer or more expressive set of emblems has never, I believe, been
produced, even by modern refined taste and ingenuity. This group of
emblematical figures is engraved upon an onyx by Tryphon, an ancient
Grecian artist. A fine drawing was made of this by Cypriani, and was
engraved both by Bartolozzi and Sherwin. See one of these plates in the
second volume of Bryant's Analysis of Ancient Mythology, page 392.

[Matthew 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 19:7</span></span>

Why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement? - It is not
an unusual case for the impure and unholy to seek for a justification of
their conduct from the law of God itself, and to wrest Scripture to
their own destruction. I knew a gentleman, so called, who professed deep
reverence for the sacred writings, and, strange as it may appear, was
outwardly irreproachable in every respect but one; that was, he kept
more women than his wife. This man frequently read the Bible, and was
particularly conversant with those places that spoke of or seemed to
legalize the polygamy of the patriarchs!

A writing of divorcement - See the form of it in the note on [Mat
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031) (note.md).

[Matthew 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 19:8</span></span>

Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts - It is dangerous to
tolerate the least evil, though prudence itself may require it: because
toleration, in this case, raises itself insensibly into permission, and
permission soon sets up for command. Moses perceived that if divorce
were not permitted, in many cases, the women would be exposed to great
hardships through the cruelty of their husbands: for so the word
σκληροκαρδια, is understood in this place by some learned men.

From the beginning it was not so - The Jews named the books of the law
from the first word in each. Genesis they always term Bereshith, בראשית,
which is the first word in it, and signifies, In the beginning. It is
probable that our Lord speaks in this way here, In Bereshith it was not
so, intimating that the account given in Genesis is widely different.
There was no divorce between Eve and Adam; nor did he or his family
practice polygamy. But our Lord, by the beginning, may mean the original
intention or design.

[Matthew 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 19:9</span></span>

Except it be for fornication - See on [Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032) (note.md). The decision of our Lord
must be very unpleasant to these men: the reason why they wished to put
away their wives was, that they might take others whom they liked
better; but our Lord here declares that they could not be remarried
while the divorced person was alive, and that those who did marry,
during the life of the divorced, were adulterers; and heavy judgments
were, denounced, in their law, against such: and as the question was not
settled by the schools of Shammai and Hillel, so as to ground national
practice on it therefore they were obliged to abide by the positive
declaration of the law, as it was popularly understood, till these
eminent schools had proved the word had another meaning. The grand
subject of dispute between the two schools, mentioned above, was the
word in [Deu 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001.md), When a man hath
taken a wife - and she find no grace in his sight, because of some
Uncleanness, ערות eruath: - this the school of Shammai held to mean
whoredom or adultery; but the school of Hillel maintained that it
signified any corporeal defect, which rendered the person deformed, or
any bad temper which made the husband's life uncomfortable. Any of the
latter a good man might bear with; but it appears that Moses permitted
the offended husband to put away the wife on these accounts, merely to
save her from cruel usage.

In this discourse, our Lord shows that marriage, (except in one case),
is indissoluble, and should be so: -

1st, By Divine institution, [Mat 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004.md).

2dly, By express commandment, [Mat
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005.md).

3dly, Because the married couple become one and the same person, [Mat
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006.md).

4thly, By the example of the first pair, [Mat
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008.md); and

5thly, Because of the evil consequent on separation, [Mat
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#009.md). The importance of this subject
will, I hope, vindicate or excuse, the length of these notes.

[Matthew 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 19:10</span></span>

If the case of the man - Του ανθρωπου, of a husband, so I think the word
should be translated here. The Codex Bezae, Armenian, and most of the
Itala, have του ανδρος, which, perhaps, more properly signifies a
husband, though both words are used in this sense.

Our word husband comes from the Anglo-Saxon, hus and band: the bond of
the house, anciently spelt housebond, - so in my old MS. Bible. It is a
lamentable case when the husband, instead of being the bond and union of
the family, scatters and ruins it by dissipation, riot, and excess.

It is not good to marry - That is, if a man have not the liberty to put
away his wife when she is displeasing to him. God had said, [Gen
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#018.md), It is not good for man to be
alone, i.e. unmarried. The disciples seem to say, that if the husband
have not the power to divorce his wife when she is displeasing to him,
it is not good for him to marry. Here was a flat contradiction to the
decision of the Creator. There are difficulties and trials in all
states; but let marriage and celibacy be weighed fairly, and I am
persuaded the former will be found to have fewer than the latter.
However, before we enter into an engagement which nothing but death can
dissolve, we had need to act cautiously, carefully consulting the will
and word of God. Where an unbridled passion, or a base love of money,
lead the way, marriage is sure to be miserable.

[Matthew 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 19:11</span></span>

All - cannot receive this saying - A very wise answer, and well suited
to the present circumstances of the disciples. Neither of the states is
condemned. If thou marry, thou dost well - this is according to the
order, will, and commandment of God. But if thou do not marry, (because
of the present necessity, persecution, worldly embarrassments, or bodily
infirmity), thou dost better. See [Co1
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025.md).

[Matthew 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 19:12</span></span>

Eunuchs - Ευνουχος, from ευνην εχειν, to have the care of the bed or
bedchamber; this being the principal employment of eunuchs in the
eastern countries, particularly in the apartments of queens and
princesses. These are they whom our Lord says are made eunuchs by men,
merely for the above purpose.

So born from their mother's womb - Such as are naturally incapable of
marriage, and consequently should not contract any.

For the kingdom of heaven's sake - I believe our Lord here alludes to
the case of the Essenes, one of the most holy and pure sects among the
Jews. These abstained from all commerce with women, hoping thereby to
acquire a greater degree of purity, and be better fitted for the kingdom
of God: children they had none of their own, but constantly adopted
those of poor people, and brought them up in their own way. Philo,
Josephus, and Pliny have largely described this very singular sect; and
Dean Prideaux, with his usual fidelity and perspicuity, has given the
substance of what each has said. Connex. vol. iii. p. 483, etc.; edit.
1725. The account is very interesting, and well worthy the attention of
every Christian. Among the rabbins we find these different kinds of
eunuchs, not only mentioned, but circumstantially described, סריס חמה
saris chama, eunuchs of the sun, i.e. eunuchs by the hand of God; men
born impotent. סריס אדם saris Adam, eunuchs of men, those who were
castrated. And they add a third sort; those who make themselves eunuchs,
abstain from marriage, etc., that they may give themselves Up to the
study of the Divine law. See many examples in Schoettgen.

He that is able to receive - Χωρειν χωρειτω. These words are variously
translated: he who can take; let him take it; comprehend, let him
comprehend it: admit, let him admit it. The meaning seems to be, Let the
man who feels himself capable of embracing this way of life, embrace it;
but none can do it but he to whom it is given, who has it as a gift from
his mother's womb.

The great Origen, understanding the latter clause of this verse (which I
have applied to the Essenes) literally - O human weakness! - went, and
literally fulfilled it on himself!

[Matthew 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 19:13</span></span>

Then were there brought unto him little children - These are termed by
Luke, [Luk 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015.md), τα βρεφη, infants,
very young children; and it was on this account, probably, that the
disciples rebuked the parents, thinking them too young to receive good.
See on [Mar 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#016) (note.md).

That he should put his hands - It was a common custom among the Jews to
lay their hands on the heads of those whom they blessed, or for whom
they prayed. This seems to have been done by way of dedication or
consecration to God - the person being considered as the sacred property
of God ever after. Often God added a testimony of his approbation, by
communicating some extraordinary influence of the Holy Spirit. This rite
has been long practised among Christians, when persons are appointed to
any sacred office. But this consecration of children to God seems to
have grown out of use. It is no wonder that the great mass of children
are so wicked, when so few, are put under the care of Christ by humble,
praying, believing parents. Let every parent that fears God bring up his
children in that fear; and, by baptism, let each be dedicated to the
holy trinity. Whatever is solemnly consecrated to God abides under his
protection and blessing.

[Matthew 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 19:14</span></span>

Of such is the kingdom of heaven - Or, the kingdom of heaven is composed
of such. This appears to be the best sense of the passage, and utterly
ruins the whole inhuman diabolic system of what is called non-elect
infants' damnation; a doctrine which must have sprung from Moloch, and
can only be defended by a heart in which he dwells. A great part of
God's kingdom is composed of such literally; and those only who resemble
little children shall be received into it: see on [Mat
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003) (note.md). Christ loves little
children because he loves simplicity and innocence; he has sanctified
their very age by passing through it himself - the holy Jesus was once a
little child.

[Matthew 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 19:15</span></span>

He - departed thence - That is, from that part of Judea which was beyond
Jordan, [Mat 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001.md); and then went to
Jericho. See [Mat 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029.md).

[Matthew 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 19:16</span></span>

One came - Instead of εις one, several MSS., the Slavonic version, and
Hilary, read νεανισκος τις, a certain young man.

Good, etc. - Much instruction may be had from seriously attending to the
conduct, spirit, and question of this person.

1\. He came running, ([Mar 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017).md), for
he was deeply convinced of the importance of his business, and seriously
determined to seek so as to find.

2\. He kneeled, or caught him by the knees, thus evidencing his
humility, and addressing himself only to mercy. See [Mat
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014.md).

3\. He came in the spirit of a disciple, or scholar, desiring to be
taught a matter of the utmost importance to him - Good teacher.

4\. He came in the spirit of obedience; he had worked hard to no
purpose, and he is still willing to work, provided he can have a
prospect of succeeding - What good thing shall I do?

5\. His question was the most interesting and important that any soul
can ask of God - How shall I be saved?

[Matthew 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 19:17</span></span>

Why callest thou me good? - Or, Why dost thou question me concerning
that good thing? τι με ερωτας περι του αγαθου. This important reading is
found in BDL, three others, the Coptic, Sahidic, Armenian, Ethiopic,
latter Syriac, Vulgate, Saxon, all the Itala but one, Origen, Eusebius,
Cyril, Dionysius Areop., Antiochus, Novatian, Jerome, Augustin, and
Juvencus. Erasmus, Grotius, Mill, and Bengel approve of this reading.
This authority appears so decisive to Griesbach that he has received
this reading into the text of his second edition, which in the first he
had interlined. And instead of, None is good but the one God, he goes on
to read, on nearly the same respectable authorities, εις εϚιν ο αγαθος.
There is one who is good. Let it be observed also that, in the 16th
verse, instead of διδασκαλε αγαθε, good teacher, διδασκαλε only is read
by BDL, one other, one Evangelistarium, the Ethiopic, three of the
Itala, Origen, and Hilary. The whole passage therefore may be read thus:
O teacher! what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life? And
he said unto him, Why dost thou question me concerning that good thing?
There is one that is good. (Or he who is good is one). But If thou art
willing to enter into that life, keep the commandments. This passage, as
it stood in the common editions, has been considered by some writers as
an incontrovertible proof against the Divinity or Godhead of Christ. A
very learned person, in his note on this place, thus concludes
concerning it: "Therefore our Savior cannot be God: and the notion of, I
know not what, a trinity in unity, Three Gods in One, is here proved
beyond all controversy, by the unequivocal declaration of Jesus Christ
Himself, to be Erroneous and Impossible." Not so. One of the greatest
critics in Europe, not at all partial to the Godhead of Christ, has
admitted the above readings into his text, on evidence which he judged
to be unexceptionable. If they be the true readings, they destroy the
whole doctrine built on this text; and indeed the utmost that the
enemies of the trinitarian doctrine can now expect from their formidable
opponents, concerning this text, is to leave it neuter.

Keep the commandments - From this we may learn that God's great design,
in giving his law to the Jews, was to lead them to the expectation and
enjoyment of eternal life. But as all the law referred to Christ, and he
became the end of the law for righteousness (justification) to all that
believe, so he is to be received, in order to have the end accomplished
which the law proposed.

[Matthew 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 19:18</span></span>

Thou shalt do no murder, etc. - But some say these commandments are not
binding on us. Vain, deceived men! Can a murderer, an adulterer, a
thief, and a liar enter into eternal life? No. The God of purity and
justice has forbidden it. But we are not to keep these commandments in
order to purchase eternal life. Right. Neither Jesus Christ, nor his
genuine messengers, say you are. To save your souls, Christ must save
you from your sins, and enable you to walk before him in newness of
life.

[Matthew 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 19:19</span></span>

Honour thy father and thy mother - σου thy, is omitted by almost every
MS. of respectability.

Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself - Self-love, as it is generally
called, has been grievously declaimed against, even by religious people,
as a most pernicious and dreadful evil. But they have not understood the
subject on which they spoke. They have denominated that intense
propensity which unregenerate men feel to gratify their carnal appetites
and vicious passions, self-love; whereas it might be more properly
termed self-hatred or self-murder. If I am to love my neighbor as myself
and this "love worketh no ill to its neighbor," then self-love, in the
sense in which our Lord uses it, is something excellent. It is properly
a disposition essential to our nature, and inseparable from our being,
by which we desire to be happy, by which we seek the happiness we have
not, and rejoice in it when we possess it. In a word, it is a uniform
wish of the soul to avoid all evil, and to enjoy all good. Therefore, he
who is wholly governed by self-love, properly and Scripturally speaking,
will devote his whole soul to God, and earnestly and constantly seek all
his peace, happiness, and salvation in the enjoyment of God. But
self-love cannot make me happy. I am only the subject which receives the
happiness, but am not the object that constitutes this happiness; for it
is that object, properly speaking, that I love, and love not only for
its own sake, but also for the sake of the happiness which I enjoy
through it. "No man," saith the apostle, "ever hated his own flesh." But
he that sinneth against God wrongeth his own soul, both of present and
eternal salvation, and is so far from being governed by self-love that
he is the implacable enemy of his best and dearest interests in both
worlds.

[Matthew 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 19:20</span></span>

All these have I kept - I have made these precepts the rule of my life.
There is a difference worthy of notice between this and our Lord's word.
He says, [Mat 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017.md), τηρησον, keep,
earnestly, diligently, as with watch and ward; probably referring not
only to the letter but to the spirit. The young man modestly says, all
these (εφυλαξα) have I observed; I have paid attention to, and
endeavored to regulate my conduct by them. I have kept them in custody.

From my youth - Several MSS., versions, and fathers, leave out these
words. Grotius and Mill approve of the omission, and Griesbach leaves
them in the text with a note of suspicion. Perhaps the young man meant
no more than that he had in general observed them, and considered them
of continual obligation.

What lack I yet? - He felt a troubled conscience, and a mind unassured
of the approbation of God; and he clearly perceived that something was
wanting to make him truly happy.

[Matthew 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 19:21</span></span>

If thou wilt be perfect - Τελειος ειναι, To be complete, to have the
business finished, and all hinderances to thy salvation removed, go and
sell that thou hast - go and dispose of thy possessions, to which it is
evident his heart was too much attached, and give to the poor - for thy
goods will be a continual snare to thee if thou keep them; and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven - the loss, if it can be called such,
shall be made amply up to thee in that eternal life about which thou
inquirest; and come and follow me - be my disciple, and I will appoint
thee to preach the kingdom of God to others. This was the usual call
which Christ gave to his disciples. See [Mat
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019.md); [Mat
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022.md); [Mat
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009.md); [Mar
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#014.md); and it is pretty evident, from
this, that he intended to make him a preacher of his salvation. How
many, by their attachment to filthy lucre, have lost the honor of
becoming or continuing ambassadors for the Most High! See on [Mar
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#021) (note.md).

[Matthew 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 19:22</span></span>

Went away sorrowful - Men undergo great agony of mind while they are in
suspense between the love of the world and the love of their souls. When
the first absolutely predominates, then they enjoy a factitious rest
through a false peace: when the latter has the upper hand, then they
possess true tranquillity of mind, through that peace of God that
passeth knowledge.

He had great possessions - And what were these in comparison of peace of
conscience, and mental rest? Besides, he had unequivocal proof that
these contributed nothing to his comfort, for he is now miserable even
while he possesses them! And so will every soul be, who puts worldly
goods in the place of the supreme God. See on [Mar
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#022) (note.md).

[Matthew 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 19:23</span></span>

A rich man shall hardly enter - That is, into the spirit and privileges
of the Gospel in this world, and through them into the kingdom of glory.
Earthly riches are a great obstacle to salvation; because it is almost
impossible to possess them, and not to set the heart upon them; and they
who love the world have not the love of the Father in them. [Jo1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015.md). To be rich, therefore, is in
general a great misfortune: but what rich man can be convinced of this?
It is only God himself who, by a miracle of mercy, can do this. Christ
himself affirms the difficulty of the salvation of a rich man, with an
oath, verily; but who of the rich either hears or believes him!

[Matthew 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 19:24</span></span>

A camel - Instead of καμηλον, camel, six MSS. read καμιλον, cable, a
mere gloss inserted by some who did not know that the other was a
proverb common enough among the people of the east.

There is an expression similar to this in the Koran. "The impious, who
in his arrogance shall accuse our doctrine of falsity, shall find the
gates of heaven shut: nor shall he enter there till a camel shall pass
through the eye of a needle. It is thus that we shall recompense the
wicked." Al Koran. Surat vii. ver. 37.

It was also a mode of expression common among the Jews, and signified a
thing impossible. Hence this proverb: A camel in Media dances in a cabe;
a measure which held about three pints. Again, No man sees a palm tree
of gold, nor an elephant passing through the eye of a needle. Because
these are impossible things. "Rabbi Shesheth answered Rabbi Amram, who
had advanced an absurdity, Perhaps thou art one of the Pembidithians who
can make an elephant pass through the eye of a needle; that is, says the
Aruch, 'who speak things impossible.'" See Lightfoot and Schoettgen on
this place.

Go through - But instead of διελθειν, about eighty MSS. with several
versions and fathers, have εισελθειν, to enter in; but the difference is
of little importance in an English translation, though of some
consequence to the elegance of the Greek text.

[Matthew 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 19:25</span></span>

Who can be saved? - The question of the disciples seemed to intimate
that most people were rich, and that therefore scarcely any could be
saved. They certainly must have attached a different meaning to what
constitutes a rich man, to what we in general do. Who is a rich man in
our Lord's sense of the word? This is a very important question, and has
not, that I know of, been explicitly answered. A rich man, in my
opinion, is not one who has so many hundreds or thousands more than some
of his neighbors; but is one who gets more than is necessary to supply
all his own wants, and those of his household, and keeps the residue
still to himself, though the poor are starving through lack of the
necessaries of life. In a word, he is a man who gets all he can, saves
all he can, and keeps all he has gotten. Speak, reason! Speak,
conscience! (for God has already spoken) Can such a person enter into
the kingdom of God? All, No!!!

[Matthew 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 19:26</span></span>

With men this is impossible - God alone can take the love of the world
out of the human heart. Therefore the salvation of the rich is
represented as possible only to him: and indeed the words seem to
intimate, that it requires more than common exertions of Omnipotence to
save a rich man.

[Matthew 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 19:27</span></span>

We have forsaken all - "A poor all," says one, "a parcel of rotten
nets." No matter - they were their All, whether rotten or sound;
besides, they were the all they got their bread by; and such an all as
was quite sufficient for that purpose: and let it be observed, that that
man forsakes much who reserves nothing to himself, and renounces all
expectations from this world, taking God alone for his portion. See [Mat
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#020.md).

To forsake all, without following Christ, is the virtue of a
philosopher. To follow Christ in profession, without forsaking all, is
the state of the generality of Christians. But to follow Christ and
forsake all, is the perfection of a Christian.

What shall we have therefore? - Τι αρα εϚαι ημιν, What Reward shall we
get? This Kypke proves to be the meaning of the words from some of the
best Greek writers.

[Matthew 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 19:28</span></span>

Ye which have followed me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, etc. - The punctuation which I
have observed here, is that which is followed by the most eminent
critics: the regeneration is thus referred to the time when Jesus shall
sit on the throne of his glory, and not to the time of following him,
which is utterly improper.

The regeneration, παλιγγενεσια. Some refer this to the time in which the
new heavens and the new earth shall be created, and the soul and body
united. The Pythagoreans termed that παλιγγενεσια, when, according to
their doctrine of the transmigration or metempsychosis, the soul entered
into a new body, and got into a new state of being. Clement, in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, calls the restoration of the world, after
the deluge, by the same name.

Judging the twelve tribes - From the parallel place, [Luk
22:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#028.md), it is evident that sitting
on thrones, and judging the twelve tribes, means simply obtaining
eternal salvation, and the distinguishing privileges of the kingdom of
glory, by those who continued faithful to Christ in his sufferings and
death.

Judging, κρινοντες. Kypke has shown that κρινεσθαι is to be understood
in the sense of governing, presiding, holding the first or most
distinguished place. Thus, [Gen 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#016.md),
Dan shall Judge his people, i.e. shall preside in, or rule over them;
shall occupy a chief place among the tribes. It is well known that the
Judges among the Jews were moderators, captains, chief, or head men. The
sense therefore of our Lord's words appears to be, that these disciples
should have those distinguished seats in glory which seem to belong
peculiarly to the first confessors and martyrs. See [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014.md), [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md), and particularly [Rev
20:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004.md).

The last-quoted passage brings into view the doctrine of the Millennium,
when Jesus, after having formed the new heavens and the new earth, shall
reign here gloriously among his ancients 365,000 years; for the thousand
years referred to above are certainly prophetical years, in which, it is
well known, each day stands for a year.

Others, of no mean note, are of opinion that the regeneration means the
conversion of men by the preaching of the Gospel - that sitting on
twelve thrones signifies the state of eminent dignity to which the
apostles should be raised - and that judging the twelve tribes of
Israel, means no more than exercising authority in the Church, and
dispensing laws to the people of God. But I confess I do not see the
propriety of this application of the terms, as the following verse seems
to fix the meaning mentioned above.

[Matthew 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 19:29</span></span>

Shall receive a hundredfold - Viz. in this life, in value, though
perhaps not in kind; and in the world to come everlasting life. A
glorious portion for a persevering believer! The fullness of Grace here,
and the fullness of Glory hereafter! See on [Mar
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030) (note.md).

[Matthew 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 19:30</span></span>

But many that are first, etc. - The Jews, who have been the first and
most distinguished people of God, will in general reject the Gospel of
my grace, and be consequently rejected by me. The Gentiles, who have had
no name among the living, shall be brought to the knowledge of the
truth, and become the first, the chief, and most exalted people of God.
That this prediction of our Lord has been literally fulfilled, the
present state of the Christian and Jewish Churches sufficiently proves.
To illustrate this fully, and to demonstrate that the Jews and Gentiles
were now put on an equal footing by the Gospel, our Lord speaks the
following parable, which has been unhappily divided from its connection
by making it the beginning of a new chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 20](mat020.md)

</div>
