<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat014)  [Next](mat016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001.md)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 15:0</span></span>

The Pharisees accuse the disciples of eating with unwashed hands, [Mat
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001.md), [Mat
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002.md). Our Lord answers, and convicts
them of gross hypocrisy, [Mat 15:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003.md).
Teaches the people and the disciples what it is that renders men
unclean, [Mat 15:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010.md). Heals the
daughter of a Canaanitish woman, [Mat
15:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021.md). Heals many diseased people
on a mountain of Galilee, [Mat
15:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#029.md). With seven loaves, and a few
little fishes, he feeds 4,000 men, besides women and children, [Mat
15:32-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#032.md). Having dismissed the
multitudes, he comes to the coast of Magdala, [Mat
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#039.md).

[Matthew 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 15:1</span></span>

The scribes and Pharisees - of Jerusalem - Our Lord was now in Galilee,
[Mat 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034.md).

[Matthew 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 15:2</span></span>

Elders - Rulers and magistrates among the Jews. For they wash not their
hands - What frivolous nonsense! These Pharisees had nothing which their
malice could fasten on in the conduct or doctrine of our blessed Lord
and his disciples, and therefore they must dispute about washing of
hands! All sorts of Pharisees are troublesome people in religious
society; and the reason is, they take more pleasure in blaming others
than in amending themselves.

The tradition of the elders - The word παραδοσις, tradition, has
occupied a most distinguished place, both in the Jewish and Christian
Church. Man is ever fond of mending the work of his Maker; and hence he
has been led to put his finishing hand even to Divine revelation! This
supplementary matter has been called παραδοσις, from παραδιδομαι, to
deliver from hand to hand - to transmit; and hence the Latin term,
tradition, from trado, to deliver, especially from one to another; - to
hand down. Among the Jews Tradition signifies what is also called the
oral law, which they distinguish from the written law: this last
contains the Mosaic precepts, as found in the Pentateuch: the former,
the traditions of the elders, i.e. traditions, or doctrines, that had
been successively handed down from Moses through every generation, but
not committed to writing. The Jews feign that, when God gave Moses the
written law, he gave him also the oral law, which is the interpretation
of the former. This law, Moses at first delivered to Aaron then to his
sons Eleazar and Ithamar; and, after these to the seventy-two elders,
who were six of the most eminent men chosen out of each of the twelve
tribes. These seventy-two, with Moses and Aaron, delivered it again to
all the heads of the people, and afterwards to the congregation at
large. They say also that, before Moses died, he delivered this oral
law, or system of traditions, to Joshua, and Joshua to the Elders which
succeeded him, They to the Prophets, and the Prophets to each other,
till it came to Jeremiah, who delivered it to Baruch his scribe, who
repeated it to Ezra, who delivered it to the men of the great synagogue,
the last of whom was Simon the Just. By Simon the Just it was delivered
to Antigonus of Socho; by him to Jose the son of Jochanan; by him to
Jose, the son of Joezer; by him to Nathan the Arbelite, and Joshua the
son of Perachiah; and by them to Judah the son of Tabbai, and Simeon,
the son of Shatah; and by them to Shemaiah and Abtalion; and by them to
Hillel; and by Hillel to Simeon his son, the same who took Christ in his
arms when brought to the temple to be presented to the Lord: by Simeon
it was delivered to Gamaliel his son, the preceptor of St. Paul, who
delivered it to Simeon his son, and he to Rab. Judah Hakkodesh his son,
who compiled and digested it into the book which is called the Mishna;
to explain which the two Talmuds, called the Jerusalem and Babylyonish
Talmuds, were compiled, which are also called the Gemera or complement,
because by these the oral law or Mishnah is fully explained. The
Jerusalem Talmud was completed about a.d. 300; and the Babylonish Talmud
about the beginning of the sixth century. This Talmud was printed at
Amsterdam in 12 vols. folio. These contain the whole of the traditions
of the elders, and have so explained, or rather frittered away, the
words of God, that our Lord might well say, Ye have made the word of God
of no effect by your traditions. In what estimation these are held by
the Jews, the following examples will prove: "The words of the scribes
are lovely beyond the words of the law: for the words of the law are
weighty and light, but the words of the scribes are all weighty."
Hierus. Berac. fol. 3.

"He that shall say, There are no phylacteries, though he thus transgress
the words of the law, he is not guilty; but he that shall say, There are
five Totaphot, thus adding to the words of the scribes, he is guilty."

"A prophet and an elder, to what are they likened! To a king sending two
of his servants into a province; of one he writes thus: Unless he show
you my seal, believe him not; for thus it is written of the prophet: He
shall show thee a sign; but of the elders thus: According to the law
which they shall teach thee, for I will confirm their words." - See
Prideaux. Con. vol. ii. p. 465, and Lightfoot's Hor. Talmud.

They wash not their hands - On washing of hands, before and after meat,
the Jews laid great stress: they considered eating with unwashed hands
to be no ordinary crime; and therefore, to induce men to do it, they
feigned that an evil spirit, called Shibta שיבתא, who sits on the hands
by night, has a right to sit on the food of him who eats without washing
his hands, and make it hurtful to him! They consider the person who
undervalues this rite to be no better than a heathen, and consequently
excommunicate him. See many examples of this doctrine in Schoettgen and
Lightfoot.

[Matthew 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 15:3</span></span>

Why do ye - transgress the commandment - Ye accuse my disciples of
transgressing the traditions of the elders - I accuse you of
transgressing the commands of God, and that too in favor of your own
tradition; thus preferring the inventions of men to the positive
precepts of God. Pretenders to zeal often prefer superstitious usages to
the Divine law, and human inventions to the positive duties of
Christianity.

[Matthew 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 15:4</span></span>

Honor thy father and mother - This word was taken in great latitude of
meaning among the Jews: it not only meant respect and submission, but
also to take care of a person, to nourish and support him, to enrich.
See [Num 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#017.md); [Jdg
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#017.md); [Ti1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017.md). And that this was the sense of
the law, as it respected parents, see [Deu
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016.md), and see the note on [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012.md).

[Matthew 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 15:5</span></span>

It is a gift - קרבן korban, [Mar 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#011.md),
an offering of approach; something consecrated to the service of God in
the temple, by which a man had the privilege of approaching his Maker.
This conduct was similar to the custom of certain persons who bequeath
the inheritance of their children to Churches or religious uses; either
through terror of conscience, thus striving to purchase the kingdom of
glory; or through the persuasion of interested hireling priests. It was
in this way that, in the days of popish influence, the principal lands
in the nation had fallen into the hands of the Church. In those
charters, multitudes of which have passed through my hands, a common
form was, pro salute meae, et pro salute antecessorum meorum, et pro
salute successorum meorum, et pro solute uxoris meae, etc., etc., do, et
concedo Deo et Ecclesiae, etc. "For my salvation, and for the salvation
of my predecessors, and for the salvation of my successors, and for the
salvation of my wife, etc., etc., I give and bequeath to God and his
Church, etc."

Though a world of literature was destroyed, and fine buildings ruined,
by the suppression of the monasteries in England, yet this step, with
the Stat. 23 Hen. VIII. c. 10, together with the Stat. 9 Geo. II. c. 36,
were the means of checking an evil that had arrived at a pitch of
unparalleled magnitude; an evil that was supplanting the atonement made
by the blood of the covenant, and putting death-bed grants of land,
etc., in the place of Jesus Christ, and throwing the whole secular power
of the kingdom into the hands of the pope and the priests. No wonder
then that they cried out, when the monasteries were suppressed! It is
sacrilege to dedicate that to God which is taken away from the
necessities of our parents and children; and the good that this pretends
to will doubtless be found in the catalogue of that unnatural man's
crimes, in the judgment of the great day, who has thus deprived his own
family of its due. To assist our poor relatives, is our first duty; and
this is a work infinitely preferable to all pious legacies and
endowments.

[Matthew 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 15:7</span></span>

Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy of you - In every place where the
proper names of the Old Testament occur, in the New, the same mode of
orthography should be followed: I therefore write Isaiah with the
Hebrew, not Esaias, with the Greek. This prophecy is found [Isa
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013.md). Our blessed Lord unmasks these
hypocrites; and we may observe that, when a hypocrite is found out, he
should be exposed to all; this may lead to his salvation: if he be
permitted to retain his falsely acquired character, how can he escape
perdition!

[Matthew 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 15:8</span></span>

Their heart is far from me - The true worship of God consists in the
union of the heart to him - where this exists not, a particle of the
spirit of devotion cannot be found.

This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth - This clause, which
is taken from [Isa 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013.md), is omitted
by several excellent MSS., and by several versions and fathers. Erasmus,
Mill, Drusius, and Bengel, approve of the omission, and Griesbach has
left it out of the text; but as I find it in the prophet, the place from
which it is quoted, I dare not omit it, howsoever respectable the above
authorities may appear.

[Matthew 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 15:9</span></span>

In vain they do worship me, etc. - By the traditions of the elders, not
only the word of God was perverted, but his worship also was greatly
corrupted. But the Jews were not the only people who have acted thus:
whole Christian Churches, as well as sects and parties, have acted in
the same way. Men must not mould the worship of God according to their
fancy - it is not what they think will do - is proper, innocent, etc.,
but what God himself has prescribed, that he will acknowledge as his
worship. However sincere a man may be in a worship of his own invention,
or of man's commandment, yet it profits him nothing. Christ himself says
it is in vain. To condemn such, may appear to some illiberal; but
whatever may be said in behalf of sincere heathens, and others who have
not had the advantages of Divine Revelation, there is no excuse for the
man who has the Bible before him.

[Matthew 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 15:10</span></span>

Hear and understand - A most important command. Hear - make it a point
of conscience to attend to the ministry of the word. Understand - be not
satisfied with attending places of public worship merely; see that the
teaching be of God, and that you lay it to heart.

[Matthew 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 15:11</span></span>

Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth - This is an answer to the
carping question of the Pharisees, mentioned [Mat
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#002.md), Why do thy disciples eat with
unwashed hands? To which our Lord here replies, That what goes into the
mouth defiles not the man; i.e. that if, in eating with unwashed hands,
any particles of dust, etc., cleaving to the hands, might happen to be
taken into the mouth with the food, this did not defile, did not
constitute a man a sinner; for it is on this alone the question hinges:
thy disciples eat with unwashed hands; therefore they are sinners; for
they transgress the tradition of the elders, i.e. the oral law, which
they considered equal in authority to the written law; and, indeed,
often preferred the former to the latter, so as to make it of none
effect, totally to destroy its nature and design, as we have often seen
in the preceding notes.

That which cometh out of the mouth - That is, what springs from a
corrupt unregenerate heart - a perverse will and impure passions - these
defile, i.e. make him a sinner.

[Matthew 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 15:12</span></span>

The Pharisees were offended - None so liable to take offense as
formalists and hypocrites, when you attempt to take away the false props
from the one, and question the sincerity of the other. Besides, a
Pharisee must never be suspected of ignorance, for they are the men, and
wisdom must die with them!

[Matthew 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 15:13</span></span>

Every plant - Every plantation. So I render φυτεια, and so it is
translated in the Itala version which accompanies the Greek text in the
Codex Bezae, omnis plantatio, and so the word is rendered by Suidas.
This gives a different turn to the text. The Pharisees, as a religious
body, were now a plantation of trees, which God did not plant, water,
nor own: therefore, they should be rooted up, not left to wither and
die, but the fellers, and those who root up, (the Roman armies), should
come against and destroy them, and the Christian Church was to be
planted in their place. Since the general dispersion of the Jews, this
sect, I believe, has ceased to exist as a separate body, among the
descendants of Jacob. The first of the apostolical constitutions begins
thus: Θεου φυτεια η καθολικη εκκλησια, και αμπελων αυτου εκλεκτος. The
Catholic Church is the plantation of God, and his chosen vineyard.

[Matthew 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 15:14</span></span>

Let them alone - Αφετε αυτους, give them up, or leave them. These words
have been sadly misunderstood. Some have quoted them to prove that blind
and deceitful teachers should not be pointed out to the people, nor the
people warned against them; and that men should abide in the communion
of a corrupt Church, because that Church had once been the Church of
God, and in it they had been brought up; and to prove this they bring
Scripture, for, in our present translation, the words are rendered, let
them alone: but the whole connection of the place evidently proves that
our blessed Lord meant, give them up, have no kind of religious
connection with them, and the strong reason for which he immediately
adds, because they are blind leaders. This passage does not at all mean
that blind leaders should not be pointed out to the people, that they
may avoid being deceived by them; for this our Lord does frequently, and
warns his disciples, and the people in general, against all such false
teachers as the scribes and Pharisees were; and though he bids men do
that they heard those say, while they sat in the chair of Moses, yet he
certainly meant no more than that they should be observant of the moral
law when read to them out of the sacred book: yet neither does he tell
them to do all these false teachers said; for he testifies in [Mat
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#006.md), that they had put such false
glosses on the law, that, if followed, would endanger the salvation of
their souls. The Codex Bezae, for αφετε αυτους, has αφετε τους τυφλους,
give up these blind men. Amen! A literal attention to these words of our
Lord produced the Reformation.

Probably the words may be understood as a sort of proverbial expression
for - Don't mind them: pay no regard to them. - "They are altogether
unworthy of notice."

And if the blind lead the blind - This was so self-evident a case that
an apter parallel could not be found - if the blind lead the blind, both
must fall into the ditch. Alas, for the blind teachers, who not only
destroy their own souls, but those also of their flocks! Like priest,
like people. If the minister be ignorant, he cannot teach what he does
not know; and the people cannot become wise unto salvation under such a
ministry - he is ignorant and wicked, and they are profligate. They who
even wish such God speed; are partakers of their evil deeds. But shall
not the poor deceived people escape? No: both shall fall into the pit of
perdition together; for they should have searched the Scriptures, and
not trusted to the ignorant sayings of corrupt men, no matter of what
sect or party. He who has the Bible in his hand, or within his reach,
and can read it, has no excuse.

[Matthew 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 15:15</span></span>

Declare unto us this parable - Is it not strange to hear the disciples
asking for the explanation of such a parable as this! The true knowledge
of the spirit of the Gospel is a thing more uncommon than we imagine,
among the generality of Christians, and even of the learned.

[Matthew 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 15:16</span></span>

Are ye also yet without understanding? - The word ακμη, which we
translate yet, should be here rendered still: Are ye still void of
understanding? and the word is used in this sense by several Greek
writers. The authorities which have induced me to prefer this
translation may be seen in Kypke.

[Matthew 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 15:17</span></span>

Cast out into the draught - Εις αφεδωνα, - And beeth into the forthgoing
a sent - what is not fit for nourishment is evacuated; is thrown into
the sink. This I believe to be the meaning of this difficult and
variously translated word, αφεδρων. Diodati translates it properly,
nella latrina, into the privy. And the Persian translator has given a
good paraphrase, and appears to have collected the general meaning her
teche der dehen ander ayeed, az nusheeb beeroon rood, we ber zemeen
aftad: "Whatsoever enters into the mouth goes downward, and falls upon
the ground." Michaelis, and his annotator, Dr. Marsh, have been much
perplexed with this perplexing passage. See Michaelis's Introduction,
vol. i. note 35. p. 458.

[Matthew 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 15:19</span></span>

Out of the heart - In the heart of an unregenerate man, the principles
and seeds of all sin are found. And iniquity is always conceived in the
heart before it be spoken or acted. Is there any hope that a man can
abstain from outward sin till his heart, that abominable fountain of
corruption, be thoroughly cleansed? I trow not.

Evil thoughts - Διαλογισμοι πονηροι, wicked dialogues - for in all evil
surmisings the heart holds a conversation, or dialogue, with itself. For
φονοι, murders, two MSS. have φθονοι, envyings, and three others have
both. Envy and murder are nearly allied: the former has often led to the
latter.

Blasphemies - I have already observed, [Mat
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003.md), that the verb βλασφημεω, when
applied to men, signifies to speak Injuriously of their persons,
characters, etc., and, when applied to God, it means to speak Impiously
of his nature, works, etc.

[Matthew 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 15:20</span></span>

These - defile a man - Our Lord's argument is very plain. What goes into
the mouth descends into the stomach and other intestines; - part is
retained for the nourishment of the body, and part is ejected, as being
improper to afford nourishment. Nothing of this kind defiles the soul,
because it does not enter into it; but the evil principles that are in
it, producing evil thoughts, murders, etc., these defile the soul,
because they have their seat and operation in it.

[Matthew 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 15:21</span></span>

Departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon - Εις τα μερη, towards the
coasts or confines. It is not clear that our Lord ever left the land of
the Hebrews; he was, as the apostle observes, [Rom
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008.md), the minister of the circumcision
according to the truth of God. Tyre and Sidon are usually joined
together, principally because they are but a few miles distant from each
other.

[Matthew 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 15:22</span></span>

A woman of Canaan - Matthew gives her this name because of the people
from whom she sprung - the descendants of Canaan, [Jdg
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#031.md), [Jdg
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#032.md); but Mark calls her a
Syrophenician, because of the country where she dwelt. The Canaanites
and Phoenicians have been often confounded. This is frequently the case
in the Septuagint. Compare [Gen 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010.md),
with [Exo 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#015.md), where the same person
is called a Phoenician in the one place, and a Canaanite in the other.
See also the same version in [Exo
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035.md); [Jos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012.md).

The state of this woman is a proper emblem of the state of a sinner,
deeply conscious of the misery of his soul.

Have mercy on me, etc. - How proper is this prayer for a penitent! There
are many excellencies contained in it;

1\. It is short;

2\. humble;

3\. full of faith;

4\. fervent;

5\. modest;

6\. respectful;

7\. rational;

8\. relying only on the mercy of God;

9\. persevering.

Can one who sees himself a slave of the devil, beg with too much
earnestness to be delivered from his thraldom?

Son of David - An essential character of the true Messiah.

[Matthew 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 15:23</span></span>

He answered her not a word - Seemed to take time to consider her
request, and to give her the opportunity of exercising her faith, and
manifesting her fervor.

[Matthew 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 15:24</span></span>

I am not sent but unto the lost sheep - By the Divine appointment, I am
come to preach the Gospel to the Jews only. There are certain preachers
who should learn a lesson of important instruction from this part of our
Lord's conduct. As soon as they hear of a lost sheep being found by
other ministers, they give all diligence to get that one into their
fold: but display little earnestness in seeking in the wilderness for
those that are lost. This conduct, perhaps, proceeds from a
consciousness of their inability to perform the work of an evangelist;
and leads them to sit down in the labors of others, rather than submit
to the reproach of presiding over empty chapels. Such persons should
either dig or beg immediately, as they are a reproach to the pastoral
office; for, not being sent of God, they cannot profit the people.

The wilderness of this world is sufficiently wide and uncultivated.
Sinners abound every where; and there is ample room for all truly
religious people, who have zeal for God, and love for their perishing
follow creatures, to put forth all their strength, employ all their
time, and exercise all their talents, in proclaiming the Gospel of God;
not only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, but to a lost World.
Nor can such exertions be unsuccessful. There the pure truth of God is
preached, many will be converted. Where that truth is preached, though
with a mixture of error, some will be converted, for God will bless his
own truth. But where nothing but false doctrine is preached, no soul is
converted: for God will never sanction error by a miracle of his mercy.

[Matthew 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 15:25</span></span>

Lord, help me - Let me also share in the deliverance afforded to Israel.

[Matthew 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 15:26</span></span>

The children's bread - The salvation provided for the Jews, who were
termed the children of the kingdom. And cast it to the κυναριοις, little
dogs - to the curs; such the Gentiles were reputed by the Jewish people,
and our Lord uses that form of speech which was common among his
countrymen. What terrible repulses! and yet she still perseveres!

[Matthew 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 15:27</span></span>

Truth, Lord - Ναι κυριε, Yes, Lord. This appears to be not so much an
assent, as a bold reply to our Lord's reason for apparently rejecting
her suit.

The little dogs share with the children, for they eat the crumbs which
fall from their masters' table. I do not desire what is provided for
these highly favored children, only what they leave: a single exertion
of thy almighty power, in the healing of my afflicted daughter, is all
that I wish for; and this the highly favored Jews can well spare,
without lessening the provision made for themselves. Is not this the
sense of this noble woman's reply?

[Matthew 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 15:28</span></span>

O woman, great is thy faith - The hinderances thrown in this woman's way
only tended to increase her faith. Her faith resembles a river, which
becomes enlarged by the dykes opposed to it, till at last it sweeps them
entirely away with it.

Her daughter was made whole - Persevering faith and prayer are next to
omnipotent. No person can thus pray and believe, without receiving all
his soul requires. This is one of the finest lessons in the book of God
for a penitent, or for a discouraged believer. Look to Jesus! As sure as
God is in heaven, so surely will he hear and answer thee to the eternal
salvation of thy soul! Be not discouraged at a little delay: when thou
art properly prepared to receive the blessing, then thou shalt have it.
Look up; thy salvation is at hand. Jesus admires this faith, to the end
that we may admire and imitate it, and may reap the same fruits and
advantages from it.

[Matthew 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 15:29</span></span>

Went up into a mountain - Το ορος, The mountain. "Meaning," says
Wakefield, "some particular mountain which he was accustomed to
frequent; for, whenever it is spoken of at a time when Jesus is in
Galilee, it is always discriminated by the article. Compare [Mat
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018.md), with [Mat
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001.md); and [Mat
13:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#054.md), with [Mat
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023.md); and [Mat
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#016.md). I suppose it was mount Tabor."

[Matthew 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 15:30</span></span>

Those that were - maimed - Κυλλους. Wetstein has fully proved that those
who had lost a hand, foot, etc., were termed κυλλοι by the Greeks. Kypke
has shown, from Hippocrates, that the word was also used to signify
those who had distorted or dislocated legs, knees, hands, etc. Mr.
Wakefield is fully of opinion that it means here those who had lost a
limb, and brings an incontestable proof from [Mat
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008.md); [Mar
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043.md). "If thy hand cause thee to
offend, Cut It Off; it is better for thee to enter into life (κυλλον)
Without A Limb, than, having thy Two hands, to go away into hell." What
an astonishing manifestation of omnific and creative energy must the
reproduction of a hand, foot, etc., be at the word or touch of Jesus! As
this was a mere act of creative power, like that of multiplying the
bread, those who allow that the above is the meaning of the word will
hardly attempt to doubt the proper Divinity of Christ. Creation, in any
sense of the word, i.e. causing something to exist that had no existence
before, can belong only to God, because it is an effect of an unlimited
power; to say that such power could be delegated to a person is to say
that the person to whom it is delegated becomes, for the time being, the
omnipotent God; and that God, who has thus clothed a creature with his
omnipotence, ceases to be omnipotent himself; for there cannot be two
omnipotents, nor can the Supreme Being delegate his omnipotence to
another, and have it at the same time. I confess, then, that this is to
me an unanswerable argument for the Divinity of our blessed Lord. Others
may doubt; I can't help believing.

[Matthew 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 15:31</span></span>

The multitude wondered - And well they might, when they had such proofs
of the miraculous power and love of God before their eyes. Blessed be
God! the same miracles are continued in their spiritual reference. All
the disorders of the soul are still cured by the power of Jesus.

[Matthew 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 15:32</span></span>

I have compassion, etc. - See a similar transaction explained, [Mat
14:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#014) (note.md).

[Matthew 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 15:33</span></span>

Whence should we have so much bread in the wilderness, etc. - Human
foresight, even in the followers of Christ, is very short. In a thousand
instances, if we supply not its deficiency by faith, we shall be always
embarrassed, and often miserable. This world is a desert, where nothing
can be found to satisfy the soul of man, but the salvation which Christ
has procured.

[Matthew 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 15:37</span></span>

They did all eat, and were filled - Εχορτασθησαν - they were satisfied.
The husks of worldly pleasures may fill the man, but cannot satisfy the
soul. A man may eat, and not be satisfied: it is the interest therefore
of every follower of Christ to follow him till he be fed, and to feed on
him till he be satisfied.

[Matthew 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 15:38</span></span>

Four thousand - Let the poor learn from these miracles to trust in God
for support. Whatever his ordinary providence denies, his miraculous
power will supply.

[Matthew 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 15:39</span></span>

He sent away the multitude - But not before he had instructed their
souls, and fed and healed their bodies.

The coasts of Magdala - In the parallel place, [Mar
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#010.md), this place is called Dalmanutha.
Either Magdala was formed by a transposition of letters from Dalman, to
which the Syriac termination atha had been added, or the one of these
names refers to the country, and the other to a town in that
neighborhood. Jesus went into the country, and proceeded till he came to
the chief town or village in that district. Whitby says, "Magdala was a
city and territory beyond Jordan, on the banks of Gadara. It readied to
the bridge above Jordan, which joined it to the other side of Galilee,
and contained within its precincts Dalmanutha." The MSS. and VV. read
the name variously - Magada, Madega, Magdala; and the Syriac has Magdu.
In Mark, Dalmanutha is read by many MSS. Melagada, Madegada, Magada,
Magidan, and Magedam. Magdala, variously pronounced, seems to have been
the place or country; Dalmanutha, the chief town or capital.

In this chapter a number of interesting and instructive particulars are
contained.

1\. We see the extreme superstition, envy, and incurable ill nature of
the Jews. While totally lost to a proper sense of the spirituality of
God's law, they are ceremonious in the extreme. They will not eat
without washing their hands, because this would be a transgression of
one of the traditions of their elders; but they can harbour the worst
temper and passions, and thus break the law of God! The word of man
weighs more with them than the testimony of Jehovah; and yet they
pretend the highest respect for their God and sacred things, and will
let their parents perish for lack of the necessaries of life, that they
may have goods to vow to the service of the sanctuary! Pride and envy
blind the hearts of men, and cause them often to act not only the most
wicked, but the most ridiculous, parts. He who takes the book of God for
the rule of his faith and practice can never go astray: but to the mazes
and perplexities produced by the traditions of elders, human creeds, and
confessions of faith, there is no end. These evils existed in the
Christian as well as in the Jewish Church; but the Reformation, thank
God! has liberated us from this endless system of uncertainty and
absurdity, and the Sun of righteousness shines now unclouded! The
plantation, which God did not plant, in the course of his judgments, he
has now swept nearly away from the face of the earth! Babylon is fallen!

2\. We wonder at the dulness of the disciples, when we find that they
did not fully understand our Lord's meaning, in the very obvious parable
about the blind leading the blind. But should we not be equally struck
with their prying, inquisitive temper? They did not understand, but they
could not rest till they did. They knew that their Lord could say
nothing that had not the most important meaning in it: this meaning, in
the preceding parable, they had not apprehended, and therefore they
wished to have it farther explained by himself. Do we imitate their
docility and eagerness to comprehend the truth of God? Christ presses
every occurrence into a means of instruction. The dulness of the
disciples in the present case, has been the means of affording us the
fullest instruction on a point of the utmost importance - the state of a
sinful heart, and how the thoughts and passions conceived in it defile
and pollute it; and how necessary it is to have the fountain purified,
that it may cease to send forth those streams of death.

3\. The case of the Canaanitish woman is, in itself, a thousand sermons.
Her faith - her prayers - her perseverance - her success - the honor she
received from her Lord, etc., etc. How instructively - how powerfully do
these speak and plead! What a profusion of light does this single case
throw upon the manner in which Christ sometimes exercises the faith and
patience of his followers! They that seek shall find, is the great
lesson inculcated in this short history: God is ever the same. Reader,
follow on after God - cry, pray, plead - all in Him is for thee! - Thou
canst not perish, if thou continuest to believe and pray. The Lord will
help Thee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 16](mat016.md)

</div>
