<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat003)  [Next](mat005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001.md)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 4:0</span></span>

Jesus, in the wilderness, is tempted by Satan, [Mat
4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001.md). He goes into Galilee, [Mat
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012.md); and Capernaum, [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013.md). The prophecy which was thus
fulfilled, [Mat 4:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#014.md). He begins to
preach publicly, [Mat 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017.md). Calls
Simon Peter, and his brother Andrew, [Mat
4:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018.md). Calls also James and John,
the sons of Zebedee, [Mat 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021.md), [Mat
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#022.md). Preaches and works miracles
throughout Galilee, [Mat 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023.md). Becomes
famous in Syria, and is followed by multitudes from various quarters,
among whom he works a great variety of miracles, [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024.md), [Mat
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#025.md).

[Matthew 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 4:1</span></span>

Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit - This transaction appears to have
taken place immediately after Christ's baptism; and this bringing up of
Christ was through the influence of the Spirit of God; that Spirit which
had rested upon him in his baptism.

To be tempted - The first act of the ministry of Jesus Christ was a
combat with Satan. Does not this receive light from [Gen
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017.md). I will put enmity between the
woman's seed and thy seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt
bruise his heel.

[Matthew 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 4:2</span></span>

And when he had fasted forty days - It is remarkable that Moses, the
great lawgiver of the Jews, previously to his receiving the law from
God, fasted forty days in the mount; that Elijah, the chief of the
prophets, fasted also forty days; and that Christ, the giver of the New
Covenant, should act in the same way. Was not all this intended to show,
that God's kingdom on earth was to be spiritual and Divine? - that it
should not consist in meat and drink, but in righteousness, peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost? [Rom 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md).
Relative to the forty days' fast of Moses, there is a beautiful saying
in the Talmudists. "Is it possible that any man can fast forty days and
forty nights? To which Rabbi Meir answered, When thou takest up thy
abode in any particular city, thou must live according to its customs.
Moses ascended to heaven, where they neither eat nor drink therefore he
became assimilated to them. We are accustomed to eat and drink; and,
when angels descend to us, they eat and drink also."

Moses, Elijah, and our blessed Lord could fast forty days and forty
nights, because they were in communion with God, and living a heavenly
life.

[Matthew 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 4:3</span></span>

And when the tempter - This onset of Satan was made (speaking after the
manner of men) judiciously: he came when Jesus, after having fasted
forty days and forty nights, was hungry: now, as hunger naturally
diminishes the strength of the body, the mind gets enfeebled, and
becomes easily irritated; and if much watching and prayer be not
employed, the uneasiness which is occasioned by a lack of food may soon
produce impatience, and in this state of mind the tempter has great
advantages. The following advice of an Arabian philosopher to his son is
worthy of attention. "My son, never go out of the house in the morning,
till thou hast eaten something: by so doing, thy mind will be more firm;
and, shouldest thou be insulted by any person, thou wilt find thyself
more disposed to suffer patiently: for hunger dries up and disorders the
brain." Bibliot. Orient. Suppl. p. 449. The state of our bodily health
and worldly circumstances may afford our adversary many opportunities of
doing us immense mischief. In such cases, the sin to which we are
tempted may be justly termed, as in [Heb
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001.md), την ευπεριστατον αμαρτιαν, the
well circumstanced sin, because all the circumstances of time, place,
and state of body and mind, are favorable to it.

If thou be the Son of God - Or, a son of God, υιος του Θεου. υιος is
here, and in [Luk 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#003.md), written without
the article; and therefore should not be translated The Son, as if it
were ὁ υιος, which is a phrase that is applicable to Christ as the
Messiah: but it is certain, whatever Satan might suspect, he did not
fully know that the person he tempted was the true Messiah. Perhaps one
grand object of his temptation was to find this out.

Command that these stones - The meaning of this temptation is: "Distrust
the Divine providence and support, and make use of illicit means to
supply thy necessities."

[Matthew 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 4:4</span></span>

But by (or, upon, επι) every word - Ρημα, in Greek, answers to דבר dabar
in Hebrew, which means not only a word spoken, but also thing, purpose,
appointment, etc. Our Lord's meaning seems to be this: God purposes the
welfare of his creatures - all his appointments are calculated to
promote this end. Some of them may appear to man to have a contrary
tendency; but even fasting itself, when used in consequence of a Divine
injunction, becomes a mean of supporting that life which it seems
naturally calculated to impair or destroy.

[Matthew 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 4:5</span></span>

Pinnacle of the temple - It is very likely that this was what was called
the στοα βασιλικη, the king's gallery; which, as Josephus says,
"deserves to be mentioned among the most magnificent things under the
sun: for upon a stupendous depth of a valley, scarcely to be fathomed by
the eye of him that stands above, Herod erected a gallery of a vast
height, from the top of which if any looked down, he would grow dizzy,
his eyes not being able to reach so vast a depth." - Ant. l. xv. c. 14.
See Dr. Lightfoot on this place.

[Matthew 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 4:6</span></span>

Cast thyself down - Our Lord had repelled the first temptation by an act
of confidence in the power and goodness of God; and now Satan solicits
him to make trial of it. Through the unparalleled subtlety of Satan, the
very means we make use of to repel one temptation may he used by him as
the groundwork of another. This method he often uses, in order to
confound us in our confidence.

He shall give his angels charge, etc. - This is a mutilated quotation of
[Psa 91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011.md). The clause, to keep thee
in all thy ways, Satan chose to leave out, as quite unsuitable to his
design. That God has promised to protect and support his servants,
admits of no dispute; but, as the path of duty is the way of safety,
they are entitled to no good when they walk out of it.

In their hands they shall bear thee up - This quotation from [Psa
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011.md), is a metaphor taken from a
nurse's management of her child: in teaching it to walk, she guides it
along plain ground; but, when stones or other obstacles occur, she lifts
up the child, and carries it over them, and then sets it down to walk
again. Thus she keeps it in all its ways, watching over, and guarding
every step it takes. To this St. Paul seems also to allude, [Th1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007.md). We were gentle among you, even as
a nurse cherisheth her children. Thus the most merciful God deals with
the children of men, ever guarding them by his eye, and defending them
by his power.

[Matthew 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 4:7</span></span>

Thou shalt not tempt - To expose myself to any danger naturally
destructive, with the vain presumption that God will protect and defend
me from the ruinous consequences of my imprudent conduct, is to tempt
God.

[Matthew 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 4:8</span></span>

An exceeding high mountain, and showeth him - If the words, all the
kingdoms of the world, be taken in a literal sense, then this must have
been a visionary representation, as the highest mountain on the face of
the globe could not suffice to make evident even one hemisphere of the
earth, and the other must of necessity be in darkness.

But if we take the world to mean only the land of Judea, and some of the
surrounding nations, as it appears sometimes to signify, (see on [Luk
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001) (note).md), then the mountain
described by the Abbe Mariti (Travels through Cyprus, etc). could have
afforded the prospect in question. Speaking of it, he says, "Here we
enjoyed the most beautiful prospect imaginable. This part of the
mountain overlooks the mountains of Arabia, the country of Gilead, the
country of the Amorites, the plains of Moab, the plains of Jericho, the
river Jordan, and the whole extent of the Dead Sea. It was here that the
devil said to the Son of God, All these kingdoms will I give thee, if
thou wilt fall down and worship me." Probably St. Matthew, in the Hebrew
original, wrote הארץ haarets, which signifies the world, the earth, and
often the land of Judea only. What renders this more probable is, that
at this time Judea was divided into several kingdoms, or governments
under the three sons of Herod the Great, viz. Archelaus, Antipas, and
Philip; which are not only called ethnarchs and tetrarchs in the
Gospels, but also βασιλεις, kings, and are said βασιλευειν, to reign, as
Rosenmuller has properly remarked. See [Mat
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022.md); [Mat
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#009.md).

[Matthew 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 4:9</span></span>

If thou wilt fall down and worship me - As if he had said, "The whole of
this land is now under my government; do me homage for it, and I will
deliver it into thy hand."

[Matthew 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 4:10</span></span>

Get thee hence - Or, behind me, οπισω μου. This is added by a multitude
of the best MSS., Versions, and Fathers. This temptation savoring of
nothing but diabolical impudence, Jesus did not treat it as the others;
but, with Divine authority, commanded the tempter to return to his own
place.

In the course of this trial, it appears that our blessed Lord was
tempted,

1st. To Distrust. Command these stones to become bread.

2dly. To Presumption. Cast thyself down.

3dly. To worldly Ambition. All these will I give.

4thly. To Idolatry. Fall down and worship me, or do me homage. There is
probably not a temptation of Satan, but is reducible to one or other of
these four articles.

From the whole we may learn:

First. No man, howsoever holy, is exempted from temptation: for God
manifested to the flesh was tempted by the devil.

Secondly. That the best way to foil the adversary, is by the sword of
the Spirit, which is the word of God, [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017.md).

Thirdly. That to be tempted even to the greatest abominations (while a
person resists) is not sin: for Christ was tempted to worship the Devil.

Fourthly. That there is no temptation which is from its own nature, or
favoring circumstances, irresistible. God has promised to bruise even
Satan under our feet.

As I wish to speak what I think most necessary on every subject, when I
first meet it, and once for all, I would observe -

First, That the fear of being tempted may become a most dangerous snare.

Secondly, That when God permits a temptation or trial to come he will
give grace to bear or overcome it.

Thirdly, That our spiritual interests shall be always advanced, in
proportion to our trials and faithful resistance.

Fourthly, That a more than ordinary measure of Divine consolation shall
be the consequence of every victory.

[Matthew 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 4:11</span></span>

Behold, angels came and ministered unto him - That is, brought that food
which was necessary to support nature.

The name given to Satan in the third verse is very emphatic, ο πειραζων,
the tempter, or trier, from πειρω, to pierce through. To this import of
the name there seems to be an allusion, [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md) : The fiery Darts of the wicked
one. This is the precise idea of the word in [Deu
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002.md). To humble thee, and to prove
thee, To Know What Was In Thy Heart: לנסתך linesteca, πειραση σε, Lxx.
that he might bore thee through.

The quality and goodness of many things are proved by piercing or boring
through; for this shows what is in the heart. Perhaps nothing tends so
much to discover what we are, as trials either from men or devils.

Shalt thou serve, or pay religious veneration, λατρευσεις. This is Mr.
Wakefield's translation, and I think cannot be mended. Λατρεια comes
from λα, very much, and τρεω, I tremble. When a sinner approaches the
presence of God, conscious of His infinite holiness and justice, and of
his own vileness, he will then fully comprehend what this word means.
See this religious reverence exemplified in the case of Moses, when in
the presence of God; I exceedingly fear, said he, and tremble, [Heb
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#021.md). And yet this fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom. See the observations at the end of the chapter.

[Matthew 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 4:13</span></span>

And leaving Nazareth - Or, entirely leaving Nazareth, και καταλιπων την
Ναζαρετ, from κατα, intensive, and Δειπω, I leave. It seems that, from
this time, our blessed Lord made Capernaum his ordinary place of
residence; and utterly forsook Nazareth, because they had wholly
rejected his word, and even attempted to take away his life. See [Luk
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029.md).

Galilee was bounded by mount Lebanon on the north, by the river Jordan
and the sea of Galilee on the east, by Chison on the south, and by the
Mediterranean on the west.

Nazareth, a little city in the tribe of Zebulon, in lower Galilee, with
Tabor on the east, and Ptolemais on the west. It is supposed that this
city was the usual residence of our Lord for the first thirty years of
his life. It was here he became incarnate, lived in subjection to Joseph
and Mary, and from which he took the name of a Nazorean.

Capernaum, a city famous in the New Testament, but never mentioned in
the Old. Probably it was one of those cities which the Jews built after
their return from Babylon. It stood on the sea-coast of Galilee, on the
borders of Zabulon and Nephthalim, as mentioned in the text. This was
called his own city, [Mat 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001.md), etc.,
and here, as a citizen, he paid the half shekel, [Mat
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024.md). Among the Jews, if a man became
a resident in any city for twelve months, he thereby became a citizen,
and paid his proportion of dues and taxes. See Lightfoot. Capernaum is
well known to have been the principal scene of our Lord's miracles
during the three years of his public ministry.

Zabulon, the country of this tribe, in which Nazareth and Capernaum were
situated, bordered on the lake of Gennesareth, stretching to the
frontiers of Sidon, [Gen 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013.md).
Nephthalim was contiguous to it, and both were on the east side of
Jordan, [Jos 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#034.md).

[Matthew 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 4:15</span></span>

Galilee of the Gentiles - Or of the nations. So called, because it was
inhabited by Egyptians, Arabians, and Phoenicians, according to the
testimony of Strabo and others. The Hebrew גוים goyim, and the Greek
εθνων, signify nations; and, in the Old and New Testaments, mean those
people who were not descendants of any of the twelve tribes. The word
Gentiles, from gens, a nation, signifies the same. It is worthy of
remark, that it was a regular tradition among the ancient Jews, that the
Messiah should begin his ministry in Galilee. See the proofs in
Schoetgen.

[Matthew 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 4:16</span></span>

The people which sat in darkness - This is quoted from [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002.md), where, instead of sitting, the
prophet used the word walked. The evangelist might on purpose change the
term, to point out the increased misery of the state of these persons.
Sitting in darkness expresses a greater degree of intellectual
blindness, than walking in darkness does. In the time of Christ's
appearing, the people were in a much worse state than in the time of the
prophet, which was nearly 700 years before; as, during all this period,
they were growing more ignorant and sinful.

The region and shadow of death - These words are amazingly descriptive.
A region of death - Death's country, where, in a peculiar manner, Death
lived, reigned, and triumphed, subjecting all the people to his sway.

Shadow of death - Σκια θανατου, used only here and in [Luk
1:79](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#079.md), but often in the Old Covenant,
where the Hebrew is צל מות tsal maveth, It is not easy to enter fully
into the ideal meaning of this term. As in the former clause, death is
personified, so here. A shadow is that darkness cast upon a place by a
body raised between it and the light or sun. Death is here represented
as standing between the land above mentioned, and the light of life, or
Sun of righteousness; in consequence of which, all the inhabitants were,
involved in a continual cloud of intellectual darkness, misery, and sin.
The heavenly sun was continually eclipsed to them, till this glorious
time, when Jesus Christ, the true light, shone forth in the beauty of
holiness and truth. Christ began his ministry in Galilee, and frequented
this uncultivated place more than he did Jerusalem and other parts of
Judea: here his preaching was peculiarly needful; and by this was the
prophecy fulfilled.

[Matthew 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 4:17</span></span>

Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent - See on [Mat
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001.md), [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002) (note.md). Every preacher
commissioned by God to proclaim salvation to a lost world, begins his
work with preaching the doctrine of repentance. This was the case with
all the prophets, John the Baptist, Jesus Christ, all the apostles, and
all their genuine successors in the Christian ministry. The reasons are
evident in the notes already referred to; and for the explanation of the
word κηρυσσειν, preaching or proclaiming as a herald, see at the end of
chap. 3 (note).

[Matthew 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 4:18</span></span>

Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother - Why did not Jesus Christ
call some of the eminent Scribes or Pharisees to publish his Gospel, and
not poor unlearned fishermen, without credit or authority? Because it
was the kingdom of heaven they were to preach, and their teaching must
come from above: besides, the conversion of sinners, though it be
effected instrumentally by the preaching of the Gospel, yet the grand
agent in it is the Spirit of God. As the instruments were comparatively
mean, and, the work which was accomplished by them was grand and
glorious, the excellency of the power at once appeared to be of God, and
not of man; and thus the glory, due alone to his name, was secured, and
the great Operator of all good had the deserved praise. Seminaries of
learning, in the order of God's providence and grace, have great and
important uses; and, in reference to such uses, they should be treated
with great respect: but to make preachers of the Gospel is a matter to
which they are utterly inadequate; it is a, prerogative that God never
did, and never will, delegate to man.

Where the seed of the kingdom of God is sowed, and a dispensation of the
Gospel is committed to a man, a good education may be of great and
general use: but it no more follows, because a man has had a good
education, that therefore he is qualified to preach the Gospel, than it
does, that because he has not had that, therefore he is unqualified; for
there may be much ignorance of Divine things where there is much human
learning; and a man may be well taught in the things of God, and be able
to teach others, who has not had the advantages of a liberal education.

Men-made ministers have almost ruined the heritage of God. To prevent
this, our Church requires that a man be inwardly moved to take upon
himself this ministry, before he can be ordained to it. And he who
cannot say, that he trusts (has rational and Scriptural conviction) that
he is moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon himself this office, is an
intruder into the heritage of God, and his ordination, ipso facto,
vitiated and of none effect. See the truly apostolic Ordination Service
of the Church of England.

Fishers - Persons employed in a lawful and profitable avocation, and
faithfully discharging their duty in it. It was a tradition of the
elders, that one of Joshua's ten precepts was, that all men should have
an equal right to spread their nets and fish in the sea of Tiberias, or
Galilee. The persons mentioned here were doubtless men of pure morals;
for the minister of God should have a good report from them that are
without.

[Matthew 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 4:19</span></span>

Follow me - Come after me, δευτε οπισω μου. Receive my doctrines,
imitate me in my conduct - in every respect be my disciples. We may
observe that most of the calls of God to man are expressed in a few
solemn words, which alarm, the conscience, and deeply impress the heart.

I will make you fishers of men - [Eze
47:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#008.md), casts much light on this
place; and to this prophet our Lord probably alludes. To follow Christ,
and be admitted into a partnership of his ministry, is a great honor;
but those only who are by himself fitted for it, God calls. Miserable
are those who do not wait fur this call - who presume to take the name
of fishers of men, and know not how to cast the net of the Divine word,
because not brought to an acquaintance with the saving power of the God
who bought them. Such persons, having only their secular interest in
view, study not to catch men, but to catch money: and though, for
charity's sake, it may be said of a pastor of this spirit, he does not
enter the sheepfold as a thief, yet he certainly lives as a hireling.
See Quesnel.

Some teach to work, but have no hands to row;

Some will be eyes, but have no light to see;

Some will be guides, but have no feet to go;

Some deaf, yet ears, some dumb, yet tongues will be;

Dumb, deaf, lame, blind, and maimed, yet fishers all!

Fit for no use but store an hospital.

Fletcher's Piscatory Eclogues. Ec iv. 5, 18.

Following a person, in the Jewish phrase, signifies being his disciple
or scholar. See a similar mode of speech, [Kg2
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#019.md).

[Matthew 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 4:20</span></span>

They straightway left their nets - A change, as far as it respected
secular things, every way to their disadvantage. The proud and the
profane may exult and say, "Such preachers as these cannot be much
injured by their sacrifices of secular property - they have nothing but
nets, etc., to leave." Let such carpers at the institution of Christ
know, that he who has nothing but a net, and leaves that for the sake of
doing good to the souls of men, leaves his All: besides, he lived
comfortably by his net before; but, in becoming the servant of all for
Christ's sake, he often exposes himself to the want of even a morsel of
bread. See on [Mat 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027) (note.md).

[Matthew 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 4:22</span></span>

Left the ship and their father - By the ship, το πλοιον, we are to
understand the mere fishing-boat, used for extending their nets in the
water and bringing the hawser or rope of the farther end to shore, by
which the net was pulled to land. But why should these be called to
leave their employment and their father, probably now aged? To this I
answer, that to be obedient to, provide for, and comfort our parents, is
the highest duty we owe or can discharge, except that to God. But, when
God calls to the work of the ministry, father and mother and all must be
left. Were we necessary to their comfort and support before? Then God,
if he call us into another work or state, will take care to supply to
them our lack of service some other way; and, if this be not done, it is
a proof we have mistaken our call. Again, were our parents necessary to
us, and in leaving them for the sake of the Gospel, or in obedience to a
Divine command, do we deprive ourselves of the comforts of life? No
matter: we should prefer the honor of serving the Most High, even in
poverty and humility, to all the comforts of a father's house. But what
an honor was the vocation of James and John, to old Zebedee their
father! His sons are called to be heralds of the God of heaven! Allowing
him to have been a pious man, this must have given him unutterable
delight.

[Matthew 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 4:23</span></span>

Teaching in their synagogues - Synagogue, συναγωγη, from συν, together,
and αγω, I bring, a public assembly of persons, or the place where such
persons publicly assembled. Synagogues, among the Jews, were not
probably older than the return from the Babylonish captivity. They were
erected not only in cities and towns, but in the country, and especially
by rivers, that they might have water for the convenience of their
frequent washings.

Not less than ten persons of respectability composed a synagogue; as the
rabbins supposed that this number of persons, of independent property,
and well skilled in the law, were necessary to conduct the affairs of
the place, and keep up the Divine worship. See Lightfoot. Therefore,
where this number could not be found, no synagogue was built; but there
might be many synagogues in one city or town, provided it were populous.
Jerusalem is said to have contained 480. This need not be wondered at,
when it is considered that every Jew was obliged to worship God in
public, either in a synagogue or in the temple.

The chief things belonging to a synagogue were:

1st. The ark or chest, made after the mode of the ark of the covenant,
containing the Pentateuch.

2dly. The pulpit and desk, in the middle of the synagogue, on which he
stood who read or expounded the law.

3dly. The seats or pews for the men below, and the galleries for the
women above.

4thly. The lamps to give light in the evening service, and at the feast
of the dedication.

5thly. Apartments for the utensils and alms-chests.

The synagogue was governed by a council or assembly, over whom was a
president, called in the Gospels, the ruler of the synagogue. These are
sometimes called chiefs of the Jews, the rulers, the priests or elders,
the governors, the overseers, the fathers of the synagogue. Service was
performed in them three times a day - morning, afternoon, and night.
Synagogue, among the Jews, had often the same meaning as congregation
among us, or place of judicature, see [Jam
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002.md).

Preaching the Gospel of the kingdom - Or, proclaiming the glad tidings
of the kingdom. See the preceding notes. Behold here the perfect pattern
of an evangelical preacher:

1\. He goes about seeking sinners on every side, that he may show them
the way to heaven.

2\. He proclaims the glad tidings of the kingdom, with a freedom worthy
of the King whom he serves.

3\. He makes his reputation and the confidence of the people subservient
not to his own interest, but to the salvation of souls.

4\. To his preaching he joins, as far as he has ability, all works of
mercy, and temporal assistance to the bodies of men.

5\. He takes care to inform men that diseases, and all kinds of temporal
evils, are the effects of sin, and that their hatred to iniquity should
increase in proportion to the evils they endure through it.

6\. And that nothing but the power of God can save them from sin and its
consequences.

For glad tidings, or Gospel, see chap. 1. title (note). Proclaiming, see
[Mat 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001) (note), and end (note.md); and
for the meaning of kingdom, see [Mat
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002) (note.md).

All manner of sickness, and all manner of disease - There is a
difference between νοσος, translated here sickness, and μαλακια,
translated disease. The first is thus defined: νοσος, την χρονιαν
κακοπαθειαν, a disease of some standing, a chronic disorder.

Infirmity, μαλακια, την προσκαιρον ανωμαλιαν· τοι σωματος, a temporary
disorder of the body. Theophylact. This is a proper distinction, and is
necessary to be observed.

[Matthew 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 4:24</span></span>

Sick people - Τους, κακως εχοντας, those who felt ill - were afflicted
with any species of malady.

And torments - βασανοις, from βασανιζω, to examine by torture, such as
cholics, gouts, and rheumatisms, which racked every joint.

Possessed with devils - Daemoniacs. Persons possessed by evil spirits.
This is certainly the plain obvious meaning of daemoniac in the Gospels.

Many eminent men think that the sacred writers accommodated themselves
to the unfounded prejudices of the common people, in attributing certain
diseases to the influence of evil spirits, which were merely the effects
of natural causes: but that this explanation can never comport with the
accounts given of these persons shall be proved as the places occur.

Our common version, which renders the word, those possessed by devils,
is not strictly correct; as the word devil, διαβολος, is not found in
the plural in any part of the Sacred Writings, when speaking of evil
spirits: for though there are multitudes of daemons, [Mar
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#009.md), yet it appears there is but one
Devil, who seems to be supreme, or head, over all the rest. Διαβολος
signifies an accuser or slanderer, [Ti1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011.md); [Ti2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003.md); [Tit
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#003.md). Perhaps Satan was called so,

1st. because he accused or slandered God in paradise, as averse from the
increase of man's knowledge and happiness, [Gen
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#005.md); [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044.md); and

2dly. because he is the accuser of men, [Rev
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009.md), [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010.md). See also [Job
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#002.md).

The word comes from δια, through, and βαλλειν, to cast, or shoot,
because of the influence of his evil suggestions; compared, [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md), to fiery darts; and thus it is
nearly of the same meaning with ο πειραζων, he who pierces through. See
on [Mat 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003) (note.md).

Lunatic - Persons afflicted with epileptic or other disorders, which are
always known to have a singular increase at the change and full of the
moon. This undoubtedly proceeds from the superadded attractive influence
of the sun and moon upon the earth's atmosphere, as, in the periods
mentioned above, these two luminaries are both in conjunction; and their
united attractive power being exerted on the earth at the same time, not
only causes the flux and reflux of the ocean, but occasions a variety of
important changes in the bodies of infirm persons, of animals in
general, but more particularly in those who are more sensible of these
variations. And is this any wonder, when it is well known, that a very
slight alteration in the atmosphere causes the most uncomfortable
sensations to a number of invalids! But sometimes even these diseases
were caused by demons. See on [Mat
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#016.md), [Mat
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#034) (note.md), and [Mat
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#015) (note.md).

Palsy - Palsy is defined, a sudden loss of tone and vital power in a
certain part of the human body. This may affect a limb, the whole side,
the tongue, or the whole body. This disorder is in general incurable,
except by the miraculous power of God, unless in its slighter stages.

He healed them - Either with a word or a touch; and thus proved that all
nature was under his control.

[Matthew 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 4:25</span></span>

This verse is immediately connected with the fifth chapter, and should
not be separated from it.

Great multitudes - This, even according to the Jews, was one proof of
the days of the Messiah: for they acknowledged that in his time there
should be a great famine of the word of God; and thus they understood
Amos, [Amo 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011.md). Behold, the days come
- that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread - but of
hearing the words of the Lord. And as the Messiah was to dispense this
word, the bread of life, hence they believed that vast multitudes from
all parts should be gathered together to him. See Schoettgenius on this
place.

Decapolis - A small country, situated between Syria and Galilee of the
nations. It was called Decapolis, Δεκαπολις, from δεκα, ten, and πολις,
a city, because it contained only ten cities; the metropolis, and most
ancient of which, was Damascus.

From beyond Jordan - Or, from the side of Jordan. Probably this was the
country which was occupied anciently by the two tribes of Reuben and
Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh; for the country of Decapolis lay on
both sides of the river Jordan. See [Num
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#005.md), [Num
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033.md).

The account of our Lord's temptation, as given by the evangelist, is
acknowledged on all hands to be extremely difficult. Two modes of
interpretation have been generally resorted to, in order to make the
whole plain and intelligible: viz. the literal and allegorical. In all
cases, where it can possibly apply, I prefer the first: the latter
should never be used, unless obviously indicated in the text itself; or
so imperiously necessary that no other mode of interpretation can
possibly apply. In the preceding observations, I have taken up the
subject in a literal point of view; and it is hoped that most of the
difficulties in the relation have been removed, or obviated, by this
plan. An ingenious correspondent has favored me with some observations
on the subject, which have much more than the merit of novelty to
recommend them. I shall give an abstract of some of the most striking;
and leave the whole to the reader's farther consideration.

The thoughts in this communication proceed on this ground: "These
temptations were addressed to Christ as a public person, and respected
his conduct in the execution of his ministry; and are reported to his
Church as a forcible and practical instruction, concerning the proper
method of promoting the kingdom of God upon earth. They are warnings
against those Satanic illusions, by which the servants of Christ are
liable to be hindered in their great work, and even stopped in the
prosecution of it.

1\. "As our Lord had, at his baptism, been declared to be the Son of
God, i.e. the promised Messiah, this was probably well known to Satan,
who did not mean to insinuate any thing to the contrary, when he
endeavored to engage him to put forth an act of that power which he
possessed as the Messiah. The mysterious union of the Divine with the
human nature, in our Lord's state of humiliation, Satan might think
possible to be broken; and therefore endeavored, in the first
temptation, Command these stones to be made bread, to induce our Lord to
put forth a separate, independent act of power; which our Lord repelled,
by showing his intimate union with the Divine will, which he was come to
fulfill - Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Thus showing, as he did on another
occasion, that it was his meat and drink to do the will of his Father.

"2. The ground of the temptation was then changed; and the fulfillment
of the Divine will, in the completion of a prophetic promise, was made
the ostensible object of the next attack. Cast thyself down - for it is
Written, He will give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their
hands shall they bear thee up, etc. This our Lord repelled with - Thou
shalt not tempt the Lord thy God - as Satan had designed to induce him
to seek this public miraculous confirmation of God's peculiar care over
him, as the promised Messiah, of his being which, according to the
hypothesis above, Satan had no doubt. Moses, being appointed to a great
and important work, needed miraculous signs to strengthen his faith; but
the sacred humanity of our blessed Lord needed them not; nor did his
wisdom judge that such a sign from heaven was essential to the
instruction of the people.

"3. The last temptation was the most subtle and the most powerful - All
these will I give unto thee, if thou wilt fall down and worship me. To
inherit all nations, had been repeatedly declared to be the birthright
of the Messiah. His right to universal empire could not be controverted;
nor could Satan presume to make the investiture. What, then, was his
purpose? Satan had hitherto opposed, and that with considerable success,
the kingdom of God upon earth; and what he appears to propose here, were
terms of peace, and an honorable retreat. The worship which he exacted
was an act of homage, in return for his cession of that ascendancy
which, through the sin of man, he had obtained in the world. Having long
established his rule among men, it was not at first to be expected that
he would resign it without a combat: but the purpose of this last
temptation appears to be an offer to decline any farther contest; and,
yet more, if his terms were accepted, apparently to engage his influence
to promote the kingdom of the Messiah. And as the condition of this
proposed alliance, he required, not Divine worship, but such an act of
homage as implied amity and obligation; and if this construction be
allowed, he may be supposed to have enforced the necessity of the
measure, by every suggestion of the consequences of a refusal. The
sufferings which would inevitably result from a provoked opposition,
which would render the victory, though certain to Christ himself, dearly
bought; added to which, the conflict he was prepared to carry on through
succeeding ages, in which all his subtlety and powers should be employed
to hinder the progress of Christ's cause in the earth, and that with a
considerable degree of anticipated success. Here the devil seems to
propose to make over to Christ the power and influence he possessed in
this world, on condition that he would enter into terms of peace with
him; and the inducement offered was, that thereby our Lord should escape
those sufferings, both in his own person, and in that of his adherents,
which a provoked contest would ensure. And we may suppose that a similar
temptation lies hid in the desires excited even in some of the servants
of Christ, who may feel themselves often induced to employ worldly
influence and power for the promotion of his kingdom, even though, in so
doing, an apparent communion of Christ and Belial is the result: for it
will be found that neither worldly riches, nor power, can be employed in
the service of Christ, till, like the spoils taken in war, [Deu
31:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021.md), they have passed through the
fire and water, as, without a Divine purification, they are not fit to
be employed in the service of God and his Church.

"Hence we may conclude, that the first temptation had for its professed
object, 1st, our Lord's personal relief and comfort, through the
inducement of performing a separate and independent act of power. - The
second temptation professed to have in view his public acknowledgment by
the people, as the Messiah: for, should they see him work such a miracle
as throwing himself down from the pinnacle of the temple without
receiving any hurt, they would be led instantly to acknowledge his
Divine mission; and the evil of this temptation may be explained, as
seeking to secure the success of his mission by other means than those
which, as the Messiah, he had received from the Father. Compare [Joh
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031.md). The third temptation was a
subtle attempt to induce Christ to acknowledge Satan as an ally, in the
establishment of his kingdom." E. M. B.

The above is the substance of the ingenious theory of my correspondent,
which may be considered as a third mode of interpretation, partaking
equally of the allegoric and literal. I still, however, think, that the
nearer we keep to the letter in all such difficult cases, the more
tenable is our ground, especially where the subject itself does not
obviously require the allegorical mode of interpretation. Among many
things worthy of remark in the preceding theory the following deserves
most attention: That Satan is ever ready to tempt the governors and
ministers of the Christian Church to suppose that worldly means, human
policy, secular interest and influence, are all essentially necessary
for the support and extension of that kingdom which is not of this
world! Such persons can never long preserve hallowed hands: they bring
the world into the Church; endeavor to sanctify the bad means they use,
by the good end they aim at; and often, in the prosecution of their
object, by means which are not of God's devising, are driven into
straits and difficulties, and to extricate themselves, tell lies for
God's sake. This human policy is from beneath - God will neither
sanction nor bless it. It has been the bane of true religion in all ages
of the world; and, in every country where the cause of Christianity has
been established, such schemers and plotters in the Church of God are as
dangerous to its interests as a plague is to the health of society. The
governors and ministers of the Christian Church should keep themselves
pure, and ever do God's work in his own way. If the slothful servant
should be cast out of the vineyard, he that corrupts the good seed of
the Divine field, or sows tares among the wheat, should be considered as
an enemy to righteousness, and be expelled from the sacred pale as one
who closes in with the temptation - "All these things (the kingdoms of
the world, and the glory of them) will I give unto Thee, if thou wilt
fall down and worship Me." However necessary the Church may be to the
state, and the state to the Church, as some people argue, yet the latter
is never in so much danger as when the former smiles upon it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 5](mat005.md)

</div>
