<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat008)  [Next](mat010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 9:0</span></span>

Christ heals a paralytic person at Capernaum, [Mat
9:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001). Calls Matthew, [Mat
9:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009). Eats with publicans and
sinners, at which the Pharisees are offended, and he vindicates his
conduct, [Mat 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011), [Mat
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012). The disciples of John come to
him and inquire about fasting, [Mat
9:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014). A ruler requests him to heal
his daughter, [Mat 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018), [Mat
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#019). On his road to the ruler's
house, he heals a diseased woman, [Mat
9:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020). Arriving at the ruler's
house, he restores the young woman to life, [Mat
9:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023). Heals two blind men, [Mat
9:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027). Casts out a dumb demon, [Mat
9:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032). Preaches and works miracles
in all the cities and villages, [Mat
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035). Is greatly affected at the
desolate and dark state of the Jewish people, [Mat
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036). Exhorts his disciples to pray to
God to send them proper instructers, [Mat
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037), [Mat
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038).

[Matthew 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 9:1</span></span>

He came into his own city - Viz. Capernaum, where he seems to have had
his common residence at the house of Peter. See [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013), and [Mat
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014). This verse properly belongs to
the preceding chapter.

[Matthew 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 9:2</span></span>

Sick of the palsy - See [Mat 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024).

Lying on a bed - Κλινης, a couch or sofa, such as they reclined on at
meals.

Seeing their faith - The faith of the paralytic person, and the faith of
those who brought him; see on [Mar 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004)
(note).

Be of good cheer - Θαρσει τεκνον, Son, take courage! Probably he began
to despond, and Christ spoke thus to support his faith.

Thy sins be forgiven thee - Moral evil has been the cause of all the
natural evil in the world. Christ goes to the source of the malady,
which is sin; and to that as the procuring cause we should refer in all
our afflictions. It is probable that this paralytic person had, in the
earnest desires of his heart, entreated the cure of his soul, leaving
his body to the care of others, as the first miracle of healing is
wrought on his soul. In a state of helplessness, when we seek above all
things to please God, by giving him our hearts, he often inspires others
with the care of our temporal necessities. It may be necessary to be
observed, that it was a maxim among the Jews that no diseased person
could be healed till all his sins were blotted out. See Nedarim, fol.
41. Hence our Lord first forgives the sins, and then heals the body of
the paralytic person. This appears to have been founded on [Psa
103:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#003). Who forgiveth all thine
iniquities, and healeth all thy diseases. Here pardon precedes health.
See also [Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003), [Psa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004). It may be observed, also, that
most people are more in earnest about their souls when in sickness than
in health, and therefore are more earnest in prayer for salvation.

[Matthew 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 9:3</span></span>

This man blasphemeth - Βλασφημεω comes either from βλαπτειν την φημην,
to hurt or blast the reputation or credit of another, or from βαλλειν
ταις φημαις, to smite with reports. Whenever it is used in reference to
God, it simply signifies, to speak impiously of his nature, or
attributes, or works. Injurious speaking is its proper translation when
referred to man.

The scribes were the literati of that time; and their learning, because
not used in dependence on God, rendered them proud, envious, and
obstinate. Unsanctified knowledge has still the same effect: that light
serves only to blind and lead men out of the way which is not joined
with uprightness of heart. The most sacred truths often become an
occasion of delusion, where men are under the government of their evil
passions.

[Matthew 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 9:4</span></span>

Jesus knowing (ιδων seeing) their thoughts - In telling them what the
thoughts of their hearts were, (for they had expressed nothing
publicly), he gave them the fullest proof of his power to forgive sins;
because God only can forgive sins, and God only can search and know the
heart. Jesus pronounced the man's sins forgiven; and gave the scribes
the fullest proof of his power to do so, by telling them what, in the
secret of their souls, they thought on the subject.

God sounds the secrets of all hearts - no sin escapes his notice; how
senseless then is the sinner to think he sins securely when unseen by
men! Let us take heed to our hearts, as well as to our conduct, for God
searches out and condemns all that does not spring from, and leads not
to himself.

[Matthew 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 9:5</span></span>

For whether is easier, to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say,
Arise, and walk? - Both are equally easy, and equally difficult; for
both require unlimited power to produce them. And every thing is equally
easy to that power which is unlimited. A universe can be as easily
produced by a single act of the Divine will as the smallest elementary
part of matter.

The common punctuation of the above passage almost destroys the sense:
the comma should be placed after easier, and to say, made the first part
of the question.

[Matthew 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 9:6</span></span>

But that ye may know, etc. - External miracles are the proofs of
internal ones. Three miracles are wrought in this case. (I mean, by
miracle, something produced or known that no power is capable of but
that which is omnipotent, and no knowledge adequate to but that which is
omniscient). The miracles are these:

1st. The remission of the poor man's sins.

2d. The discernment of the secret thoughts of the scribes.

3d. The restoring of the paralytic, in an instant, to perfect soundness.

Thus one miracle becomes the proof and establishment of another. Never
was a clearer proof of omnipotent energy and mercy brought under the
senses of man. Here is an absolutely perfect miracle wrought; and here
are absolute incontestable proofs that the miracle was wrought; and the
conclusion is the fullest demonstration of the Divinity of the
ever-blessed Jesus.

Arise, take up thy bed - Being enabled to obey this command was the
public proof that the man was made whole. Such a circumstance should not
pass without improvement. A man gives proof of his conversion from sin
to God who imitates this paralytic person. He who does not rise and
stand upright, but either continues grovelling on the earth, or falls
back as soon as he is got up, is not yet cured of his spiritual palsy.
When we see a penitent enabled to rejoice in hope of God's glory, and to
walk in the way of his commandments, he affords us all the proof which
we can reasonably require, that his conversion is real: the proof
sufficient to satisfy himself is the witness of the Holy Spirit in his
own heart; but this is a matter of which those who are without cannot
judge: they must form their opinion from his conduct, and judge of the
tree by its fruits.

[Matthew 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 9:8</span></span>

When the multitudes saw it, they marveled - Instead of εθαυμασαν,
wondered, the Codex Vatic. and Cod. Bezae, with several other MSS. and
versions, have εφοβηθησαν, feared. In the Gothic, and one copy of the
Itala, both readings are conjoined, thus: And the multitudes seeing it,
wondered and feared, and glorified God. Wondered at the miracle; feared
to offend against such power and goodness; and glorified God for the
works of mercy which he had wrought.

That which to the doctors of the law, the worldly-wise and prudent, is a
matter of scandal, is to the humble an occasion of glorifying the Most
High. Divine things make a deeper impression on the hearts of the simple
multitude than on those of the doctors, who, puffed up with a sense of
their own wisdom, refuse to receive the truth as it is in Jesus. The
conversion of one rebellious soul is a greater miracle, and more to be
admired than all that can be wrought on inanimate creatures. He who sees
a sinner converted from the error of his way sees a miracle wrought by
eternal power and goodness. May such miracles be multiplied!

[Matthew 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 9:9</span></span>

Named Matthew - Generally supposed to be the same who wrote this history
of our blessed Lord. Mathai signifies a gift in Syriac; probably so
named by his parents as implying a gift from God.

The receipt of custom - The custom-house, τελωνιον - the place where the
taxes levied by the Romans of the Jews, were collected.

Follow me - That is, become my disciple.

And he arose, and followed him - How blessed it is to be obedient to the
first call of Christ - how much happiness and glory are lost by delays,
though conversion at last may have taken place!

[Matthew 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 9:10</span></span>

Sat at meat in the house - Viz. of Matthew, who it appears, from [Luk
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#029), made a great feast on the
occasion, thus testifying his gratitude for the honor done him; and that
his friends and acquaintances might profit by the teaching of his new
master, he invites them to the entertainment that was honored by the
presence of Christ. His companions, it appears, were not of the most
creditable kind. They were tax-gatherers (see [Mat
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)) and sinners, αμαρτωλοι, a word
which I believe in general signifies heathens, throughout the Gospels,
and in several other parts of the New Testament. See, among others, [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019) (note); [Mat
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#045) (note); [Mar
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#015) (note); [Mar
14:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#041); [Luk
5:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#030) (note); [Luk
6:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#032) (note); [Luk
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#034), [Luk
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037), (note); [Luk
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#039); [Luk
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#001), [Luk
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002), [Luk
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#007), [Luk
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010) (note); [Luk
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007) (note); [Luk
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#007) (note); [Joh
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016), [Joh
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024), [Joh
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#025), [Joh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031) (note); [Rom
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008) (note); [Gal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015) (note); [Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026) (note); [Pe1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018) (note); in most, if not all of
which places, it evidently refers to the character or state of a
Gentile, or Heathen. See also the notes on these passages.

[Matthew 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 9:11</span></span>

When the Pharisees saw it - He who, like a Pharisee, never felt himself
indebted to infinite mercy for his own salvation, is rarely solicitous
about the salvation of others. The grace of Christ alone inspires the
soul with true benevolence. The self-righteous Pharisees considered it
equal to legal defilement to sit in company with tax-gatherers and
heathens. It is certain that those who fear God should not associate,
through choice, with the workers of iniquity, and should only be found
with them when transacting their secular business requires it, or when
they have the prospect of doing good to their souls.

[Matthew 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 9:12</span></span>

They that be whole need not a physician - A common proverb, which none
could either misunderstand or misapply. Of it the reader may make the
following use: -

1\. Jesus Christ represents himself here as the sovereign Physician of
souls.

2\. That all stand in need of his healing power.

3\. That men must acknowledge their spiritual maladies, and the need
they have of his mercy, in order to be healed by him.

4\. That it is the most inveterate and dangerous disease the soul can be
afflicted with to imagine itself whole, when the sting of death, which
is sin, has pierced it through in every part, infusing its poison every
where.

[Matthew 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 9:13</span></span>

I will have mercy, and not sacrifice - Quoted from [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022). These are remarkable words. We
may understand them as implying,

1st. That God prefers an act of mercy, shown to the necessitous, to any
act of religious worship to which the person might be called at that
time. Both are good; but the former is the greater good, and should be
done in preference to the other.

2dly. That the whole sacrificial system was intended only to point out
the infinite mercy of God to fallen man, in his redemption by the blood
of the new covenant. And

3dly. That we should not rest in the sacrifices, but look for the mercy
and salvation prefigured by them. This saying was nervously translated
by our ancestors, I will mild-heartedness, and not sacrifice.

Go ye and learn - צא ולמד tse velimmed, a form of speech in frequent use
among the rabbins, when they referred to any fact or example in the
Sacred Writings. Nothing tends more to humble pretenders to devotion
than to show them that they understand neither Scripture nor religion,
when, relying on external performances, they neglect love to God and
man, which is the very soul and substance of true religion. True
holiness has ever consisted in faith working by love.

I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners - Most of the common
editions add, εις μετανοιαν, unto repentance; but this is omitted in the
Codex Vatic. and Bezae, sixteen others, both the Syriac, both the
Persic, Ethiop. Armen. Gothic, Anglo-Saxon, all the Itala except three,
the Vulgate, Clemens Roman, Origen, Basil, Jerome, Augustin, Ambrose,
and Barnabas. The omission is approved by Mill and Bengel. Griesbach
leaves it out of the text.

[Matthew 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 9:14</span></span>

Thy disciples fast not? - Probably meaning that they did not fast so
frequently as the others did, or for the same purposes, which is very
likely, for the Pharisees had many superstitious fasts. They fasted in
order to have lucky dreams, to obtain the interpretation of a dream, or
to avert the evil import of a dream. They also fasted often, in order to
obtain the things they wished for. The tract, Taanith is full of these
fasts, and of the wonders performed thus by the Jewish doctors.

[Matthew 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 9:15</span></span>

Can the children of the bride-chamber - Νυμφωνος. Or, νυμφιου,
bridegroom, as the Cod. Bezae and several versions have it. These
persons were the companions of the bridegroom, who accompanied him to
the house of his father-in-law when he went to bring the bride to his
own home. The marriage-feast among the Jews lasted seven days; but the
new married woman was considered to be a bride for thirty days. Marriage
feasts were times of extraordinary festivity, and even of riot, among
several people of the east.

When the bridegroom shall be taken from them, etc. - There was one
annual fast observed in the primitive Church, called by our ancestors
the spring fast, and, by us, Lent; by the Greeks τεσσερακοϚη, and by the
Latins, Quadrigessima. This fast is pretended to be kept by many, in the
present day, in commemoration of our Lord's forty days' fast in the
wilderness; but it does not appear that, in the purest ages of the
primitive Church, genuine Christians ever pretended that their
quadrigessimal fast was kept for the above purpose. Their fast was kept
merely to commemorate the time during which Jesus Christ lay under the
power of death, which was about Forty Hours; and it was in this sense
they understood the words of this text: the days will come, etc. With
them, the bridegroom meant Christ: the time in which he was taken away,
his crucifixion, death, and the time he lay in the grave. Suppose him
dying about twelve o'clock on what is called Friday, and that he rose
about four on the morning of his own day, (St. John says, Early, while
it was yet dark, [Mat 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001)), the
interim makes forty hours, which was the true primitive Lent, or
quadrigessimal fast. It is true that many in the primitive Church were
not agreed on this subject, as Socrates, in his Church History, book v.
chap. 22, says, "Some thought they should fast one day; others two;
others more." Different Churches also were divided concerning the length
of the time, some keeping it three, others five, and others seven weeks;
and the historian himself is puzzled to know why they all agreed in
calling these fasts, differing so much in their duration, by the name of
Quadrigessima, or forty days' fast: the plain obvious reason appears to
me to have been simply this: They put Days in the place of Hours; and
this absurdity continues in some Christian Churches to the present day.
For more on fasting, see [Mat 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#016).

[Matthew 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 9:16</span></span>

No man putteth a piece of new cloth - Ουδεις δε επιβαλλει επιβλημα
ρακους αγναφου επι ιματιω παλαιω. No man putteth a patch of unscoured
cloth upon an old garment. This is the most literal translation I can
give of this verse, to convey its meaning to those who cannot consult
the original. Ρακος αγναφον is that cloth which has not been scoured, or
which has not passed under the hand of the fuller, who is called γναφευς
in Greek: and επιβλημα signifies a piece put on, or what we commonly
term a patch.

It - taketh from the garment - Instead of closing up the rent, it makes
a larger, by tearing away with it the whole breadth of the cloth over
which it was laid; αιρει γαρ το πληρωμα αυτου - it taketh its fullness
or whole breadth from the garment; this I am persuaded is the meaning of
the original, well expressed by the Latin, or Itala of the C. Bezae,
Tollit enim plenitudo ejus de vestimento. "It takes away its fullness
from the garment."

[Matthew 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 9:17</span></span>

New wine into old bottles - It is still the custom, in the eastern
countries, to make their bottles of goat skins: if these happened to be
old, and new wine were put into them, the violence of the fermentation
must necessarily burst them; and therefore newly made bottles were
employed for the purpose of putting that wine in which had not yet gone
through its state of fermentation. The institutes of Christ, and those
of the Pharisees, could never be brought to accord: an attempt to
combine the two systems would be as absurd as it would be destructive.
The old covenant made way for the new, which was its completion and its
end; but with that old covenant the new cannot be incorporated.

Christian prudence requires that the weak, and newly converted, should
be managed with care and tenderness. To impose such duties and
mortifications as are not absolutely necessary to salvation, before God
has properly prepared the heart by his grace for them, is a conduct as
absurd and ruinous as putting a piece of raw, unscoured cloth on an old
garment; it is, in a word, requiring the person to do the work of a man,
while as yet he is but a little child. Preachers of the Gospel, and
especially those who are instruments in God's hand of many conversions,
have need of much heavenly wisdom, that they may know to watch over,
guide, and advise those who are brought to a sense of their sin and
danger. How many auspicious beginnings have been ruined by men's
proceeding too hastily, endeavoring to make their own designs take
place, and to have the honor of that success themselves which is due
only to God.

[Matthew 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 9:18</span></span>

A certain ruler - There were two officers in the synagogue, חזן הכנסת
chazan ha-ceneseth, the bishop or overseer of the congregation; and ראש
הכנסת rosh ha-ceneseth, the head or ruler of the congregation. The
chazan takes the book of the Law, and gives it to the rosh, or ruler;
and he appoints who shall read the different sections, etc. Jairus, who
is the person intended here, was, in this latter sense, the ruler or
governor of one of the synagogues, probably at Capernaum. See [Mar
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#022); [Luk
8:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#041).

My daughter is even now dead - Or, my daughter was just now dying; αρτι
ετελευτησεν, or, is by this time dead: i.e. as Mr. Wakefield properly
observes, She was so ill when I left home that she must be dead by this
time. This turn of the expression reconciles the account given here with
that in Mark and Luke. Michaelis conjectures that, in the Hebrew
original, the words must have stood thus, עתה מתה atah matah, which,
without the points, may signify either, She is dead, or She is dying.

To be successful in our applications to God by prayer, four things are
requisite; and this ruler teaches us what they are.

First, A man should place himself in the presence of God - he came unto
him.

Secondly, He should humble himself sincerely before God - he fell down
before him - at his feet. [Mar 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#022).

Thirdly, He should lay open his wants with a holy earnestness - he
besought him greatly. [Mar 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#023).

Fourthly, he should have unbounded confidence in the power and goodness
of Christ that his request shall be granted - put thy hand upon her, and
she shall live.

He who comes in this way to God, for salvation, is sure to be heard.
Imposition of hands was a rite anciently used by the servants of God,
through which heavenly influences were conveyed to the bodies and souls
of men. This rite is still used in certain Churches; but, as there is no
Holy Ghost communicated by it, some suppose it may be as well omitted.
But why is this? Is it not because there is an unfaithfulness in the
person who lays on hands, or an unfitness in him on whom they are laid?
Let the rite be restored to its primitive simplicity, and God will own
it as he formerly did. But, however this may be, where is the man or
number of men who have authority to abrogate a rite of God's own
appointment? In the appointment of men to the sacred ministry it should
never be omitted: even in these degenerate days, it may still serve as a
sign of the necessity of the gifts and graces of that Holy Spirit
without which no man can fulfill the work of the ministry, or be the
instrument of saving the souls of them that hear him. When the
inventions of men are put in the place of the ordinances of God, the
true Church of Christ is in great danger.

[Matthew 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 9:19</span></span>

Jesus arose, and followed him - Our blessed Lord could have acted as
well at a distance as present; but he goes to the place, to teach his
ministers not to spare either their steps or their pains when the
salvation of a soul is in question. Let them not think it sufficient to
pray for the sick in their closets; but let them go to their bed-sides,
that they may instruct and comfort them. He can have little unction in
private, who does not also give himself up to public duties.

[Matthew 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 9:20</span></span>

A woman which was diseased with an issue of blood - Γυνη αἱμοῤῥουσα.
Mulier sanguinis profluvio laborans. Significatur hoc loco, fluxus
muliebris, in Sanis, menstruus; in Hac perpetuus. It would be easy to
explain the nature and properties of the disease here mentioned; but,
when it is said that prudence forbids it, the intimation itself may be
thought sufficiently explanatory of the disorder in question. There are
some remarkable circumstances relative to this case mentioned by St.
Mark, [Mar 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#025), etc., which shall be
properly noticed in the notes on that place.

The hem of his garment - The ציצית tsitsith, or fringes, which the Jews
were commanded to wear on their garments. See [Num
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038), and the note there.

[Matthew 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 9:21</span></span>

She said within herself, If I may but touch his garment - Her disorder
was of that delicate nature that modesty forbade her to make any public
acknowledgment of it; and therefore she endeavored to transact the whole
business in private. Besides, the touch of such a person was by the law
reputed unclean. By faith in Christ Jesus, little things are often
rendered efficacious to our salvation. What more simple than a morsel of
bread, and a few drops of wine, in the Lord's Supper! And yet, they who
receive them by faith in the sacrifice they represent, are made
partakers of the blessings purchased by the crucified body and spilled
blood of the Lord Jesus!

[Matthew 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 9:22</span></span>

Daughter, be of good comfort - Θαρσει θυγατερ, Take courage, daughter.
See on [Mat 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002) (note). The reason of
this kind speech was - Jesus, finding that virtue had proceeded from
him; made inquiry who had touched him. The woman, finding that she could
not be hid, came fearing and trembling, ([Mar
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#033)), and confessed the truth: to
dispel these fears and to comfort her mind, Jesus said, Daughter, take
courage.

Thy faith hath made thee whole - Η πιστις σου σεσωκε σε, This thy faith
hath saved thee: i.e. thy faith in my power has interested that power in
thy behalf, so that thou art saved from thy disorder, and from all its
consequences. See on [Luk 8:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#046) (note).

[Matthew 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 9:23</span></span>

Saw the minstrels and the people making a noise - Αυλητας, pipers;
Anglo-Saxon the whistlers; Gothic, haurngans haurngandans, the
horn-blowers blowing with their horns. Nearly the same as the
pipublasara, pipe-blowers of the Islandic: for among all those nations
funeral lamentations accompanied with such rude instruments, were made
at the death of relatives. That pipes were in use among the Jews, in
times of calamity or death, is evident from [Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036). And among the Greeks, and
Romans, as well as among the Jews, persons were hired on purpose to
follow the funeral processions with lamentations. See [Jer
9:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017); [Amo
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016). Even the poorest among the Jews
were required to have two pipers, and one mourning woman. At these
funeral solemnities it was usual with them to drink considerably; even
ten cups of wine each, where it could be got. See Lightfoot. This custom
is observed among the native Irish to this day, in what is called their
Caoinan. The body of the deceased, dressed in grave-clothes and
ornamented with flowers, is placed in some eminent place; the relations
and caoiners range themselves in two divisions, one at the head and the
other at the feet of the corpse. Anciently, where the deceased was a
great personage, the bards and croteries prepared the caoinan. The chief
bard of the head chorus began by singing the first stanza in a low
doleful tone; which was softly accompanied by the harp. At the
conclusion, the foot semichorus began the lamentation, or Ullaloo, from
the final note of the preceding stanza, in which they were answered by
the head semichorus; then both united in one general chorus.

The chorus of the first stanza being ended, the chief bard of the foot
semichorus sung the second stanza, the strain of which was taken from
the concluding note of the preceding chorus, which ended, the head
semichorus began the Gol, or lamentation, in which they were answered by
that of the foot, and then, as before, both united in the general full
chorus. Thus alternately were the song and choruses performed during the
night. I have seen a number of women, sometimes fourteen, twenty-four,
or more, accompany the deceased from his late house to the grave-yard,
divided into two parties on each side the corpse, singing the Ullaloo,
alternately, all the way. That drinking, in what is called the wake, or
watching with the body of the deceased, is practised, and often carried
to a shameful excess, needs little proof. This kind of intemperance
proceeded to such great lengths among the Jews that the Sanhedrin were
obliged to make a decree, to restrain the drinking to ten cups each. I
mention these things more particularly, because I have often observed
that the customs of the aboriginal Irish bear, a very striking
resemblance to those of the ancient Jews, and other Asiatic nations. The
application of these observations I leave to others.

It was a custom with the Greeks to make a great noise with brazen
vessels; and the Romans made a general outcry, called conclamatio,
hoping either to stop the soul which was now taking its flight, or to
awaken the person, if only in a state of torpor. This they did for eight
days together, calling the person incessantly by his name; at the
expiration of which term the phrase, Conclamatum est - all is over -
there is no hope - was used. See the words used in this sense by
Terence, Eun. l. 347. In all probability this was the θορυβουμενον, the
making a violent outcry, mentioned here by the evangelist. How often, on
the death of relatives, do men incumber and perplex themselves with
vain, worldly, and tumultuous ceremonies, instead of making profitable
reflections on death!

[Matthew 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 9:24</span></span>

The maid is not dead, but sleepeth - That is, she is not dead so as to
continue under the power of death; but shall be raised from it as a,
person is from natural sleep.

They laughed him to scorn - Κατεγελων αυτον, they ridiculed him; from
κατα, intensive, and γελαω, I laugh: - they grinned a ghastly smile,
expressive of the contempt they felt for his person and knowledge.
People of the world generally ridicule those truths which they neither
comprehend nor love, and deride those who publish them; but a faithful
minister of God, (copying the example of Christ), keeps on his way, and
does the work of his Lord and Master.

[Matthew 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 9:25</span></span>

He - took her by the hand, and the maid arose - The fountain of life
thus communicating its vital energy to the dead body. Where death has
already taken place, no power but that of the great God can restore to
life; in such a case, vain is the help of man. So the soul that is dead
in trespasses and sins - that is, sentenced to death because of
transgression - and is thus dead in law, can only be restored to
spiritual life by the mighty power of the Lord Jesus; because He alone
has made the atonement, and He alone can pardon transgression. If the
spiritually dead person be utterly unconcerned about the state and fate
of his soul, let a converted relative either bring him to Christ by
leading him to hear the unadulterated Gospel of the kingdom; or bring
Christ to him by fervent, faithful, and persevering prayer.

[Matthew 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 9:26</span></span>

And the fame hereof went abroad - In this business Jesus himself
scarcely appears, but the work effected by his sovereign power is fully
manifested; to teach us that it is the business of a successful preacher
of the Gospel to conceal himself as much as possible, that God alone may
have the glory of his own grace. This is a proper miracle, and a full
exemplification of the unlimited power of Christ.

[Matthew 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 9:27</span></span>

Son of David - This was the same as if they had called him Messiah. Two
things here are worthy of remark:

1st. That it was a generally received opinion at this time in Judea,
that the Messiah should be son of David. ([Joh
7:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#042)).

2dly. That Jesus Christ was generally and incontestably acknowledged as
coming from this stock. [Mat 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#023).

Have mercy on us - That man has already a measure of heavenly light who
knows that he has no merit; that his cry should be a cry for mercy; that
he must be fervent, and that in praying he must follow Jesus Christ as
the true Messiah, the son of David, expected from heaven.

[Matthew 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 9:28</span></span>

When he was come unto the house - That is, the house of Peter at
Capernaum, where he ordinarily lodged.

Believe ye that I am able to do this? - Without faith Jesus does nothing
to men's souls now, no more than he did to their bodies in the days of
his flesh.

They said unto him, Yea, Lord - Under a sense of our spiritual blindness
we should have,

1st. A lively faith in the almighty grace of Christ.

2dly. A fervent, incessant cry for the communication of this grace.

3dly. A proper view of his incarnation, because it is through his union
with our nature, and by his sufferings and death, we are to expect
salvation.

[Matthew 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 9:29</span></span>

According to your faith - See on [Mat
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#013) (note).

[Matthew 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 9:30</span></span>

Straitly charged them - He charged them severely, from ενεβριμησατο,
from εν, and βριμαομαι, to roar or storm with anger; he charged them, on
pain of his displeasure, not to make it as yet public. See the reasons,
[Mat 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004).

[Matthew 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 9:31</span></span>

But they - spread abroad his fame - They should have held their peace;
for to obey is better than sacrifice, [Sa1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022); but man must always be wiser
than God, however, it may be profitable to remark,

1st. That honor pursues those who fly from it.

2dly. He who is thoroughly sensible of God's mercy cannot long contain
his acknowledgments.

3dly. That God in general requires that what a man has received, for his
own salvation, shall become subservient to that of others - Let your
light so shine, etc.

God chooses to help man by man, that all may be firmly knit together in
brotherly love.

[Matthew 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 9:32</span></span>

A dumb man possessed with a devil - Some demons rendered the persons
they possessed paralytic, some blind, others dumb, etc. It was the
interest of Satan to hide his influences under the appearance of natural
disorders. A man who does not acknowledge his sin to God, who prays not
for salvation, who returns no praises for the mercies he is continually
receiving, may well be said to be possessed with a dumb demon.

[Matthew 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 9:33</span></span>

And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spake - The very miracle which
was now wrought was to be the demonstrative proof of the Messiah's being
manifested in the flesh. See [Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005), [Isa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006).

It was never so seen in Israel - The greatest of the prophets has never
been able to do such miracles as these. This was the remark of the
people; and thus we find that the poor and the simple were more ready to
acknowledge the hand of God than the rich and the learned. Many miracles
had been wrought in the course of this one day, and this excited their
surprise.

[Matthew 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 9:34</span></span>

He casteth out devils through the prince of the devils - This verse is
wanting in both the Greek and Latin of the C. Bezae, in another copy of
the Itala, and in Hilary and Juvencus. But see on [Mat
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024) (note).

It is a consummate piece of malice to attribute the works of God to the
devil. Envy cannot suffer the approbation which is given to the
excellencies of others. Those whose hearts are possessed by this vice
speak the very language of the devil. Calumny is but a little distance
from envy. Though all persons may not have as much envy as the
Pharisees, yet they should fear having some degree of it, as all have
the principle from whence it proceeds, viz. sin.

[Matthew 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 9:35</span></span>

Jesus went about all the cities and villages - Of Galilee. See on [Mat
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023), [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024) (note). A real minister of Jesus
Christ, after his example, is neither detained in one place by a
comfortable provision made by some, nor discouraged from pursuing his
work by the calumny and persecution of others. It is proper to remark,
that, wherever Christ comes, the proofs of his presence evidently
appear: he works none but salutary and beneficial miracles, because his
ministry is a ministry of salvation.

Among the people - Εν τω λαω. This clause is omitted by about fifty
MSS., several of them of the first antiquity and authority; by the
Complutensian, and by Bengel; by both the Syriac, both the Arabic, both
the Persic; the Ethiopic, Gothic, Saxon, and all the Itala, except four.
Griesbach has left it out of the text.

[Matthew 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 9:36</span></span>

Moved with compassion - Εσπλαγχνισθη, from σπλαγχνον, a bowel. The Jews
esteemed the bowels to be the seat of sympathy and the tender passions,
and so applied the organ to the sense.

Επλαγχνιζομαι signifies, says Mintert, "to be moved with pity from the
very inmost bowels. It is an emphatic word, signifying a vehement
affection of commiseration, by which the bowels and especially the heart
is moved." Both this verb and the noun seem to be derived from σπαω, to
draw; the whole intestinal canal, in the peristaltic motion of the
bowels, being drawn, affected, and agitated with the sight of a
distressed or miserable object. Pity increases this motion of the
bowels, and produces considerable pain: hence σπλαγχνιζομαι, to have the
bowels moved, signifies to feel pity or compassion at seeing the
miseries of others.

They fainted - Instead of εκλελυμενοι, fainted, all the best MSS.,
versions, and fathers, read εσκυλμενοι, grieved and melancholy. Kypke
says σκυλλειν properly signifies, to pluck off the hair, as persons do
in extreme sorrow or distress. The margin says, They were tired and lay
down.

And were scattered abroad - Ερριμμενοι, thrown down, or, all along. They
were utterly neglected as to the interests of their souls, and rejected
by the proud and disdained Pharisees. This people (οχλος, this mob) that
knoweth not the law, is accursed, [Joh
7:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#049). Thus those execrable men spoke
of the souls that God had made, and of whom they should have been the
instructors.

Those teachers, in name, have left their successors behind them; but, as
in the days of Christ, so now, God has in his mercy rescued the flock
out of the hands of those who only fed upon their flesh, and clothed
themselves with their wool. The days in which a man was obliged to give
his property to what was called The Church, for the salvation of his
soul, Christ being left out of the question, are, thank God, nearly over
and gone. Jesus is the true Shepherd; without him there is nothing but
fainting, fatigue, vexation, and dispersion. O that we may be led out
and in by him, and find pasture!

[Matthew 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 9:37</span></span>

The harvest - The souls who are ready to receive the truth are very
numerous; but the laborers are few. There are multitudes of scribes,
Pharisees, and priests, of reverend and right reverend men; but there
are few that work. Jesus wishes for laborers, not gentlemen, who are
either idle drones, or slaves to pleasure and sin, and nati consumere
fruges. "Born to consume the produce of the soil."

It was customary with the Jews to call their rabbins and students
reapers; and their work of instruction, the harvest. So in Idra Rabba,
s. 2. "The days are few; the creditor is urgent; the crier calls out
incessantly; and the reapers are few." And in Pirkey Aboth: "The day is
short, the work great, the workmen idle, the reward abundant, and the
master of the household is urgent." In all worldly concerns, if there be
the prospect of much gain, most men are willing enough to labor; but if
it be to save their own souls, or the souls of others, what indolence,
backwardness, and carelessness! While their adversary, the devil, is
going about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; and a
careless soul, and especially a careless minister is his especial prey.

The place of the harvest is the whole earth: it signifies little where a
man works, provided it be by the appointment, in the Spirit, and with
the blessing of God.

[Matthew 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 9:38</span></span>

That he will send forth laborers - Οπως εκβαλλη εργατας, that he would
thrust forth laborers. Those who are fittest for the work are generally
most backward to the employment. The man who is forward to become a
preacher knows little of God, of human nature, or of his own heart. It
is, God's province to thrust out such preachers as shall labor; and it
is our duty to entreat him to do so. A minister of Christ is represented
as a day-laborer: he comes into the harvest, not to become lord of it,
not to live on the labor of others, but to work, and to labor his day.
Though the work may be very severe, yet, to use a familiar expression,
there is good wages in the harvest-home; and the day, though hot, is but
a short one.

How earnestly should the flock of Christ pray to the good Shepherd to
send them pastors after his own heart, who will feed them with
knowledge, and who shall be the means of spreading the knowledge of his
truth and the savor of his grace over the face of the whole earth!

The subject of fasting, already slightly noticed in the preceding notes,
should be farther considered.

In all countries, and under all religions, fasting has not only been
considered a duty, but also of extraordinary virtue to procure
blessings, and to avert evils. Hence it has often been practised with
extraordinary rigour, and abused to the most superstitious purposes.
There are twelve kinds of fasts among the Hindoos: -

1\. The person neither eats nor drinks for a day and night. This fast is
indispensable, and occurs twenty-nine times in the year.

2\. The person fasts during the day, and eats at night.

3\. The person eats nothing but fruits, and drinks milk or water.

4\. He eats once during the day and night.

5\. Eats one particular kind of food during the day and night, but as
often as he pleases.

6\. Called Chanderaym, which is, to eat on the first day, only one
mouthful; two on the second; and thus continue increasing one mouthful
every day for a month, and then decreasing a mouthful every day, till he
leaves off where he began.

7\. The person neither eats nor drinks for twelve days.

8\. Lasts twelve days: the first three days he eats a little once in the
day; the next three, he eats only once in the night; the next three, he
eats nothing, unless it be brought to him; and, during the last three
days, he neither eats nor drinks.

9\. Lasts fifteen days. For three days and three nights, he eats only
one handful at night; the next three days and nights, he eats one
handful if it be brought him, if not, he takes nothing. Then he eats
nothing for three days and three nights. The next three days and nights
he takes only a handful of warm water each day. The next three days and
nights he takes a handful of warm milk each day.

10\. For three days and nights he neither eats nor drinks. He lights a
fire, and sits at a door where there enters a hot wind, which he draws
in with his breath.

11\. Lasts fifteen days. Three, days and three nights he eats nothing
but leaves; three days and three nights, nothing but the Indian fig;
three days and three nights, nothing but the seed of the lotus; three
days and three nights, nothing but peepul leaves; three days and three
nights, the expressed juice of a particular kind of grass called doobah.

12\. Lasts a week. First day he eats milk; second, milk-curds; third,
ghee, i.e. clarified butter; fourth, cow's urine; fifth, cow's dung;
sixth, water; seventh, nothing.

During every kind of fast, the person sleeps on the ground, plays at no
game, has no connection with women, neither shaves nor anoints himself,
and bestows alms each day. - Ayeen Akbery, vol. iii. p. 247-250. How
much more simple and effectual is the way of salvation taught in the
Bible! But, because it is true, it is not credited by fallen man.

Fasting is considered by the Mohammedans as an essential part of piety.
Their orthodox divines term it the gate of religion. With them, it is of
two kinds, voluntary and incumbent; and is distinguished by the Mosliman
doctors into three degrees:

1\. The refraining from every kind of nourishment or carnal indulgence.

2\. The restraining the various members from every thing which might
excite sinful or corrupt desires.

3\. The abstracting the mind wholly from worldly cares, and fixing it
exclusively upon God.

Their great annual fast is kept on the month Ramzan, or Ramadhan,
beginning at the first new moon, and continuing until the appearance of
the next; during which, it is required to abstain from every kind of
nourishment from day-break till after sun-set of each day. From this
observance none are excused but the sick, the aged, and children. This
is properly the Mohammedan Lent. See Hedayah, prel. Dis. p. LV. LVI.

It is worthy of remark, that these children of the Bridegroom, the
disciples, did not mourn, were exposed to no persecution, while the
Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus, was with them, but after he had been taken
from them, by death and his ascension, they did fast and mourn; they
were exposed to all manner of hardships, persecutions, and even death
itself, in some of its worst forms.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 10](mat010)

</div>
