<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat010)  [Next](mat012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 11:0</span></span>

Christ, having finished his instructions to his disciples, departs to
preach in different cities, [Mat 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001).
John sends two of his disciples to him to inquire whether he were the
Christ, [Mat 11:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002). Christ's
testimony concerning John, [Mat
11:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007). He upbraids the Jews with
their capriciousness, [Mat 11:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016).
The condemnation of Chorazin, and Bethsaida, and Capernaum, for their
unbelief and impenitence, [Mat
11:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020). Praises the Divine wisdom
for revealing the Gospel to the simple-hearted, [Mat
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025), [Mat
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026). Shows that none can know God
but by the revelation of his Son, [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027). Invites the distressed to come
unto him, and gives them the promise of rest for their souls, [Mat
11:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029).

[Matthew 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 11:1</span></span>

This verse properly belongs to the preceding chapter, from which it
should on no account be separated; as with that it has the strictest
connection, but with this it has none.

To teach and to preach - To teach, to give private instructions to as
many as came unto him; and to preach, to proclaim publicly, that the
kingdom of God is at hand; two grand parts of the duty of a Gospel
minister.

Their cities - The cities of the Jews.

[Matthew 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 11:2</span></span>

John had heard in the prison - John was cast into prison by order of
Herod Antipas, [Mat 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003), etc., (where
see the notes), a little after our Lord began his public ministry, [Mat
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012); and after the first passover,
[Joh 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024).

[Matthew 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 11:3</span></span>

Art thou he that should come - Ο ερχομενος, he that cometh, seems to
have been a proper name of the Messiah; to save or deliver is
necessarily implied. See on [Luk 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#019)
(note).

There is some difficulty in what is here spoken of John. Some have
thought he was utterly ignorant of our Lord's Divine mission, and that
he sent merely for his own information; but this is certainly
inconsistent with his own declaration, [Luk
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#015), etc.; [Joh
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015), [Joh
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#026), [Joh
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033), [Joh
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#028), etc. Others suppose he sent the
message merely for the instruction of his disciples; that, as he saw his
end approaching, he wished them to have the fullest conviction that
Jesus was the Messiah, that they might attach themselves to him.

A third opinion takes a middle course between the two former, and states
that, though John was at first perfectly convinced that Jesus was the
Christ, yet, entertaining some hopes that he would erect a secular
kingdom in Judea, wished to know whether this was likely to take place
speedily. It is very probable that John now began, through the length of
his confinement, to entertain doubts, relative to his kingdom, which
perplexed and harassed his mind; and he took the most reasonable way to
get rid of them at once, viz. by applying to Christ himself.

Two of his disciples - Instead of δυο, two, several excellent MSS., with
both the Syriac, Armenian, Gothic, and one copy of the Itala, have δια,
by; he sent by his disciples.

[Matthew 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 11:4</span></span>

Go and show John the things - ye do hear and see - Christ would have men
to judge only of him and of others by their works. This is the only safe
way of judging. A man is not to be credited because he professes to know
such and such things; but because he demonstrates by his conduct that
his pretensions are not vain.

[Matthew 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 11:5</span></span>

The blind receive their sight, etc. - Αναβλεπωσι, look upwards,
contemplating the heavens which their Lord hath made.

The lame walk - Περιπατωσι, they walk about; to give the fullest proof
to the multitude that their cure was real. These miracles were not only
the most convincing proofs of the supreme power of Christ, but were also
emblematic of that work of salvation which he effects in the souls of
men.

1\. Sinners are blind; their understanding is so darkened by sin that
they see not the way of truth and salvation.

2\. They are lame - not able to walk in the path of righteousness.

3\. They are leprous, their souls are defiled with sin, the most
loathsome and inveterate disease; deepening in themselves, and infecting
others.

4\. They are deaf to the voice of God, his word, and their own
conscience.

5\. They are dead in trespasses and sins; God, who is the life of the
soul, being separated from it by iniquity.

Nothing less than the power of Christ can redeem from all this; and,
from all this, that power of Christ actually does redeem every penitent
believing soul. Giving sight to the blind, and raising the dead, are
allowed by the ancient rabbins to be works which the Messiah should
perform, when he should manifest himself in Israel.

The poor have the Gospel preached to them - And what was this Gospel?
Why, the glad tidings that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners: that he opens the eyes of the blind; enables the lame to walk
with an even, steady, and constant pace in the way of holiness; cleanses
the lepers from all the defilement of their sins; opens the ears of the
deaf to hear his pardoning words; and raises those who were dead in
trespasses and sins to live in union with himself to all eternity.

[Matthew 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 11:6</span></span>

Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me - Or, Happy is he
who will not be stumbled at me; for the word σκανδαλιζεσθαι, in its
root, signifies to hit against or stumble over a thing, which one may
meet with in the way. The Jews, as was before remarked, expected a
temporal deliverer. Many might he tempted to reject Christ, because of
his mean appearance, etc., and so lose the benefit of salvation through
him. To instruct and caution such, our blessed Lord spoke these words.
By his poverty and meanness he condemns the pride and pomp of this
world. He who will not humble himself, and become base, and poor, and
vile in his own eyes, cannot enter into the kingdom of God. It is the
poor, in general, who hear the Gospel; the rich and the great are either
too busy, or too much gratified with temporal things, to pay any
attention to the voice of God.

[Matthew 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 11:7</span></span>

What went ye out into the wilderness to see? - The purport of our Lord's
design, in this and the following verses, is to convince the scribes and
Pharisees of the inconsistency of their conduct in acknowledging John
Baptist for a divinely authorized teacher, and not believing in the very
Christ which he pointed out to them. He also shows, from the
excellencies of John's character, that their confidence in him was not
misplaced, and that this was a farther argument why they should have
believed in him, whom the Baptist proclaimed as being far superior to
himself.

A reed shaken with the wind? - An emblem of an irresolute, unsteady
mind, which believes and speaks one thing to-day, and another to-morrow.
Christ asks these Jews if they had ever found any thing in John like
this: Was he not ever steady and uniform in the testimony he bore to me?
The first excellency which Christ notices in John was his steadiness;
convinced once of the truth, he continued to believe and assert it. This
is essentially necessary to every preacher, and to every private
Christian. He who changes about from opinion to opinion, and from one
sect or party to another, is never to be depended on; there is much
reason to believe that such a person is either mentally weak, or has
never been rationally and divinely convinced of the truth.

[Matthew 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 11:8</span></span>

A man clothed in soft raiment? - A second excellency in John was, his
sober and mortified life. A preacher of the Gospel should have nothing
about him which savours of effeminacy and worldly pomp: he is awfully
mistaken who thinks to prevail on the world to hear him and receive the
truth, by conforming himself to its fashions and manners. Excepting the
mere color of his clothes, we can scarcely now distinguish a preacher of
the Gospel, whether in the establishment of the country, or out of it,
from the merest worldly man. Ruffles, powder, and fribble seem
universally to prevail. Thus the Church and the world begin to shake
hands, the latter still retaining its enmity to God. How can those who
profess to preach the doctrine of the cross act in this way? Is not a
worldly-minded preacher, in the most peculiar sense, an abomination in
the eyes of the Lord?

Are in kings' houses - A third excellency in John was, he did not affect
high things. He was contented to live in the desert, and to announce the
solemn and severe truths of his doctrine to the simple inhabitants of
the country. Let it be well observed, that the preacher who conforms to
the world in his clothing, is never in his element but when he is
frequenting the houses and tables of the rich and great.

[Matthew 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 11:9</span></span>

A prophet? yea - and more than a prophet - That is, one more excellent
(περισσοτερον) than a prophet; one greatly beyond all who had come
before him, being the immediate forerunner of Christ, (see below), and
who was especially commissioned to prepare the way of the Lord.

This was a fourth excellency: he was a prophet, a teacher, a man
divinely commissioned to point out Jesus and his salvation; and more
excellent than any of the old prophets, because he not only pointed out
this Christ, but saw him, and had the honor of dying for that sacred
truth which he steadily believed and boldly proclaimed.

[Matthew 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 11:10</span></span>

Behold, I send my messenger - A fifth excellency of the Baptist was, his
preparing the way of the Lord; being the instrument, in God's hand, of
preparing the people's hearts to receive the Lord Jesus; and it was
probably through his preaching that so many thousands attached
themselves to Christ, immediately on his appearing as a public teacher.

[Matthew 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 11:11</span></span>

A greater than John the Baptist - A sixth excellency of the Baptist - he
was greater than any prophet from the beginning of the world till that
time: -

1st. Because he was prophesied of by them, [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003), and [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001), where Jesus Christ himself seems
to be the speaker.

2ndly. Because he had the privilege of showing the fulfillment of their
predictions, by pointing out that Christ has now come, which they
foretold should come. And

3dly. Because he saw and enjoyed that salvation which they could only
foretell. See Quesnel.

Notwithstanding, he that is least in the kingdom of heaven - By the
kingdom of heaven in this verse is meant, the fullness of the blessings
of the Gospel of peace; which fullness was not known till after Christ
had been crucified, and had risen from the dead. Now the least in this
kingdom, the meanest preacher of a crucified, risen, and glorified
Savior, was greater than John, who was not permitted to live to see the
plenitude of Gospel grace, in the pouring out of the Holy Spirit. Let
the reader observe,

1st. That the kingdom of heaven here does not mean the state of future
glory. See [Mat 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002).

2dly. That it is not in holiness or devotedness to God that the least in
this kingdom is greater than John; but

3dly. That it is merely in the difference of the ministry.

The prophets pointed out a Christ that was coming; John showed that that
Christ was then among them; and the preachers of the Gospel prove that
this Christ has suffered, and entered into his glory, and that
repentance and remission of sins are proclaimed through his blood. There
is a saying similar to this among the Jews: "Even the servant maid that
passed through the Red Sea, saw what neither Ezekiel, nor any other of
the prophets had seen."

[Matthew 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 11:12</span></span>

The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence - The tax-gatherers and
heathens, whom the scribes and Pharisees think have no right to the
kingdom of the Messiah, filled with holy zeal and earnestness, seize at
once on the proffered mercy of the Gospel, and so take the kingdom as by
force from those learned doctors who claimed for themselves the chiefest
places in that kingdom. Christ himself said, The tax-gatherers and
harlots go before you into the kingdom of God. See the parallel place,
[Luk 7:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#028). He that will take, get
possession of the kingdom of righteousness, peace, and spiritual joy,
must be in earnest: all hell will oppose him in every step he takes; and
if a man be not absolutely determined to give up his sins and evil
companions, and have his soul saved at all hazards, and at every
expense, he will surely perish everlastingly. This requires a violent
earnestness.

[Matthew 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 11:13</span></span>

All the prophets and the law prophesied until John - I believe
προεφητευσαν means here, they taught, or continued to instruct. They
were the instructers concerning the Christ who was to come, till John
came and showed that all the predictions of the one, and the types and
ceremonies of the other were now about to be fully and finally
accomplished; for Christ was now revealed. The word is taken in this
sense, [Mat 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022).

[Matthew 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 11:14</span></span>

This is Elias, which was for to come - This should always be written
Elijah, that as strict a conformity as possible might be kept up between
the names in the Old Testament and the New. The Prophet Malachi, who
predicted the coming of the Baptist in the spirit and power of Elijah,
gave the three following distinct characteristics of him. First, That he
should be the forerunner and messenger of the Messiah: Behold I send my
messenger before me, [Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001).
Secondly, That he should appear before the destruction of the second
temple: Even the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple,
ibid. Thirdly, That he should preach repentance to the Jews; and that,
some time after, the great and terrible day of the Lord should come, and
the Jewish land be smitten with a curse, [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005), [Mal
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006). Now these three characters agree
perfectly with the conduct of the Baptist, and what shortly followed his
preaching, and have not been found in any one else; which is a
convincing proof that Jesus was the promised Messiah.

[Matthew 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 11:15</span></span>

He that hath ears to hear, let him hear - As if our Lord had said, These
things are so clear and manifest that a man has only to hear them to be
convinced and fully satisfied of their truth. But neither the Jews of
that time nor of the succeeding times to the present day, have heard or
considered, these things. When spoken to on these subjects, their common
custom is to stop their ears, spit out, and blaspheme; this shows not
only a bad, but a ruined cause. They are deeply and willfully blind.
They will not come unto the light, lest their deeds should become
manifest, that they are not wrought in God. They have ears but they will
not hear.

[Matthew 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 11:16</span></span>

But whereunto shall I liken this generation? - That is, the Jewish
people - την γενεαν ταυτην, this race: and so the word γενεα is often to
be understood in the evangelists.

In the markets - Or, places of concourse, αγοραις, from αγειρω, I gather
together; not a market-place only, but any place of public resort:
probably meaning here, places of public amusement.

Calling unto their fellows - Or, companions. Instead of εταιροις,
companions, many of the best MSS. have ετεροις, others. The great
similarity of the words might have easily produced this difference.

There are some to whom every thing is useful in leading them to God;
others, to whom nothing is sufficient. Every thing is good to an upright
mind, every thing bad to a vicious heart.

[Matthew 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 11:17</span></span>

We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced - We have begun the
music, which should have been followed by the dance, but ye have not
attended to it.

We have mourned - and ye have not lamented - Ye have not smote the
breast: ουκ εκοψασθε, from κοπτομαι, to strike, or beat the breasts with
the hands, particularly in lamentation. So used, [Nah
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#007); [Luk
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013); [Luk
23:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#048), and by the best Greek and Roman
writers. There is an allusion here to those funeral lamentations
explained [Mat 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023).

[Matthew 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 11:18</span></span>

For John came neither eating nor drinking - Leading a very austere and
mortified life: and yet, he did not receive him. A sinner will not be
persuaded that what he has no mind to imitate can come from God. There
are some who will rather blame holiness itself, than esteem it in those
whom they do not like.

He hath a devil - He is a vile hypocrite, influenced by a demon to
deceive and destroy the simple.

[Matthew 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 11:19</span></span>

The Son of man came eating and drinking - That is, went wheresoever he
was invited to eat a morsel of bread, and observed no rigid fasts: how
could he, who had no corrupt appetites to mortify or subdue?

They say, Behold a man gluttonous, etc. - Whatever measures the
followers of God may take, they will not escape the censure of the
world: the best way is not to be concerned at them. Iniquity, being
always ready to oppose and contradict the Divine conduct, often
contradicts and exposes itself.

But wisdom is justified of her children - Those who follow the dictates
of true wisdom ever justify, point out as excellent, the holy maxims by
which they are guided, for they find the way pleasantness, and the path,
peace. Of, here, and in many places of our translation, ought to be
written by in modern English. Some suppose that our blessed Lord applies
the epithet of η σοφια, that Wisdom to himself; as he does that of Son
of man, in the first clause of the verse: and that this refers to the
sublime description given of wisdom in Proverbs 8. Others have supposed
that by the children or sons (τεκνων) of wisdom our Lord means John
Baptist and himself, who came to preach the doctrines of true wisdom to
the people, and who were known to be teachers come from God by all those
who seriously attended to their ministry: they recommending themselves,
by the purity of their doctrines, and the holiness of their lives, to
every man's conscience in the sight of God. It is likely, however, that
by children our Lord simply means the fruits or effects of wisdom,
according to the Hebrew idiom, which denominates the fruits or effects
of a thing, its children. So in [Job
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007), sparks emitted by coals are
termed בני רשף beney resheph, the children of the coal. It was probably
this well known meaning of the word, which led the Codex Vaticanus, one
of the most ancient MSS. in the world, together with the Syriac, Persic,
Coptic, and Ethiopic, to read εργων, works, instead of τεκνων, sons or
children. Wisdom is vindicated by her works, i.e. the good effects prove
that the cause is excellent.

The children of true wisdom can justify all God's ways in their
salvation; as they know that all the dispensations of Providence work
together for the good of those who love and fear God. See on [Luk
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#035) (note).

[Matthew 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 11:20</span></span>

Then began he to upbraid the cities - The more God has done to draw men
unto himself, the less excusable are they if they continue in iniquity.
If our blessed Lord had not done every thing that was necessary for the
salvation of these people, he could not have reproached them for their
impenitence.

[Matthew 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 11:21</span></span>

Wo unto thee, Chorazin - Bethsaida! - It would be better to translate
the word ουαι σοι, alas for thee, than wo to thee. The former is an
exclamation of pity; the latter a denunciation of wrath. It is evident
that our Lord used it in the former sense. It is not known precisely
where Chorazin was situated; but as Christ joins it in the same censure
with Bethsaida, which was in Upper Galilee, beyond the sea, [Mar
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045), it is likely that Chorazin was
in the same quarter. Though the people in these cities were (generally)
impenitent, yet there is little doubt that several received the word of
life. Indeed, Bethsaida itself furnished not less than three of the
twelve apostles, Philip, Andrew, and Peter. See [Joh
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#044).

Tyre and Sidon - Were two heathen cities, situated on the shore of the
Mediterranean Sea, into which it does not appear that Christ ever went,
though he was often very nigh to them; see [Mat
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021).

They would have repented long ago - Παλαι, formerly, seems here to refer
to the time of Ezekiel, who denounced destruction against Tyre and
Sidon, Ezekiel 26, 27, and 28. Our Lord, then, intimates that, if
Ezekiel had done as many miracles in those cities as himself had in
Chorazin and Bethsaida, the inhabitants would have repented in sackcloth
and ashes, with the deepest and most genuine sorrow.

A Hindoo who renounces the secular life, and becomes a religious
mendicant, often covers himself with a coarse cloth sprinkled over with
ashes. This is the sackcloth and ashes which our Lord refers to; and
this covering was the outward sign of deep repentance, and forsaking of
sin.

[Matthew 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 11:22</span></span>

But - it shall be more tolerable - Every thing will help to overwhelm
the impenitent at the tribunal of God - the benefits and favors which
they have received, as well as the sins which they have committed.

[Matthew 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 11:23</span></span>

Thou, Capernaum - exalted unto heaven - A Hebrew metaphor, expressive of
the utmost prosperity, and the enjoyment of the greatest privileges.
This was properly spoken of this city, because that in it our Lord
dwelt, and wrought many of his miraculous works.

Shalt be brought down to hell - Perhaps not meaning, here, the place of
torment, but rather a state of desolation. The original word is Hades,
Αδης, from α, not, and ιδειν, to see; the invisible receptacle or
mansion of the dead, answering to שאול sheol, in Hebrew; and implying
often, 1st. the grave; 2dly. the state of separate souls, or unseen
world of spirits, whether of torment, [Luk
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023), or, in general, [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018); [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008); [Rev
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#013), [Rev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014). The word hell, used in the
common translation, conveys now an improper meaning of the original
word; because hell is only used to signify the place of the damned. But,
as the word hell comes from the Anglo-Saxon, helan, to cover, or hide,
hence the tiling or slating of a house is called, in some parts of
England (particularly Cornwall) heling, to this day; and the covers of
books (in Lancashire) by the same name: so the literal import of the
original word Αδης was formerly well expressed by it. Here it means a
state of the utmost wo, and ruin, and desolation, to which these
impenitent cities should be reduced. This prediction of our Lord was
literally fulfilled; for, in the wars between the Romans and the Jews,
these cities were totally destroyed, so that no traces are now found of
Bethsaida, Chorazin, or Capernaum. See Bp. Pearce.

[Matthew 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 11:24</span></span>

But - it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom - Γη Σοδομων, the
land of the Sodomites; i.e. the ancient inhabitants of that city and its
neighborhood.

In Jude, [Jde 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007), we are told that
these persons are suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. The
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah happened A. M. 2107, which was 1897
years before the incarnation. What a terrible thought is this! It will
be more tolerable for certain sinners, who have already been damned
nearly four thousand years, than for those who, live and die infidels
under the Gospel! There are various degrees of punishments in hell,
answerable to various degrees of guilt, and the contempt manifested to,
and the abuse made of; the preaching of the Gospel, will rank
semi-infidel Christians in the highest list of transgressors, and
purchase them the hottest place in hell! Great God! save the reader from
this destruction!

Day of judgment - May either refer to that particular time in which God
visits for iniquity, or to that great day in which he will judge the
world by the Lord Jesus Christ. The day of Sodom's judgment was that in
which it was destroyed by fire and brimstone from heaven, [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024); and the day of judgment to
Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, was the time in which they were
destroyed by the Romans, [Mat 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023).
But there is a day of final judgment, when Hades itself, (sinners in a
state of partial punishment in the invisible world) shall be cast into
the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second death. See [Rev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014).

[Matthew 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 11:25</span></span>

I thank thee - Εξομολογουμαι σοι, I fully agree with thee - I am
perfectly of the same mind. Thou hast acted in all things according to
the strictest holiness, justice, mercy, and truth.

Wise and prudent - The scribes and Pharisees, vainly puffed up by their
fleshly minds, and having their foolish hearts darkened, refusing to
submit to the righteousness of God (God's method of saving man by
Christ) and going about to establish their own righteousness, (their own
method of saving themselves), they rejected God's counsel, and God sent
the peace and salvation of the Gospel to others, called here babes, (his
disciples), simple-hearted persons, who submitted to be instructed and
saved in God's own way. Let it be observed, that our Lord does not thank
the Father that he had hidden these things from the wise and prudent,
but that, seeing they were hidden from them, he had revealed them to the
others.

There is a remarkable saying in the Talmudists, which casts light upon
this: "Rab. Jochanan said: 'From the time in which the temple was
destroyed, wisdom was taken away from the prophets, and given to fools
and children.' Bava Bathra, fol. 12. Again: 'In the days of the Messiah,
every species of wisdom, even the most profound, shall, be revealed; and
this even to children.'" Synop. Sohar. fol. 10.

[Matthew 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 11:26</span></span>

Even so, Father - Ναι ο πατηρ. An emphatical ratification of the
preceding address.

It was right that the heavenly wisdom, despised, rejected, and
persecuted by the scribes and Pharisees, should be offered to the simple
people, and afterwards to the foolish people, the Gentiles, who are the
children of wisdom, and justify God in his ways, by bringing forth that
fruit of the Gospel of which the Pharisees refused to receive even the
seed.

[Matthew 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 11:27</span></span>

All things are delivered unto me of my Father - This is a great truth,
and the key of the science of salvation. The man Christ Jesus receives
from the Father, and in consequence of his union with the eternal
Godhead becomes the Lord and sovereign Dispenser of all things. All the
springs of the Divine favor are in the hands of Christ, as Priest of
God, and atoning Sacrifice for men: all good proceeds from him, as
Savior, Mediator, Head, Pattern, Pastor, and sovereign Judge of the
whole world.

No man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man, etc. -
None can fully comprehend the nature and attributes of God, but Christ;
and none can fully comprehend the nature, incarnation, etc., of Christ,
but the Father. The full comprehension and acknowledgment of the
Godhead, and the mystery of the Trinity, belong to God alone.

[Matthew 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 11:28</span></span>

Come unto me - This phrase in the new covenant implies simply, believing
in Christ, and becoming his disciple, or follower.

All ye that labor and are heavy laden - The metaphor here appears to be
taken from a man who has a great load laid upon him, which he must carry
to a certain place: every step he takes reduces his strength, and
renders his load the more oppressive. However, it must be carried on;
and he labors, uses his utmost exertions, to reach the place where it is
to be laid down. A kind person passing by, and, seeing his distress,
offers to ease him of his load, that he may enjoy rest.

The Jews, heavily laden with the burdensome rites of the Mosaic
institution, rendered still more oppressive by the additions made by the
scribes and Pharisees, who, our Lord says, ([Mat
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004)), bound on heavy burdens; and
laboring, by their observance of the law, to make themselves pleasing to
God, are here invited to lay down their load, and receive the salvation
procured for them by Christ.

Sinners, wearied in the ways of iniquity, are also invited to come to
this Christ, and find speedy relief.

Penitents, burdened with the guilt of their crimes, may come to this
Sacrifice, and find instant pardon.

Believers, sorely tempted, and oppressed by the remains of the carnal
mind, may come to this blood, that cleanseth from all unrighteousness;
and, purified from all sin, and powerfully succored in every temptation,
they shall find uninterrupted rest in this complete Savior.

All are invited to come, and all are promised rest. If few find rest
from sin and vile affections, it is because few come to Christ to
receive it.

[Matthew 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 11:29</span></span>

Take my yoke upon you - Strange paradox! that a man already weary and
overloaded must take a new weight upon him, in order to be eased and
find rest! But this advice is similar to that saying, [Psa
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022). Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he will sustain thee; i.e. trust thy soul and concerns to him, and
he will carry both thyself and thy load.

I am meek and lowly in heart - Wherever pride and anger dwell, there is
nothing but mental labor and agony; but, where the meekness and humility
of Christ dwell, all is smooth, even, peaceable, and quiet; for the work
of righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness
and assurance for ever. [Isa 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017).

[Matthew 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 11:30</span></span>

For my yoke is easy - My Gospel imposes nothing that is difficult; on
the contrary, it provides for the complete removal of all that which
oppresses and renders man miserable, viz. sin. The commandments of
Christ are not grievous. Hear the whole: Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself. Can any thing be
more congenial to the nature of man than love? - such a love as is
inspired by God, and in which the soul rests supremely satisfied and
infinitely happy? Taste, and know, by experience, how good the Lord is,
and how worthy his yoke is to be taken, borne, and loved. This most
tender invitation of the compassionate Jesus is sufficient to inspire
the most diffident soul with confidence. See on [Mar
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#034) (note).

Creeshna, the incarnate God of the Hindoos, is represented in the Geeta
addressing one of his beloved disciples thus: "I am the creator of all
things, and all things proceed from me. Those who are endued with
spiritual wisdom, believe this, and worship me: their very hearts and
minds are in me; they rejoice among themselves, and delight in speaking
of my name, and teaching one another my doctrine. I gladly inspire those
who are constantly employed in my service with that use of reason by
which they come unto me; and, in compassion, I stand in my own nature,
and dissipate the darkness of their ignorance with the light of the lamp
of wisdom." Bhagvat Geeta, p. 84.

The word עול aval, among the Jews, which we properly enough translate
yoke, signified not only that sort of neck-harness by which bullocks
drew in wagons, carts, or in the plough; but also any kind of bond, or
obligation, to do some particular thing, or to do some particular work.
By them it is applied to the following things: -

1\. The yoke of the Kingdom of heaven, עול מלכות השמים obedience to the
revealed will of God.

2\. The yoke of the Law, עול הורה the necessity of obeying all the
rites, ceremonies, etc., of the Mosaic institution.

3\. The yoke of the Precept, עול מצוה the necessity of performing that
particular obligation by which any person had bound himself, such as
that of the Nazarite, etc.

4\. The yoke of Repentance, עול של השוכה without which, they knew, they
could not enter into the kingdom of heaven. With the Jews, repentance
not only implied forsaking sin, but fasting, mortification, etc.

5\. The yoke of Faith, עול אמונה the necessity of believing in the
promised Messiah.

6\. The Divine yoke, עול רלעילא the obligation to live a spiritual life;
a life of thanksgiving and gratitude unto God.

In Shemoth Rabba it is said: "Because the ten tribes did not take the
yoke of the holy and blessed God upon them, therefore Sennacherib led
them into captivity."

Christ's yoke means, the obligation to receive him as the Messiah, to
believe his doctrine, and to be in all things conformed to his Word and
to his Spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 12](mat012)

</div>
