<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat009)  [Next](mat011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 10:0</span></span>

Jesus calls, commissions, and names his twelve disciples, [Mat
10:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001). Gives them particular
instructions relative to the objects of their ministry, [Mat
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005), [Mat
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006). Mode of preaching, etc., [Mat
10:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007). Foretells the afflictions and
persecutions they would have to endure, and the support they should
receive, [Mat 10:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016). Cautions them
against betraying his cause, in order to procure their personal safety,
[Mat 10:26-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026). And gives especial
promises to those who should assist his faithful servants in the
execution of their work, [Mat
10:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040).

[Matthew 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 10:1</span></span>

Twelve disciples - Our Lord seems to have had the twelve patriarchs,
heads of the congregation of Israel, in view, in his choosing twelve
disciples. That he had the plan of the ancient Jewish Church in his eye
is sufficiently evident from [Mat
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028); and from [Luk
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001); [Luk
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030); [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001), etc., and [Rev
21:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#012).

He gave them power against unclean spirits - The word κατα, against,
which our translators have supplied in Italic, is found in many MSS. of
good note, and in the principal versions. Here we find the first call to
the Christian ministry, and the end proposed by the commission given. To
call persons to the ministry belongs only to Him who can give them power
to cast out unclean spirits. He whose ministry is not accompanied with
healing to diseased souls, was never called of God. But let it be
observed, that, though the spiritual gifts requisite for the ministry
must be supplied by God himself, yet this does not preclude the
importance of human learning. No man can have his mind too well
cultivated, to whom a dispensation of the Gospel is committed. The
influence of the Spirit of God was no more designed to render human
learning useless, than that learning should be considered as superseding
the necessity of Divine inspiration.

[Matthew 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 10:2</span></span>

Apostles - This is the first place where the word is used. ΑποϚολος, an
apostle, comes from αποϚελλω, I send a message. The word was anciently
used to signify a person commissioned by a king to negotiate any affair
between him and any other power or people. Hence αποϚολοι and κηρυκες,
apostles and heralds, are of the same import in Herodotus. See the
remarks at the end of chap. 3.

It is worthy of notice, that those who were Christ's apostles were first
his disciples; to intimate, that men must be first taught of God, before
they be sent of God. Jesus Christ never made an apostle of any man who
was not first his scholar or disciple. These twelve apostles were
chosen.

1\. That they might be with our Lord, to see and witness his miracles,
and hear his doctrine.

2\. That they might bear testimony of the former, and preach his truth
to mankind.

The first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; etc. - We
are not to suppose that the word πρωτος, first, refers to any kind of
dignity, as some have imagined; it merely signifies the first in order -
the person first mentioned. A pious man remarks: "God here unites by
grace those who were before united by nature." Though nature cannot be
deemed a step towards grace, yet it is not to be considered as always a
hinderance to it. Happy the brothers who are joint envoys of Heaven, and
the parents who have two or more children employed as ambassadors for
God! But this is a very rare case; and family compacts in the work of
the ministry are dangerous and should be avoided.

[Matthew 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 10:3</span></span>

Bartholomew - Many are of opinion that this was Nathanael, mentioned
[Joh 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046), whose name was probably
Nathanael bar Talmai, Nathanael, the son of Talmai: here, his own name
is repressed, and he is called Bar Talmai, or Bartholomew, from his
father.

Matthew the publican - The writer of this history. See the preface.

James the son of Alpheus - This person was also called Cleopas, or
Clopas, [Luk 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018); [Joh
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025). He had married Mary, sister to
the blessed Virgin, [Joh 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025).

[Matthew 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 10:4</span></span>

Simon - He was third son of Alpheus, and brother of James and Jude, or
Judas, [Mat 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055).

The Canaanite - This word is not put here to signify a particular
people, as it is elsewhere used in the Sacred Writings; but it is formed
from the Hebrew קנא kana, which signifies zealous, literally translated
by Luke, [Luk 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#015), ζηλωτης, zelotes,
or the zealous, probably from his great fervency in preaching the Gospel
of his Master. But see [Luk 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#015).

Judas Iscariot - Probably from the Hebrew איש קריות ish kerioth, a man
of Kerioth, which was a city in the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#025), where it is likely this man was
born.

As אסכרא iscara, signifies the quinsy, or strangulation, and Judas
hanged himself after he had betrayed our Lord, Dr. Lightfoot seems
inclined to believe that he had his name from this circumstance, and
that it was not given him till after his death.

Who also betrayed him - Rather, even he who betrayed him, or delivered
him up; for so, I think, ο και παραδους αυτον should be translated. The
common translation, who Also betrayed him, is very exceptionable, as it
seems to imply, he was betrayed by some others, as well as by Judas.

[Matthew 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 10:5</span></span>

These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded - To be properly qualified
for a minister of Christ, a man must be,

1\. filled with the spirit of holiness;

2\. called to this particular work;

3\. instructed in its nature, etc.; and,

4\. commissioned to go forth, and testify the Gospel of the grace of
God.

These are four different gifts which a man must receive from God by
Christ Jesus. To these let him add all the human qualifications he can
possibly attain; as in his arduous work he will require every gift and
every grace.

Go not into the way of the Gentiles - Our Lord only intended that the
first offers of salvation should be made to the Jewish people; and that
the heathen should not be noticed in this first mission, that no
stumbling-block might be cast in the way of the Jews.

Into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not - The Samaritans had
afterwards the Gospel preached to them by Christ himself, [Joh
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#004), etc., for the reason assigned
above. Such as God seems at first to pass by are often those for whom he
has designed his greatest benefits, (witness the Samaritans, and the
Gentiles in general), but he has his own proper time to discover and
reveal them.

The history of the Samaritans is sufficiently known from the Old
Testament. Properly speaking, the inhabitants of the city of Samaria
should be termed Samaritans; but this epithet belongs chiefly to the
people sent into that part of the promised land by Salmanezer, king of
Assyria, in the year of the world 3283, when he carried the Israelites
that dwelt there captives beyond the Euphrates, and sent a mixed people,
principally Cuthites, to dwell in their place. These were altogether
heathens at first; but they afterwards incorporated the worship of the
true God with that of their idols. See the whole account, [Kg2
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005), etc. From this time they feared
Jehovah, and served other gods till after the Babylonish captivity. From
Alexander the Great, Sanballat, their governor, obtained permission to
build a temple upon Mount Gerizim, which the Jews conceiving to be in
opposition to their temple at Jerusalem, hated them with a perfect
hatred, and would have no fellowship with them. The Samaritans
acknowledge the Divine authority of the law of Moses, and carefully
preserve it in their own characters, which are probably the genuine
ancient Hebrew; the character which is now called Hebrew being that of
the Chaldeans. The Samaritan Pentateuch is printed in the London
Polyglott, and is an undeniable record. A poor remnant of this people is
found still at Naplouse, the ancient Shechem; but they exist in a state
of very great poverty and distress, and probably will soon become
extinct.

[Matthew 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 10:6</span></span>

But go rather to the lost sheep, etc. - The Jewish Church was the
ancient fold of God; but the sheep had wandered from their Shepherd, and
were lost. Our blessed Lord sends these under-shepherds to seek, find,
and bring them back to the Shepherd and Overseer of their souls.

[Matthew 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 10:7</span></span>

And as ye go, preach - πορευομενοι δε κηρυσσετε, and as you proceed,
proclaim like heralds - make this proclamation wherever ye go, and while
ye are journeying. Preach and travel; and, as ye travel, preach -
proclaim salvation to all you meet. Wherever the ministers of Christ go,
they find lost, ruined souls; and, wherever they find them, they should
proclaim Jesus, and his power to save. For an explanation of the word
proclaim or preach, see on [Mat 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001)
(note).

From this commission we learn what the grand subject of apostolic
preaching was - The Kingdom Of Heaven Is At Hand! This was the great
message. "They preached," says Quesnel, "to establish the faith; the
kingdom, to animate the hope; of heaven, to inspire the love of heavenly
things, and the contempt of earthly; which is at hand, that men may
prepare for it without delay."

[Matthew 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 10:8</span></span>

Raise the dead - This is wanting in the MSS. marked EKLMS of Griesbach,
and in those marked BHV of Mathai, and in upwards of one hundred others.
It is also wanting in the Syriac, (Vienna edition), latter Persic,
Sahidic, Armenian, Sclavonic, and in one copy of the Itala; also in
Athanasius, Basil, and Chrysostom. There is no evidence that the
disciples raised any dead person previously to the resurrection of
Christ. The words should certainly be omitted, unless we could suppose
that the authority now given respected not only their present mission,
but comprehended also their future conduct. But that our blessed Lord
did not give this power to his disciples at this time, is, I think,
pretty evident from [Mat 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001), and
from [Luk 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#006), [Luk
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#010); [Luk
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019), [Luk
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020), where, if any such power had
been given, or exercised, it would doubtless have been mentioned.
Wetstein has rejected it, and so did Griesbach in his first edition; but
in the second (1796) he has left it in the text, with a note of
doubtfulness.

Freely ye have received, freely give - A rule very necessary, and of
great extent. A minister or laborer in the Gospel vineyard, though
worthy of his comfortable support while in the work, should never preach
for hire, or make a secular traffic of a spiritual work. What a scandal
is it for a man to traffic with gifts which he pretends, at least, to
have received from the Holy Ghost, of which he is not the master, but
the dispenser. He who preaches to get a living, or to make a fortune, is
guilty of the most infamous sacrilege.

[Matthew 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 10:9</span></span>

Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass, in your purses - Εις τας
ξωνας υμων, in your Girdles. It is supposed that the people of the east
carry their money in a fold of their girdles. This is scarcely correct:
they carry it in a purse in their bosom, under their girdles. This I
have often observed.

In a thousand instances an apostolic preacher, who goes to the
wilderness to seek the lost sheep, will be exposed to hunger and cold,
and other inconveniences; he must therefore resign himself to God,
depending on his providence for the necessaries of life. If God have
sent him, he is bound to support him, and will do it: anxiety therefore,
in him, is a double crime, as it insinuates a bad opinion of the Master
who has employed him. Every missionary should make himself master of
this subject.

Have no money in your purse, is a command, obedience to which was
secured by the narrow circumstances of most of the primitive genuine
preachers of the Gospel. Whole herds of friars mendicants have professed
the same principle, and abandoned themselves to voluntary poverty; but
if the money be in the heart it is a worse evil. In the former case, it
may be a temptation to sin; in the latter, it must be ruinous.

[Matthew 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 10:10</span></span>

Nor scrip for your journey - To carry provisions. This was called תורמיל
tormil, by the rabbins; it was a leathern pouch hung about their necks,
in which they put their victuals. This was properly, the shepherd's bag.

Neither two coats, etc. - Nothing to encumber you.

Nor yet staves - Ραβδον, a staff, as in the margin, but, instead of
ραβδον, staff, which is the common reading, all the following MSS. and
versions have ραβδους, staves, and CEFGKLMPS. V. ninety-three others,
Coptic, Armenian, latter Syriac, one of the Itala, Chrysostom, and
Theophylact. This reading is of great importance, as it reconciles this
place with [Luk 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#003), and removes the
seeming contradiction from [Mar 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#008);
as if he had said: "Ye shall take nothing to defend yourselves with,
because ye are the servants of the Lord, and are to be supported by his
bounty, and defended by his power. In a word, be like men in haste, and
eager to begin the important work of the ministry. The sheep are
lost-ruined: Satan is devouring them: give all diligence to pluck them
out of the jaws of the destroyer."

The workman is worthy of his meat - Της τροφης αυτου, of his
maintenance. It is a maintenance, and that only, which a minister of God
is to expect, and that he has a Divine right to; but not to make a
fortune, or lay up wealth: besides, it is the workman, he that labors in
the word and doctrine, that is to get even this. How contrary to Christ
is it for a man to have vast revenues, as a minister of the Gospel, who
ministers no Gospel, and who spends the revenues of the Church to its
disgrace and ruin!

[Matthew 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 10:11</span></span>

Into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter - In the commencement of
Christianity, Christ and his preachers were all itinerant.

Inquire who in it is worthy - That is, of a good character; for a
preacher of the Gospel should be careful of his reputation, and lodge
only with those who are of a regular life.

There abide till ye go thence - Go not about from house to house, [Luk
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007). Acting contrary to this precept
has often brought a great disgrace on the Gospel of God. Stay in your
own lodging as much as possible, that you may have time for prayer and
study. Seldom frequent the tables of the rich and great; if you do, it
will unavoidably prove a snare to you. The unction of God will perish
from your mind, and your preaching be only a dry barren repetition of
old things; the bread of God in your hands will be like the dry, mouldy,
Gibeonitish crusts, mentioned [Jos
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#005). He who knows the value of time,
and will redeem it from useless chit-chat, and trifling visits, will
find enough for all the purposes of his own salvation, the cultivation
of his mind, and the work of the ministry. He to whom time is not
precious, and who lives not by rule, never finds time sufficient for any
thing, is always embarrassed, always in a hurry, and never capable of
bringing one good purpose to proper effect.

[Matthew 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 10:12</span></span>

Salute it - Λεγουτες, ειρηνη εν τω οικω τουτω, saying, "Peace be to this
house." This clause, which, as explanatory of the word ασπασασθε, is
necessary to the connection in which it now stands, is added, by the
MSS. D and L, and forty-three others, the Armenian, Ethiopic, Slavonic,
Saxon, Vulgate, all the copies of the old Itala, Theophylact, and
Hilary. The clause is also found in several modern versions. The modern
Greek has λεγοντες· ειρηνη εις το σκηπρι τουτο. The Italian, by Matthew,
of Erberg, and of Diodati, renders it thus: Pace sia a questa casa.
Peace be to this house.

It is found also in Wickliff, and in my old MS. Seyinge, pees be to this
hous. Some suppose it is an addition taken from Luke; but there is
nearly as much reason to believe he took it from Matthew.

Peace, שלום, among the Hebrews, had a very extensive meaning: - it
comprehended all blessings, spiritual and temporal. Hence that saying of
the rabbins, גדול שלום שכל הברכות כלולות בו Gadal shalom, shecol
haberacoth culoloth bo. Great is Peace, for all other blessings are
comprehended in it. To wish peace to a family, in the name and by the
authority of Christ, was in effect a positive promise, on the Lord's
side, of all the good implied in the wish. This was paying largely even
beforehand. Whoever receives the messengers of God into his house
confers the highest honor upon himself, and not upon the preacher, whose
honor is from God, and who comes with the blessings of life eternal to
that man and his family who receives him.

In India, it is customary for a way-faring man, when night draws on, to
enter a house, and simply say, "Sir, I am a guest with you this night."
If the owner cannot lodge him, he makes an apology, and the traveler
proceeds to another house.

[Matthew 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 10:13</span></span>

If that house be worthy - If that family be proper for a preacher to
lodge in, and the master be ready to embrace the message of salvation.

Your peace - The blessings you have prayed for shall come upon the
family: God will prosper them in their bodies, souls, and substance.

But if it be not worthy - As above explained.

Let your peace - The blessings prayed for, return to you. Προς υμας
επιϚραφητω, it shall turn back upon yourselves. They shall get nothing,
and you shall have an increase.

The trials, disappointments, insults, and wants of the followers of
Christ become, in the hand of the all-wise God, subservient to their
best interests: hence, nothing can happen to them without their deriving
profit from it, unless it be their own fault.

[Matthew 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 10:14</span></span>

Shake off the dust of your feet - The Jews considered themselves defiled
by the dust of a heathen country, when was represented by the prophets
as a polluted laud, [Amo 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#017), when
compared with the land of Israel, which was considered as a holy land,
[Eze 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001); therefore, to shake the
dust of any city of Israel from off one's clothes or feet was an
emblematical action, signifying a renunciation of all farther connection
with them, and placing them on a level with the cities of the Heathen.
See [Amo 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007).

[Matthew 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 10:15</span></span>

In the day of judgment - Or, punishment, - κρισεως. Perhaps not meaning
the day of general judgment, nor the day of the destruction of the
Jewish state by the Romans; but a day in which God should send
punishment on that particular city, or on that person, for their crimes.
So the day of judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah, was the time in which the
Lord destroyed them by fire and brimstone, from the Lord out of heaven.

If men are thus treated for not receiving the preachers of the Gospel,
what will it be to despise the Gospel itself, to decry it, to preach the
contrary, to hinder the preaching of it, to abuse those who do preach it
in its purity, or to render it fruitless by calumnies and lies! Their
punishment, our Lord intimates, shall be greater than that inflicted on
the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah!

[Matthew 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 10:16</span></span>

Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves - He who is
called to preach the Gospel is called to embrace a state of constant
labor, and frequent suffering. He who gets ease and pleasure, in
consequence of embracing the ministerial office, neither preaches the
Gospel, nor is sent of God. If he did the work of an evangelist, wicked
men and demons would both oppose him.

Wise (φρονιμοι prudent) as serpents, and harmless as doves - This is a
proverbial saying: so in Shir hashirim Rabba, fol. 16, "The holy blessed
God said to the Israelites, Ye shall be towards me as upright as the
doves; but, towards the Gentiles, as cunning as serpents."

There is a beauty in this saying which is seldom observed. The serpent
is represented as prudent to excess, being full of cunning, [Gen
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001); [Co2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003); and the dove is simple, even to
stupidity, [Hos 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#011); but Jesus Christ
corrects here the cunning of the serpent, by the simplicity of the dove;
and the too great simplicity of the dove, by the cunning of the serpent.
For a fine illustration of this text, see the account of the Boiga: -

"This species is remarkably beautiful, combining the richest colors of
the finest gems with the splendor of burnished gold, mingled with dark
brown shades, which contrast and heighten its brilliant ornaments. The
whole under surface of the head and body is of a silver white, separated
from the changing blue of the back by a golden chain on each side, the
whole length of the body. This fine blue and silver, ornamented with
gold, by no means give a full idea of the beautiful embroidery of the
boiga. We must take in all the reflected tints of silver color, golden
yellow, red, blue, green, and black, mingled, and changing in the most
extraordinary and beautiful manner possible; so that, when about to
change its skin, it seems studded with a mixed assemblage of diamonds,
emeralds, topazes, sapphires, and rubies, under a thin transparent veil
of bluish crystal. Thus, in the rich and torrid plains of India, where
the most splendid gems abound, nature seems to have chosen to reunite
them all, together with the noble metals, to adorn the brilliant robe of
the boiga. This is one of the most slender of serpents in proportion to
its length. The specimens in the royal collection, which exceed three
feet in length, are hardly a few lines in diameter. The tail is almost
as long as the body, and at the end is like a needle for fineness; yet
it is sometimes flattened above, below, and on the two sides, rendering
it in some measure square. From the delicacy of its form, its movements
are necessarily extremely agile; so that, doubling itself up several
times, it can spring to a considerable distance, with great swiftness.
It can twine and twist itself, most readily, and nimbly, around trees or
other such bodies; climbing, or descending, or suspending itself, with
the utmost facility. The boiga feeds on small birds, which it swallows
very easily, notwithstanding the small diameter of its body, in
consequence of the great distensibility of its jaws, throat, and
stomach, common to it with other serpents. It conceals itself under the
foliage of trees, on purpose to surprise the small birds, and is said to
attract them by a peculiar kind of whistling, to which the term of song
has been applied; but we must consider this as an exaggeration, as its
long divided tongue, and the conformation of its other organs of sound,
are only adapted for producing a hiss, or species of simple whistle,
instead of forming a melodious assemblage of tones. Yet, if nature has
not reckoned the boiga among the songsters of the woods, it seems to
possess a more perfect instinct than other serpents, joined to more
agile movements, and more magnificent ornament. In the isle of Borneo,
the children play with the boiga, without the smallest dread. They carry
it in their hands, as innocent as themselves, and twist it about their
necks, arms, and bodies, in a thousand directions. This circumstance
brings to recollection that fine emblem of Candour and Confidence
imagined by the genius of the ancients: a child smiling on a snake,
which holds him fast in his convolutions. But, in that beautiful
allegory, the snake is supposed to conceal a deadly poison; while the
boiga returns caress for caress to the Indian children who fondle it,
and seems pleased to be twisted about their delicate hands. As the
appearance of such nimble and innocent animals in the forests must be
extremely beautiful, displaying their splendid colors, and gliding
swiftly from branch to branch, without possessing the smallest noxious
quality, we might regret that this species should require a degree of
heat greatly superior to that of our regions, and that it can only
subsist near the tropics, in Asia, Africa, and America. It has usually a
hundred and sixty-six large plates, and a hundred and twenty-eight pairs
of small plates, but is subject to considerable variation.

"According to this representation, the boiga is not merely to be praised
for its beauty, but may be said to fulfill the old maxim of combining
the wisdom of the serpent with the harmlessness of the dove." Cepede's
Hist. of Oviparous Quadrupeds and Serpents.

Instead of ακεραιοι, harmless, or as the Etymol. Mag. defines it,
without mixture of evil, the Cod. Bezae reads απλουστατοι, simple -
uncompounded, - so all the copies of the old Itala, the Vulgate, and the
Latin fathers; hut this curious and explanatory reading is found in no
other Greek MS.

[Matthew 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 10:17</span></span>

But beware of men - Or, be on your guard against men, των ανθρωπων These
men; i.e. your countrymen; those from whom you might have reasonably
expected comfort and support; and especially those in power, who will
abuse that power to oppress you.

Councils - Συνεδρια, sanhedrins and synagogues. See on [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022) (note). "By synagogues we may
understand here, not the places of public worship, but assemblies where
three magistrates, chosen out of the principal members of the synagogue,
presided to adjust differences among the people: these had power, in
certain cases, to condemn to the scourge, but not to death. See [Act
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#019); [Co2
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024), compared with [Luk
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#011)." See Lightfoot.

[Matthew 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 10:18</span></span>

Ye shall be brought before governors, etc. - "This affords a striking
proof of the prescience of Christ. Who could have thought, at that time,
that these despised and illiterate men could excite so much attention,
and be called upon to apologize for the profession of their faith before
the tribunals of the most illustrious personages of the earth?"
Wakefield.

By governors and kings we may understand, the Roman proconsuls,
governors of provinces, and the kings who were tributary to the Roman
government, and the emperors themselves, before whom many of the
primitive Christians were brought.

For a testimony against them and the Gentiles - That is, to render
testimony, both to Jews and Gentiles, of the truth and power of my
Gospel.

[Matthew 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 10:19</span></span>

Take no thought how or what ye shall speak - Μη μεριμνησετε - Be not
anxiously careful, because such anxiety argues distrust in God, and
infallibly produces a confused mind. In such a state, no person is fit
to proclaim or vindicate the truth. This promise, It shall be given you,
etc., banishes all distrust and inquietude on dangerous occasions; but
without encouraging sloth and negligence, and without dispensing with
the obligation we are under to prepare ourselves by the meditation of
sacred truths, by the study of the Holy Scriptures, and by prayer.

It shall be given you in that same hour what - This clause is wanting in
the MSS. D and L, and several others, some versions, and several of the
fathers: but it is found in [Mar
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#011), without any various reading;
and in substance in [Luk 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013).

[Matthew 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 10:20</span></span>

For it is - the Spirit of your Father, etc. - This was an extraordinary
promise, and was literally fulfilled to those first preachers of the
Gospel; and to them it was essentially necessary, because the New
Testament dispensation was to be fully opened by their extraordinary
inspiration. In a certain measure, it may be truly said, that the Holy
Spirit animates the true disciples of Christ, and enables them to speak.
The Head speaks in his members, by his Spirit; and it is the province of
the Spirit of God to speak for God. Neither surprise, defect of talents,
nor even ignorance itself, could hurt the cause of God, in the primitive
times, when the hearts and minds of those Divine men were influenced by
the Holy Spirit.

Your Father - This is added to excite and increase their confidence in
God.

[Matthew 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 10:21</span></span>

And the brother shall deliver up the brother, etc. - What an astonishing
enmity is there in the soul of man against God and goodness!

That men should think they did God service, in putting to death those
who differ from them in their political or religious creed, is a thing
that cannot be accounted for but on the principle of an indescribable
depravity.

O shame to men! devil with devil damn'd

Firm concord holds, men only disagree

Of creatures rational; though under hope

Of heavenly grace; and, God proclaiming peace,

Yet live in hatred, enmity, and strife

Among themselves, and levy cruel wars,

Wasting the earth, each other to destroy!

par. Lost, b. ii. l. 496

[Matthew 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 10:22</span></span>

Ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake - Because ye are
attached to me, and saved from the corruption that is in the world;
therefore the world will hate you. "The laws of Christ condemn a vicious
world, and gall it to revenge."

He that endureth to the end shall be saved - He who holds fast faith and
a good conscience to the end, till the punishment threatened against
this wicked people be poured out, he shall be saved, preserved from the
destruction that shall fall upon the workers of iniquity. This verse is
commonly understood to refer to the destruction of Jerusalem. It is also
true that they who do not hold fast faith and a good conscience till
death have no room to hope for an admission into the kingdom of God.

[Matthew 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 10:23</span></span>

But when they persecute you - It is prudence and humility (when charity
or righteousness obliges us not to the contrary) to avoid persecution.
To deprive those who are disposed to do evil of the opportunities of
doing it; to convey the grace which they despise to others; to
accomplish God's designs of justice on the former, and of mercy on the
latter, are consequences of the flight of a persecuted preacher. This
flight is a precept to those who are highly necessary to the Church of
Christ, an advice to those who might imprudently draw upon themselves
persecution, and of indulgence for those who are weak. But this flight
is highly criminal in those mercenary preachers who, through love to
their flesh and their property, abandon the flock of Christ to the wolf.
See Quesnel.

In this city, flee ye into another - There is a remarkable repetition of
this clause found in the MSS. DL and eight others; the Armenian, Saxon,
all the Italia except three; Athan., Theodor., Tertul., August., Ambr.,
Hilar., and Juvencus. Bengel, in his gnomon approves of this reading. On
the above authorities Griesbach has inserted it in the text. It probably
made a portion of this Gospel as written by Matthew. The verse in the
MSS. is as follows: - But when they shall persecute you in this city,
flee ye into another; and if they persecute in the other, flee ye unto
another.

Ye shall not have gone over (ended or finished, margin) the cities, etc.
- The word τελεσητε here is generally understood as implying to go over
or through, intimating that there should not be time for the disciples
to travel over the cities of Judea before the destruction predicted by
Christ should take place. But this is very far from being the truth, as
there were not less than forty years after this was spoken, before
Jerusalem was destroyed: τελειων και μανθαναντων are used by the
Septuagint. [Ch1 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#008), for those who
teach and those who learn. And τοις τελειοις is used by the apostle,
[Co1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006), for those who are perfectly
instructed in the things of God. Ovid has used the Latin perficio, which
answers to the Greek τελειοω in exactly the same sense.

Phillyrides puerum cithara perfecit Achillem.

"Chiron Taught the young Achilles to play on the harp."

For these reasons some contend that the passage should be translated, Ye
shall not have Instructed, i.e. preached the Gospel in the cities of
Israel, till the Son of man be come. The Greek divines call baptism
τελειωσις or initiation. See Leigh. Crit. sacr. Edit. Amst. p. 326, 328.

Dr. Lightfoot supposes the meaning to be: "Ye shall not have traveled
over the cities of Israel, preaching the Gospel, before the Son of man
is revealed by his resurrection, [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004); compare [Act
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019), [Act
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#020); [Act
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#026). To you first, God, raising up
his Son, sent him to bless you, etc. The epoch of the Messiah is dated
from the resurrection of Christ." After all, the place may be understood
literally; for τελειν τας πολεις, to finish the cities, is only a
concise mode of speech, for τελειν οδον δια τας πολεις, to complete the
journey through the cities. To finish the survey, to preach in every
one: - till the Son of man be come, may refer either to the outpouring
of the Spirit on the day of pentecost, or to the subversion of the
Jewish state. See Rosenmuller.

[Matthew 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 10:24</span></span>

The disciple is not above his master - Or in plainer terms, A scholar is
not above his teacher. The saying itself requires no comment, its truth
and reasonableness are self-evident, but to the spirit and design we
should carefully attend. Jesus is the great teacher: we profess to be
his scholars. He who keeps the above saying in his heart will never
complain of what he suffers. How many irregular thoughts and affections
is this maxim capable of restraining! A man is not a scholar of Christ
unless he learn his doctrine; and he does not learn it as he ought
unless he put it in practice.

[Matthew 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 10:25</span></span>

It is enough for the disciple that he be as his master - Can any man who
pretends to be a scholar or disciple of Jesus Christ, expect to be
treated well by the world? Will not the world love its own, and them
only? Why, then, so much impatience under sufferings, such an excessive
sense of injuries, such delicacy? Can you expect any thing from the
world better than you receive? If you want the honor that comes from it,
abandon Jesus Christ, and it will again receive you into its bosom. But
you will, no doubt, count the cost before you do this. Take the
converse, abandon the love of the world, etc., and God will receive you.

Beelzebub - This name is variously written in the MSS. Beelzebaul,
Beelzeboun, Beelzebud, but there is a vast majority in favor of the
reading Beelzebul, which should, by all means, be inserted in the text
instead of Beelzebub. See the reasons below.

It is supposed that this idol was the same with בעל זבוב Baalzebub the
god fly, worshipped at Ekron, [Kg2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002), etc., who had his name changed
afterwards by the Jews to בעל זבול Baal zebul, the dung god, a title
expressive of the utmost contempt. It seems probable that the worship of
this vile idol continued even to the time of our Lord; and the title,
being applied by the Jews to our blessed Lord, affords the strongest
proof of the inveteracy of their malice.

Dr. Lightfoot has some useful observations on this subject, which I
shall take the liberty to subjoin.

"For the searching out the sense of this horrid blasphemy, these things
are worthy observing,

"I. Among the Jews it was held, in a manner, for a matter of religion,
to reproach idols, and to give them odious names. R. Akibah saith,
Idolatry pollutes, as it is said, Thou shalt cast away the (idol) as
something that is abominable, and thou shalt say to it, Get thee hence:
([Isa 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022)). R. Lazar saith, Thou
shalt say to it, Get thee hence: that which they call the face of God,
let them call the face of a dog. That which they call עין כוס ein cos,
the Fountain Of A Cup, let them call עין קוץ ein kuts, the Fountain Of
Toil (or of flails). That which they call גדיה gediyah, Fortune, let
them call גלייא geliya, a Stink, etc. That town which sometimes was
called Bethel, was afterwards called Bethaven. See also the tract
Schabbath.

"II. Among the ignominious names bestowed upon idols, the general and
common one was זבול Zebul, Dung, or a Dunghill. 'Even to them that have
stretched out their hands בזבול bezebul in a dunghill, (that is, in an
idol temple, or in idolatry), there is hope. Thou canst not bring them
(into the Church) because they have stretched forth their hands bezebul,
in a dunghill. But yet you cannot reject them, because they have
repented.' And a little after, He that sees them dunging, בזבלין (that
is, sacrificing), to an idol, let him say, Cursed be he that sacrifices
to a strange god. Let them, therefore, who dare, form this word in
Matthew into Beelzebub. I am so far from doubting that the Pharisees
pronounced the word Beelzebul, and that Matthew so wrote it, that I
doubt not but the sense fails if it be writ otherwise.

"III. Very many names of evil spirits, or devils, occur in the Talmud,
which it is needless here to mention. Among all the devils, they
esteemed that devil the worst, the foulest, as it were, the prince of
the rest, who ruled over the idols, and by whom oracles and miracles
were given forth among the Heathens and idolaters. And they were of this
opinion for this reason, because they held idolatry, above all other
things, chiefly wicked and abominable, and to be the prince and head of
evil. This demon they called בעל זבול Baal-zebul, not so much by a
proper name, as by one more general and common; as much as to say, the
lord of idolatry: the worst devil, and the worst thing: and they called
him the prince of devils, because idolatry is the prince (or chief) of
wickedness."

[Matthew 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 10:26</span></span>

Fear them not - A general direction to all the persecuted followers of
Christ. Fear them not, for they can make you suffer nothing worse than
they have made Christ suffer; and under all trials he has promised the
most ample support.

For there is nothing covered, etc. - God sees every thing; this is
consolation to the upright and dismay to the wicked; and he will bring
into judgment every work, and every secret thing, whether good or bad,
[Ecc 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014).

[Matthew 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 10:27</span></span>

What I tell you in darkness - A man ought to preach that only which he
has learned from God's Spirit, and his testimonies; but let him not
pretend to bring forth any thing new, or mysterious. There is nothing
that concerns our salvation that is newer than the new covenant; and in
that there are, properly speaking, no mysteries: what was secret before
is now made manifest in the Gospel of the ever-blessed God. See [Eph
3:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001).

What ye hear in the ear - The doctor who explained the law in Hebrew had
an interpreter always by him, in whose ears he softly whispered what he
said; this interpreter spoke aloud what had been thus whispered to him.
Lightfoot has clearly proved this in his Horae Talmudicae, and to this
custom our Lord here evidently alludes. The spirit of our Lord's
direction appears to be this: whatever I speak to you is for the benefit
of mankind, - keep nothing from them, declare explicitly the whole
counsel of God; preach ye, (κηρυξατε proclaim), on the house-tops. The
houses in Judea were flat-roofed, with a ballustrade round about, which
were used for the purpose of taking the air, prayer, meditation, and it
seems, from this place, for announcing things in the most public manner.
As there are no bells among the Turks, a crier proclaims all times of
public worship from the house-tops. Whoever will give himself the
trouble to consult the following scriptures will find a variety of uses
to which these housetops were assigned. [Deu
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008); [Jos
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#006); [Jdg
9:51](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#051); [Neh
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016); [Sa2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002); [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012); [Isa
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#003); [Jer
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029), and [Act
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009).

Lightfoot thinks that this may be an allusion to that custom, when the
minister of the synagogue, on the Sabbath eve, sounded with a trumpet
six times, upon the roof of a very high house, that from thence all
might have notice of the coming in of the Sabbath. The first blast
signified that they should heave off their work in the field: the second
that they should cease from theirs in the city: the third that they
should light the Sabbath candle, etc.

[Matthew 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 10:28</span></span>

Fear not them which kill the body - Των αποκτεινοντων. Those who slay
with acts of cruelty, alluding probably to the cruelties which
persecutors should exercise on his followers in their martyrdom. But are
not able to kill the soul. Hence we find that the body and the soul are
distinct principles, for the body may be slain and the soul escape; and,
secondly, that the soul is immaterial, for the murderers of the body are
not able, μη δυναμενων, have it not in their power, to injure it.

Fear him - It is, not hell-fire we are to fear, but it is God; without
the stroke of whose justice hell itself would be no punishment, and
whose frown would render heaven itself insupportable. What strange
blindness is it to expose our souls to endless ruin, which should enjoy
God eternally; and to save and pamper the body, by which we enjoy
nothing but the creatures, and them only for a moment!

[Matthew 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 10:29</span></span>

Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? - Ασσαριου. A Roman As was
one-tenth of a Denarius, which was about sevenpence-halfpenny, and
one-tenth of sevenpence-halfpenny makes just three farthings.

The word ασσαριον, which we translate farthing, is found among the
rabbins in the word עיסר aisar, which, according to Maimonides, is equal
to four grains of silver, but is used among them to express a thing of
the lowest, or almost no value. Our Lord seems to have borrowed the
expression, One of them shall not fall on the ground, etc., from his own
countrymen. In Bereshith Rabba, sec. 79, fol. 77, it is said: In the
time in which the Jews were compelled to apostatize, Rab. Simeon, Ben.
Jochai, and Eliezer his son hid themselves in a cave, and lived upon dry
husks. After thirteen years they came out; and, sitting at the mouth of
the cave, they observed a fowler stretching his nets to catch birds; and
as often as the Bath Kol said דימוס dimos, escape! the bird escaped; but
when it said ספקולא spicula, a dart, the bird was taken. Then the rabbin
said, Even a bird is not taken without Heaven, i.e. without the will of
God, how much less the life of man! The doctrine intended to be
inculcated is this: The providence of God extends to the minutest
things; every thing is continually under the government and care of God,
and nothing occurs without his will or permission; if then he regards
sparrows, how much more man, and how much more still the soul that
trusts in him!

Fall on the ground - Instead of επι την γην, Origen, Clement,
Chrysostom, Juvencus, and six MSS. of Mathai, read εις την παγιδα, into
a snare. Bengel conjectures that it might have been written at first,
επι την παγην; that the first syllable πα being lost out of the word,
γην, the earth, instead of παγην, snare, became the common reading.

Without your Father - Without the will of your Father: της βουλης, the
will or counsel, is added here by Origen, Coptic, all the Arabic, latter
Persic, Gothic, all the Itala except two; Tert., Iren., Cypr., Novatian,
and other Latin fathers. If the evidence be considered as insufficient
to entitle it to admission into the text, let it stand there as a
supplementary italic word, necessary to make the meaning of the place
evident.

All things are ordered by the counsel of God. This is a great
consolation to those who are tried and afflicted. The belief of an
all-wise, all-directing Providence, is a powerful support under the most
grievous accidents of life. Nothing escapes his merciful regards, not
even the smallest things of which he may be said to be only the creator
and preserver; how much less those of whom he is the Father, Savior, and
endless felicity! See on [Luk 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#007)
(note).

[Matthew 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 10:30</span></span>

But the very hairs of your head are all numbered - Nothing is more
astonishing than the care and concern of God for his followers. The
least circumstances of their life are regulated, not merely by that
general providence which extends to all things, but by a particular
providence, which fits and directs all things to the design of their
salvation, causing them all to co-operate for their present and eternal
good. [Rom 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001).

[Matthew 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 10:31</span></span>

Fear ye not - ye are of more value - None can estimate the value of a
soul, for which Christ has given his blood and life! Have confidence in
his goodness; for he who so dearly purchased thee will miraculously
preserve and save thee. Did the poet intend to contradict Christ when he
said: -

"He sees with equal eye, as God of all,

A Hero perish, or a Sparrow fall?"

How cold and meagre is this shallow deistical saying! But could the poet
mean, that a sparrow is of as much worth in the sight of God, who
regards (if we may believe him) things only in general, as an immortal
soul, purchased by the sacrifice of Christ?

[Matthew 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 10:32</span></span>

Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men - That is, whosoever
shall acknowledge me to be the Messiah, and have his heart and life
regulated by my spirit and doctrine. It is not merely sufficient to have
the heart right before God; there must be a firm, manly, and public
profession of Christ before men. "I am no hypocrite," says one; neither
should you be. "I will keep my religion to myself" i.e. you will not
confess Christ before men; then he will renounce you before God.

We confess or own Christ when we own his doctrine, his ministers, his
servants, and when no fear hinders us from supporting and assisting them
in times of necessity.

[Matthew 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 10:33</span></span>

Whosoever shall deny me - Whosoever prefers his worldly interest to his
duty to God, sets a greater value on earthly than on heavenly things,
and prefers the friendship of men to the approbation of God.

Let it be remembered, that to be renounced by Christ is to have him
neither for a Mediator nor Savior. To appear before the tribunal of God
without having Christ for our Advocate, and, on the contrary, to have
him there as our Judge, and a witness against us, - how can a man think
of this and not die with horror!

[Matthew 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 10:34</span></span>

Think not that I am come to send peace, etc. - The meaning of this
difficult passage will be plain, when we consider the import of the word
peace, and the expectation of the Jews. I have already had occasion to
remark, ([Mat 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#012)), that the word
שלום shalom, rendered by the Greeks ειρηνη, was used among the Hebrews
to express all possible blessings, temporal and spiritual; but
especially the former. The expectation of the Jews was, that, when the
Messiah should come, all temporal prosperity should be accumulated on
the land of Judea; therefore την γην, in this verse, should not be
translated the earth, but this land. The import of our Lord's teaching
here is this, Do not imagine, as the Jews in general vainly do, that I
am come to send forth, (βαλλειν), by forcing out the Roman power, that
temporal prosperity which they long for; I am not come for this purpose,
but to send forth (βαλλειν) the Roman sword, to cut off a disobedient
and rebellious nation, the cup of whose iniquity is already full, and
whose crimes cry aloud for speedy vengeance. See also on [Luk
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049) (note). From the time they
rejected the Messiah, they were a prey to the most cruel and destructive
factions; they employed their time in butchering one another, till the
Roman sword was unsheathed against them, and desolated the land.

[Matthew 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 10:35</span></span>

I am come to set a man at variance - The spirit of Christ can have no
union with the spirit of the world. Even a father, while unconverted,
will oppose a godly child. Thus the spirit that is in those who sin
against God is opposed to that spirit which is in the followers of the
Most High. It is the spirits then that are in opposition, and not the
persons.

[Matthew 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 10:36</span></span>

A man's foes shall be they of his own household - Our Lord refers here
to their own traditions. So Sota, fol. 49. "A little before the coming
of the Messiah, the son shall insult the father, the daughter rebel
against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; and
each man shall have his own household fur his enemies." Again, in
Sanhedrin, fol. 97, it is said: "In the age in which the Messiah shall
come, the young men shall turn the elders into ridicule; the elders
shall rise up against the youth, the daughter against her mother, the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; and the man of that age shall
be excessively impudent; nor shall the son reverence his father." These
are most remarkable sayings, and, by them, our Lord shows them that he
was the Messiah, for all these things literally took place shortly after
their final rejection of Christ. See the terrible account, given by
Josephus, relative to the desolations of those times. Through the just
judgment of God, they who rejected the Lord that bought them became
abandoned to every species of iniquity; they rejected the salvation of
God, and fell into the condemnation of the devil.

Father Quesnel's note on this place is worthy of deep attention. "The
father (says he) is the enemy of his son, when, through a bad education,
an irregular love, and a cruel indulgence, he leaves him to take a wrong
bias, instructs him not in his duty, and fills his mind with ambitious
views. The son is the father's enemy, when he is the occasion of his
doing injustice, in order to heap up an estate for him, and to make his
fortune. The mother is the daughter's enemy, when she instructs her to
please the world, breeds her up in excess and vanity, and suffers any
thing scandalous or unseemly in her dress. The daughter is the mother's
enemy, when she becomes her idol, when she engages her to comply with
her own irregular inclinations, and to permit her to frequent balls and
plays. The master is the enemy of his servant, and the servant that of
his master, when the one takes no care of the other's salvation, and the
latter is subservient to his master's passions."

[Matthew 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 10:37</span></span>

He that loveth father or mother more than me - He whom we love the most
is he whom we study most to please, and whose will and interests we
prefer in all cases. If, in order to please a father or mother who are
opposed to vital godliness, we abandon God's ordinances and followers,
we are unworthy of any thing but hell.

[Matthew 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 10:38</span></span>

He that taketh not his cross - i.e. He who is not ready, after my
example, to suffer death in the cause of my religion, is not worthy of
me, does not deserve to be called my disciple.

This alludes to the custom of causing the criminal to bear his own cross
to the place of execution; so Plutarch, ΕκαϚος των κακουργων εκφερει τον
αυτου Ϛαυρον. Each of the malefactors carries on his own cross. See [Joh
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017).

[Matthew 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 10:39</span></span>

He that findeth his life, etc. - i.e. He who, for the sake of his
temporal interest, abandons his spiritual concerns, shall lose his soul;
and he who, in order to avoid martyrdom, abjures the pure religion of
Christ, shall lose his soul, and perhaps his life too. He that findeth
his life shall lose it, was literally fulfilled in Archbishop Cranmer.
He confessed Christ against the devil, and his eldest son, the pope. He
was ordered to be burnt; to save his life he recanted, and was,
notwithstanding, burnt. Whatever a man sacrifices to God is never lost,
for he finds it again in God.

There is a fine piece on this subject in Juvenal, Sat. viii. l. 80,
which deserves to be recorded here.

\- ambiguae si quando citabere testis

Incertaeque rei, Phalaris liect imperet ut sis

Falsus, et admoto dictet perjuria tauro,

Summum crede nefas Animam praeferre Pudori

Et propter Vitam Vivendi perdere causas

\- If ever call'd

To give thy witness in a doubtful case,

Though Phalaris himself should bid thee lie,

On pain of torture in his flaming bull,

Disdain to barter innocence for life;

To which life owes its lustre and its worth

Wakefield

[Matthew 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 10:40</span></span>

He that receiveth you - Treats you kindly, receiveth me; I will consider
the kindness as shown to myself; for he who receiveth me, as the true
Messiah, receiveth that God by whose counsels and through whose love I
am come.

[Matthew 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 10:41</span></span>

He that receiveth a prophet - Προφητην, a teacher, not a foreteller of
future events, for this is not always the meaning of the word; but one
commissioned by God to teach the doctrines of eternal life. It is no
small honor to receive into one's house a minister of Jesus Christ.
Every person is not admitted to exercise the sacred ministry; but none
are excluded from partaking of its grace, its spirit, and its reward. If
the teacher should be weak, or even if he should be found afterwards to
have been worthless, yet the person who has received him in the name,
under the sacred character, of an evangelist, shall not lose his reward;
because what he did he did for the sake of Christ, and through love for
his Church. Many sayings of this kind are found among the rabbins, and
this one is common: "He who receives a learned man, or an elder, into
his house, is the same as if he had received the Shekinah." And again:
"He who speaks against a faithful pastor, it is the same as if he had
spoken against God himself." See Schoettgen.

[Matthew 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 10:42</span></span>

A cup of cold water - Υδατος, of water, is not in the common text, but
it is found in the Codex Bezae, Coptic, Armenian, Gothic, Anglo-Saxon,
Slavonic, all copies of the Itala, Vulgate, and Origen. It is
necessarily understood; the ellipsis of the same substantive is
frequent, both in the Greek and Latin writers. See Wakefield.

Little ones - My apparently mean and generally despised disciples.

But a cup of water in the eastern countries was not a matter of small
worth. In India, the Hindoos go sometimes a great way to fetch it, and
then boil it that it may do the less hurt to travelers when they are
hot; and, after that, they stand from morning to night in some great
road, where there is neither pit nor rivulet, and offer it, in honor of
their god, to be drunk by all passengers. This necessary work of
charity, in these hot countries, seems to have been practised by the
more pious and humane Jews; and our Lord assures them that, if they do
this in his name, they shall not lose their reward. See the Asiatic
Miscellany, vol. ii. p. 142.

Verily - he shall in no wise lose his reward - The rabbins have a
similar saying: "He that gives food to one that studies in the law, God
will bless him in this world, and give him a lot in the world to come."
Syn. Sohar.

Love heightens the smallest actions, and gives a worth to them which
they cannot possess without it. Under a just and merciful God every sin
is either punished or pardoned, and every good action rewarded. The most
indigent may exercise the works of mercy and charity; seeing even a cup
of cold water, given in the name of Jesus, shall not lose its reward.
How astonishing is God's kindness! It is not the rich merely whom he
calls on to be charitable; but even the poor, and the most impoverished
of the poor! God gives the power and inclination to be charitable, and
then rewards the work which, it may be truly said, God himself hath
wrought.

It is the name of Jesus that sanctifies every thing, and renders
services, in themselves comparatively contemptible, of high worth in the
sight of God. See Quesnel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 11](mat011)

</div>
