<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic004)  [Next](mic006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 5:0</span></span>

This chapter begins, according to the opinion of some commentators, with
a prophecy concerning the siege of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and the
great indignities which Zedekiah should suffer from the Babylonians,
[Mic 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001). We have next a most famous
prediction concerning the birthplace of the Messiah, "whose goings forth
have been from of old, from Everlasting, [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002). See [Mat
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006). The Jews obstinately persisting
in their opposition to the Messiah, God will therefore give them up into
the hands of their enemies till the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled:
and then all the posterity of Jacob, both Israel and Judah, shall be
converted to the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and, along with the
Gentiles, be brought into the large and peaceful pastures of this Great
Shepherd of the sheep, [Mic 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003), [Mic
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004). After this illustrious prophecy,
the prophet goes on to foretell the downfall of the Assyrians, by whom
are meant the enemies of the Church in general, the type being probably
put for the antitype; the miraculous discomfiture of the great Assyrian
army in the reign of Sennacherib strongly shadowing forth the glorious
and no less miraculous triumphs of Christianity in the latter times,
[Mic 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005), [Mic
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006). See [Isa
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016). Some understand this prophecy
of Antiochus and the seven famous Maccabees, with their eight royal
successors, from Aristobulus to Antigonus; and it is not impossible that
these people may be also intended, for we have often had occasion to
remark that a prophecy of the Old Testament Scriptures has frequently
more than one aspect. The seventh verse was fulfilled by the Jews
spreading the knowledge of the true God during their captivity, and so
paving the way for the gospel; but will be more signally fulfilled after
their conversion and restoration. See [Rom
11:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012). The remaining verses contain
a prophecy of the final overthrow of all the enemies of pure and
undefiled religion, and of the thorough purification of the Church of
God from the corruptions of Antichrist, [Mic
5:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#009).

[Micah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 5:1</span></span>

O daughter of troops - The Chaldeans, whose armies were composed of
troops from various nations.

He (Nebuchadnezzar) hath laid siege against us; (Jerusalem ); they shall
smite the judge of Israel (Zedekiah) with a rod upon the cheek - They
shall offer him the greatest indignity. They slew his sons before his
face; and then put out his eyes, loaded him with chains, and carried him
captive to Babylon.

[Micah 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 5:2</span></span>

But thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah - I have considered this subject in great
detail in the notes on [Mat 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006), to
which the reader will be pleased to refer. This verse should begin this
chapter; the first verse belongs to the preceding chapter.

Bethlehem Ephratah, to distinguish it from another Beth-lehem, which was
in the tribe of Zebulun, [Jos 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015).

Thousands of Judah - The tribes were divided into small portions called
thousands; as in our country certain divisions of counties are called
hundreds.

Whose goings forth have been from of old - In every age, from the
foundation of the world, there has been some manifestation of the
Messiah. He was the hope, as he was the salvation, of the world, from
the promise to Adam in paradise, to his manifestation in the flesh four
thousand years after.

From everlasting - מימי עולם miyemey olam, "From the days of all time;"
from time as it came out of eternity. That is, there was no time in
which he has not been going forth-coming in various ways to save men.
And he that came forth the moment that time had its birth, was before
that time in which he began to come forth to save the souls that he had
created. He was before all things. As he is the Creator of all things,
so he is the Eternal, and no part of what was created. All being but God
has been created. Whatever has not been created is God. But Jesus is the
Creator of all things; therefore he is God; for he cannot be a part of
his own work.

[Micah 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 5:3</span></span>

Therefore wilt he give them up - Jesus Christ shall give up the
disobedient and rebellious Jews into the hands of all the nations of the
earth, till she who travaileth hath brought forth; that is, till the
Christian Church, represented [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001), under the notion of a woman in
travail, shall have had the fullness of the Gentiles brought in. Then
the remnant of his brethren shall return; the Jews also shall be
converted unto the Lord; and thus all Israel shall be saved according to
[Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026).

Unto the children of Israel - Taking in both families, that of Judah and
that of Israel. The remnant of the ten tribes, wherever they are, shall
be brought in under Christ; and though now lost among the nations of the
earth, they will then not only be brought in among the fullness of the
Gentiles, but most probably be distinguished as Jews.

On this verse Abp. Newcome says, "The sense is, God will not fully
vindicate and exalt his people, till the virgin mother shall have
brought forth her Son; and till Judah and Israel, and all the true sons
of Abraham among their brethren the Gentiles, be converted to
Christianity.

[Micah 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 5:4</span></span>

He shall stand and feed - The Messiah shall remain with his followers,
supporting and governing them in the strength and majesty of the Lord,
with all the miraculous interferences of his power, and all the glories
of his grace.

And they shall abide - After this the Jews shall no more go astray, but
shall remain one people with the Gentiles, under the one Shepherd and
Bishop of all souls.

Newcome translates, "They shall be converted" for instead of וישבו
veyashebu, he reads וישובו veyashubu, which gives him the translation
above. This is the reading of three MSS. of Kennicott's and De Rossi's,
with the Syriac, Chaldee, and Vulgate.

For now shall he be great - The Messiah shall be great, as bringing
salvation to the ends of the earth. All nations shall receive his
religion, and he shall be universal King.

[Micah 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 5:5</span></span>

And this man shall be the peace - This clause should be joined to the
preceding verse, as it finishes the prophecy concerning our blessed
Lord, who is the Author and Prince of Israel; and shall finally give
peace to all nations, by bringing them under his yoke.

When the Assyrian shall come - This is a new prophecy, and relates to
the subversion of the Assyrian empire.

Then shall we raise against him seven shepherds - Supposed to mean the
seven Maccabees, Mattathias, and his five sons, and Hyrcanus, the son of
Simon.

Eight principal men - Eight princes, the Asmonean race; beginning with
Aristobulus, and ending with Herod, who was married to Mariamne. -
Sharpe. Perhaps seven and eight are a definite for an indefinite number,
as [Ecc 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#002); [Job
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#019). The prophet means the chiefs of
the Medes and Babylonians, the prefects of different provinces who took
Nineveh, whose number may have been what is here specified. - Newcome.

Calmet considers this as referring to the invasion of Judea by Cambyses,
when the Lord raised up against him the seven magi. He of them who
passed for king of the Persians was the Smerdis of Herodotus, the
Oropastes of Trogus, and the Artaxerxes of Ezra. These magi were put to
death by seven Persian chiefs; who, having delivered the empire from
them, set one of themselves, Darius, the son of Hystaspes, upon the
throne.

[Micah 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 5:6</span></span>

The land of Nimrod - Assyria, and Nineveh its capital; and Babylon,
which was also built by Nimrod, who was its first king, [Gen
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011), [Gen
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#012), in the margin.

In the entrances thereof - At its posts or watergates; for it was by
rendering themselves masters of the Euphrates that the Medes and
Persians took the city, according to the prediction of Jeremiah, [Jer
51:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#032), [Jer
51:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#036). Calmet thinks that this refers
to the deliverance of the land from Cambyses by his death, and the
insurrection of the eight princes mentioned above, who made themselves
masters of the whole Babylonian empire, etc. Perhaps it is best to refer
it to the invasion of Judea by Nebuchadnezzar; and the final destruction
of the Babylonish empire by Cyrus, who took Babylon, slew Belshazzar,
and possessed himself of the kingdom.

[Micah 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 5:7</span></span>

The remnant of Jacob - From the reign of Darius Hystaspes (Ahasuerus,
husband of Esther) the Jews were greatly favored. Those who continued in
Persia and Chaldea were greatly honored under the protection of Mordecai
and Esther. - Calmet. But others consider this as applying to the
Maccabees.

As a dew from the Lord - Even during their captivity many of the Jews
were the means of spreading the knowledge of the one true God; see [Dan
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047); [Dan
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029); [Dan
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034); [Dan
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#026). This may be the dew from the
Lord mentioned here. When the Messiah appeared, the Gospel was preached
by them; and it shall again be propagated by their future glorious
restoration, [Rom 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012), [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025).

The grass, that tarrieth not for man - Which grass springs up without
the attention and culture of man; לאיש leish, even the best and most
skillful of men.

Nor waiteth for the sons of men - לבני אדם libney adam, for the sons of
Adam, the first transgressor. The dew and the showers descend on the
earth and water it, in order to render it fruitful; and the grass
springs up independently either of the worth or wickedness of man. All
comes through God's bounty, who causes his sun to shine on the just and
the unjust, and his rain to descend on the evil and the good.

[Micah 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 5:8</span></span>

As a lion - In this and the following verse the victories of the
Maccabees are supposed to be foretold.

[Micah 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 5:9</span></span>

All thine enemies shall be cut off - The Assyrians, who had destroyed
Israel; and the Babylonians, who had ruined Judah.

[Micah 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 5:10</span></span>

I will cut off thy horses - Thou shalt have no need of cavalry in thine
armies; God will fight for you.

[Micah 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 5:11</span></span>

I will - throw down all thy strongholds - Thou shalt have no need of
fortified cities; I will be thy defense.

[Micah 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 5:12</span></span>

I will cut off witchcrafts - Thou shalt seek help only in Jehovah thy
God. They have had neither soothsayers, images, groves, nor high places,
from the captivity to the present day.

[Micah 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 5:13</span></span>

Thy graven images also will I cut off - Thou shalt be no more an
idolatrous people.

[Micah 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mic 5:15</span></span>

I will execute vengeance - upon the heathen - And he did so; for the
empires of the Assyrians, Chaldeans, and others, the sworn enemies of
the Jews, have long since been utterly destroyed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 6](mic006)

</div>
