<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Micah Index](mic.md)  
  [Previous](mic005)  [Next](mic007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001.md)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 6:0</span></span>

This chapter reproves and threatens. The manner of raising the attention
by calling on man to urge his plea in the face of all nature, and on the
inanimate creation to hear the expostulation of Jehovah with his people,
is awakening and sublime. The words of Jehovah follow, [Mic
6:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003.md). And God's mercies hawing been
set forth to his people, one of them is introduced, in a beautiful
dramatic form, asking what his duty is towards a God so gracious, [Mic
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006.md), [Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007.md). The answer follows in the words
of the prophet, [Mic 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008.md); who goes on
to upbraid the people of his charge with their injustice and idolatry,
to which he ascribes want of success in their lawful undertakings, and
those heave calamities which are now impending, [Mic
6:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009.md).

[Micah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 6:1</span></span>

Arise, contend thou - This chapter is a sort of dialogue between God and
the people. God speaks the five first verses, and convicts the people of
sin, righteousness, and judgment. The People, convinced of their
iniquity, deprecate God's judgments, in the sixth and seventh verses. In
the eighth verse God prescribes the way in which they are to be saved;
and then the prophet, by the command of God, goes on to remonstrate from
the ninth verse to the end of the chapter.

[Micah 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 6:2</span></span>

Hear ye, O mountains - Micah, as God's advocate, summons this people
into judgment, and makes an appeal to inanimate creation against them.
He had spoken to the priests, to the princes, to the people. He had done
every thing that was necessary to make them wise, and holy, and happy;
they had uniformly disobeyed, and were ever ungrateful. It was not
consistent with either the justice or mercy of God to permit them to go
on without reprehension and punishment. He now calls them into judgment;
and such was the nature of their crimes that, to heighten the effect,
and show what reason he had to punish such a people, he appeals to
inanimate creation. Their ingratitude and rebellion are sufficient to
make the mountains, the hills, and the strong foundations of the earth
to hear, tremble, and give judgment against them. This, then, is the
Lord's controversy with his people, and thus he will plead with Israel.

[Micah 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 6:3</span></span>

O my people, what have I done unto thee? - They are called to show why
God should not pronounce sentence upon them. This condescension is truly
astonishing! God appears to humble himself to his creatures. You have
acted basely, treacherously, and ungratefully to me; this had already
been proved by the prophets. What cause have I given you for such
conduct? I have required a religious service from you; but have I
wearied you by a fatiguing round of difficult duties? If I have, now
testify against me; and you shall be first heard, and your plea
received, if it be reasonable and good. They are silent; and God
proceeds, and states what he has done for them.

[Micah 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 6:4</span></span>

I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt - Where you were slaves, and
grievously oppressed; from all this I redeemed you. Was this a small
benefit? I sent before thee Moses, my chosen servant, and instructed him
that he might be your leader and lawgiver. I sent with him Aaron, that
he might be your priest and transact all spiritual matters between
myself and you, in offerings, sacrifices, and atonements. I sent Miriam,
to whom I gave the spirit of prophecy, that she might tell you things to
come, and be the director of your females. To this sense the Chaldee, "I
have sent three prophets before you; Moses, that he might teach you the
tradition of judgments, Aaron, that he might make atonement for the
people; and Miriam, that she might instruct the females."

[Micah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 6:5</span></span>

Remember now what Balak king of Moab consulted - He sent for Balaam to
curse your fathers; but by my influence he was obliged to bless them.
See Numbers 22 (note) and Numbers 23 (note), and the notes there, where
this subject is largely considered.

From Shittim unto Gilgal - From the encampment at Shittim, [Num
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001.md), on the way to that of Gilgal,
[Jos 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019.md). Balaam gave different
answers in the interval between these places. We may suppose that the
encampments of Israel advanced slowly to that part of Jordan which was
opposite to Gilgal. The Chaldee has, "Were there not wonderful things
done in your behalf from the valley of Shittim to the house of Gilgal?"
See [Jos 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001.md); [Jos
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020.md). Thus there will be a reference
to the miraculous passage over Jordan. See Newcome.

That ye may know the righteousness - The just, equitable, and merciful
dealing of the Most High. Recollect those things, that ye may have a
proper impression of this. There are many interpretations given of this
rather obscure clause; what I have proposed seems to me the most simple.

This is the sum of the address; and here the case of the plaintiff
terminates, the prisoners being called to show why the sentence of the
law should not be pronounced. I make no apology for using any forensic
terms, as the passages before us refer to a case brought into a court to
be judged, and the terms in the original are all such as are proper for
a court of justice; and the thing itself is called the Lord's
controversy, ריב יהוה rib Yehovah, Jehovah's suit at law. And hence it
is said, He will plead, litigate, with Israel.

[Micah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 6:6</span></span>

Wherewith shall I come before the Lord - Now the people, as defendants,
appear; but instead of vindicating themselves, or attempting to dispute
what has been alleged against them, they seem at once to plead guilty;
and now anxiously inquire how they shall appease the wrath of the Judge,
how they shall make atonement for the sins already committed.

Bow myself before the high God - They wish to pray, and to make
supplication to their Judge; but how shall they come before him? They
have no right to come into his presence. Some offering must be brought;
but of what kind, or of what value? Their sin is unprecedented, and
usual methods of access will not avail. They are distracted in their
minds, and make a variety of proposals to themselves, some rational,
some absurd and impossible, and some even sinful.

Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings - This is reasonable, and
according to the law; but this will be insufficient.

[Micah 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 6:7</span></span>

Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams - These might be
procured, though with difficulty; but conscience says neither will these
do.

With ten thousands of rivers of oil - This is absurd and impossible; but
could even these be procured, could they all make atonement for such
guilt, and ingratitude, and rebellion?

Shall I give my first-born for my transgression - This was sinful and
wicked; but such offerings had been made by the Phoenicians, and their
successors the Carthaginians, and this very custom was copied by the
corrupt Israelites. See some cases of such offerings, [Kg2
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027) (note.md); [Lev
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027) (note.md).

The fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? - This clause is an
explanation of the former. Shall I make the first-born, the best and
goodliest of my children, חטאת chattath, a Sin-Offering for my soul? And
thus the original is used in a multitude of places.

When they had put all these questions to their reason and conscience,
they found no satisfaction; their distraction is increased, and despair
is about to take place, when Jehovah, the plaintiff, in his mercy
interposes:

[Micah 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 6:8</span></span>

He hath showed thee, O Man, what is good - All the modes of expiation
which ye have proposed are, in the sight of God, unavailable; they
cannot do away the evil, nor purify from the guilt of sin. He himself
has shown thee what is good; that which is profitable to thee, and
pleasing to himself. And what is that? Answer, Thou art: -

I. To do justly; to give to all their due.

1\. To God his due; thy heart, thy body, soul, and spirit; thy Wisdom,
understanding, judgment. "To love him with all thy heart, soul, mind,
and strength, and thy neighbor as thyself." This is God's due and right
from every man.

2\. Thou art to give thy neighbor his due to do to him as thou wouldst
that he should do to thee, never working ill to him.

3\. Thou art to give to thyself thy due; not to deprive thy soul of what
God has provided for it; to keep thy body in temperance, sobriety, and
chastity; avoiding all excesses, both in action and passion.

II\. Thou art to love mercy; not only to do what justice requires, but
also what mercy, kindness, benevolence, and charity require.

III\. But how art thou to do this? Thou art to walk humbly with thy God;
הצנע hatsnea, to humble thyself to walk. This implies to acknowledge thy
iniquity, and submit to be saved by his free mercy, as thou hast already
found that no kind of offering or sacrifice can avail. Without this
humiliation of soul there never was, there never can be, any walking
With God; for without his mercy no soul can be saved; and he must be Thy
God before thou canst walk with him. Many, when they hear the nature of
sin pointed out, and the way of salvation made plain through the blood
of the Lamb, have shut their eyes both against sin and the proper
sacrifice for it, and parried all exhortation, threatening, etc., with
this text: "God requires nothing of us but to do justly, love mercy, and
walk humbly with him." Now I ask any man, Art thou willing to stand or
fall by this text? And it would cost me neither much time nor much pains
to show that on this ground no soul of man can be saved. Nor does God
say that this doing justly, etc., shall merit eternal glory. No. He
shows that in this way all men should walk; that this is the duty of
Every rational being; but he well knows that no fallen soul can act thus
without especial assistance from him, and that it is only the regenerate
man, the man who has found redemption through the blood of the cross,
and has God for His God, that can thus act and walk. Salvation is of the
mere mercy of God alone; for by the works of the law shall no flesh be
justified.

The manner of raising attention, says Bp. Newcome, on [Mic
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001.md), [Mic
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#002.md), by calling on man to urge his
plea in the face of all nature, and on the inanimate creation to hear
the expostulation of Jehovah with his people, is truly awakening and
magnificent. The wards of Jehovah follow in [Mic
6:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#003.md). And God's mercies having been
set before the people, one of them is introduced in a beautiful dramatic
form; asking what his duty is towards so gracious a God, [Mic
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006.md), [Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007.md). The answer follows in the words
of the prophet, [Mic 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008.md). Some think
we have a sort of dialogue between Balak and Balaam, represented to us
in the prophetical way. The king of Moab speaks, [Mic
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006.md). Balaam replies by another
question in the two first hemistichs of [Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007.md). The king of Moab rejoins in the
remaining part of the verse; and Balaam replies, [Mic
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#008.md). Bps. Butler and Lowth favor this.
I cannot agree.

[Micah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 6:9</span></span>

The Lord's voice crieth unto the city - No man is found to hear; but the
man of wisdom will hear, תושיה tushiyah; a word frequent in the writings
of Solomon and Job, signifying wisdom, wealth, substance, reason,
essence, happiness; any thing that is complete; or that which is
substantial, in opposition to vanity, emptiness, mere show,
unsubstantiality. When God speaks, the man of common sense, who has any
knowledge of God or his own soul, will see thy name; but instead of יראה
yireh, will see, the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic, with
twelve of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., have read יראי yirey, they
that Fear. The Vulgate reads: -

Et salus erit timentibus nomen tuum.

"And thou shalt be salvation to them that fear thy name."

The Septuagint -

Και σωσει φαβουμενους το ονομα αυτου.

And he shall save those who fear his name. -

This the Arabic copies.

The Targum has, "And the teachers shall fear the name." That is, יהוה
Yehovah.

The French Bible is very strange: -

Car ton nom volt comme il va de tout.

"For thy name sees how every thing goes."

The word תושיה tushiyah, mentioned above, which occasions all the
difficulty, has been read with an ע ain by the Vulgate and Septuagint,
as coming from the root ישע yasha, to be saved; and it is very likely
that this was the original reading. The two last letters in the word,
יה, might have been easily mistaken in the MS. for the letter ע where I
may suppose the word stood thus, תושע, shall be saved; and as several
MSS. read יראי yirey, they who fear, instead of יראה yireh, he shall
see, the whole clause might have been just what it appears in the
Vulgate and Septuagint. It is also necessary to remark that the word in
dispute has various forms in some MSS., which is a strong presumption
against its authenticity. See Kennicott and De Rossi.

[Micah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 6:10</span></span>

Are there yet the treasures of wickedness - Such as false balances and
deceitful weights. See on [Hos 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007.md)
(note). This shows that they were not Doing Justly. They did not give to
each his due.

[Micah 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 6:12</span></span>

For the rich men thereof are full of violence - This shows that they did
not love mercy.

The inhabitants thereof have spoken lies - This shows that they did not
humble themselves to walk with God.

[Micah 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 6:13</span></span>

Will I make thee sick in smiting thee - Perhaps better, "I also am weary
with smiting thee, in making thee desolate for thy sins." They were
corrected, but to no purpose; they had stroke upon stroke, but were not
amended.

[Micah 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mic 6:14</span></span>

Thou shalt eat, but not be satisfied - All thy possessions are cursed,
because of thy sins; and thou hast no real good in all thy enjoyments.

And thy casting down - For וישחך veyeshchacha, "thy casting down,"
Newcome, by transposing the ח and ש, reads ויחשך veyechshach, "and it
shall be dark;" and this is probably the true reading. The Arabic and
Septuagint have read the same. "There shall be calamity in the midst of
thee." It shall have its seat and throne among you.

[Micah 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mic 6:15</span></span>

Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt not reap - Thou shalt labor to amass
property, but thou shalt not have God's blessing; and whatever thou
collectest, thy enemies shall carry away. And at last carry thyself into
captivity.

[Micah 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mic 6:16</span></span>

The statutes of Omri are kept - Omri, king of Israel, the father of
Ahab, was one of the worst kings the Israelites ever had; and Ahab
followed in his wicked father's steps. The statutes of those kings were
the very grossest idolatry. Jezebel, wife of the latter, and daughter of
Ithobaal, king of Tyre, had no fellow on earth. From her Shakespeare
seems to have drawn the character of Lady Macbeth; a woman, like her
prototype, mixed up of tigress and fiend, without addition. Omri Ahab,
and Jezebel, were the models followed by the Israelites in the days of
this prophet.

The inhabitants thereof a hissing - לשרקה lishrekah, "for a shriek;"
because those who should see them should be both astonished and
affrighted at them.

There are few chapters in the prophets, or in the Bible, superior to
this for genuine worth and importance. The structure is as elegant as it
is impressive; and it is every way worthy of the Spirit of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 7](mic007.md)

</div>
