<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic002)  [Next](mic004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 3:0</span></span>

In this chapter the prophet inveighs with great boldness and spirit
against the princes and prophets of Judah; and foretells the destruction
of Jerusalem as the consequence of their iniquity, [Mic
3:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001). The last verse was fulfilled
to a certain extent by Nebuchadnezzar; but most fully and literally by
the Romans under Titus. See Josephus.

[Micah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 3:1</span></span>

Hear - O heads of Jacob - The metaphor of the flock is still carried on.
The chiefs of Jacob, and the princes of Israel, instead of taking care
of the flocks, defending them, and finding them pasture, oppressed them
in various ways. They are like wolves, who tear the skin of the sheep,
and the flesh off their bones. This applies to all unjust and oppressive
rulers.

Suetonius tells us, in his Life of Tiberius, that when the governors of
provinces wrote to the emperor, entreating him to increase the tributes,
he wrote back: "It is the property of a good shepherd to shear his
sheep, not to skin them." Praesidibus onerandas tributo provincias
suadentibus rescripsit: Boni Pastoris esse Tondere pecus, non Deglubebe.
This is a maxim which many rulers of the earth do not seem to
understand.

[Micah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 3:4</span></span>

Then shall they cry - When calamity comes upon these oppressors, they
shall cry for deliverance: but they shall not be heard; because, in
their unjust exactions upon the people, they went on ruthlessly, and
would not hear the cry of the oppressed.

[Micah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 3:5</span></span>

That bite with their teeth - That eat to the full; that are well
provided for, and as long as they are so, prophesy smooth things, and
cry, Peace! i.e., Ye shall have nothing but peace and prosperity.
Whereas the true prophet, "who putteth not into their mouths," who makes
no provision for their evil propensities, "they prepare war against
him." קדשו עליו מלחמה kiddeshu alaiv milchamah, "They sanctify a war
against him." They call on all to help them to put down a man who is
speaking evil of the Lord's people; and predicting the destruction of
his temple, and Israel his inheritance.

[Micah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 3:6</span></span>

Night shall be unto you - Ye shall have no spiritual light, nor will God
give you any revelation of his will.

The sun shall go down over the prophets - They prospered for a while,
causing the people to err; but they shall also be carried into
captivity, and then the sun of their prosperity shall go down for ever,
and the very day that gives light and comfort to others, shall be
darkness and calamity to them.

[Micah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 3:7</span></span>

Shall the seers be ashamed - For the false visions of comfort and
prosperity which they pretended to see.

And the diviners confounded - Who pretended to foretell future
prosperity; for they themselves are now thralled in that very captivity
which the true prophets foretold, and which the false prophets said
should not happen.

[Micah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 3:8</span></span>

But - I am full of power - Here is the character of the true prophet. He
is filled, all his soul is occupied with power, כח coach, with heavenly
energy; by the Spirit of the Lord, the fountain of all truth and might;
and of judgment, which enables him to make a proper discernment between
the precious and the vile; and of might, גבורה geburah, prevalent power,
against which vice shall not be able to prevail, and before which
iniquity shall not be able to stand: but all shall fall together, and be
confounded.

[Micah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 3:9</span></span>

Hear this - An appeal similar to that in [Mic
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001).

[Micah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 3:10</span></span>

They build up Zion with blood - They might cry out loudly against that
butchery practiced by Pekah, king of Israel, and Pul coadjutor of Rezie,
against the Jews. See on [Mic 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#009)
(note). But these were by no means clear themselves; for if they
strengthened the city, or decorated the temple, it was by the produce of
their exactions and oppressions of the people.

I do not know a text more applicable than this to slave-dealers; or to
any who have made their fortunes by such wrongs as affect the life of
man; especially the former, who by the gains of this diabolic traffic
have built houses etc.; for, following up the prophet's metaphor, the
timbers, etc., are the bones of the hapless Africans; and the mortar,
the blood of the defenceless progeny of Ham. What an account must all
those who have any hand in or profit from this detestable, degrading,
and inhuman traffic, give to Him who will shortly judge the quick and
dead!

[Micah 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 3:11</span></span>

The heads thereof judge for reward - This does not apply to the regular
law officers, who have their proper salaries for giving up their whole
time and attention to the conscientious discharge of the duties of their
office; but to those who take a reward, who take Bribes, for the
perversion of justice; who will decide in favor of those from whom they
get the greatest reward.

The prophets - divine for money - These are evidently the false
prophets; for none, professing to be sent by God, used any kind of
divination.

Yet will they lean upon the Lord - They will prescribe fasts and public
thanksgivings, while not one sin is repented of or forsaken, and not one
public grievance is redressed.

Is not the Lord among us? - Here is his temple, here are his ordinances,
and here are his people. Will he leave these? Yes, he will abandon the
whole, because all are polluted.

[Micah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 3:12</span></span>

Therefore shall Zion - be ploughed as a field - It shall undergo a
variety of reverses and sackages, till at last there shall not be one
stone left on the top of another, that shall not be pulled down; and
then a plough shall be drawn along the site of the walls, to signify an
irreparable and endless destruction. Of this ancient custom Horace
speaks, Odar. lib. i., Od. 16, ver. 18.

Altis urbibus ultimae

Stetere causae cur perirent

Funditus, imprimeretque muris

Hostile aratrum exercitus insolens.

"From hence proud cities date their utter falls;

When, insolent in ruin, o'er their walls

The wrathful soldier drags the hostile plough,

That haughty mark of total overthrow."

Francis.

Thus did the Romans treat Jerusalem when it was taken by Titus. Turnus
Rufus, or as he is called by St. Jerome, Titus Arinius Rufus, or
Terentius Rufus, according to Josephus, caused a plough to be drawn over
all the courts of the temple to signify that it should never be rebuilt,
and the place only serve for agricultural purposes. See the note on [Mat
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002). Thus Jerusalem became heaps, an
indiscriminate mass of ruins and rubbish; and the mountain of the house,
Mount Moriah, on which the temple stood, became so much neglected after
the total destruction of the temple, that it soon resembled the high
places of the forest. What is said here may apply also, as before
hinted, to the ruin of the temple by Nebuchadnezzar in the last year of
the reign of Zedekiah, the last king of the Jews.

As the Masoretes, in their division of the Bible, reckon the twelve
minor prophets but as one book, they mark this verse ([Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012)) the Middle verse of these
prophets.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 4](mic004)

</div>
