<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Nahum Index](nah.md)  
  [Previous](mic007)  [Next](nah001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001.md)

[Nahum](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">nah 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Book of the Prophet Nahum

Nahum, the seventh of the twelve minor prophets, was a native of
Elkoshai, a little village of Galilee, whose ruins were still in being
in the time of St. Jerome. However there are some who think that
Elkoshai is rather the name of his father, and that the place of his
birth was Bethabor, or Bethabara, beyond Jordan They used to show the
tomb of the prophet at a village called Beth-gabre, now called Gibbin,
near Emmaus. The Chaldee calls him Nahum of Beth-koshi, or of
Beth-kitsi; but the situation of this place is as much unknown as that
of Elkoshai.

The particular circumstances of the life of Nahum are altogether
unknown. His prophecy consists of three chapters, which make up but one
discourse, wherein he foretells the destruction of Nineveh. He describes
it in so lovely and pathetic a manner, that he seems to have been upon
the spot to declare to the Ninevites the destruction of their city.

Opinions are divided as to the time in which he prophesied. Josephus
will have it that he foretold the fall of Nineveh one hundred and
fifteen years before it happened, which will bring the time of Nahum to
that of King Ahaz. The Jews say that he prophesied under Manasseh. We
are inclined to be of St. Jerome's opinion, that he foretold the
destruction of Nineveh in the time of Hezekiah, and after the war of
Sennacherib in Egypt, mentioned by Berosus. Nahum speaks plainly of the
taking of No-Ammon, a city of Egypt; of the haughtiness of Rabshakeh; of
the defeat of Sennacherib; and he speaks of them as things that were
past. He supposes that the Jews were still in their own country, and
that they there celebrated their festivals. He speaks of the captivity,
and of the dispersion of the ten tribes. All these evidences convince us
that Nahum cannot be placed before the fifteenth year of Hezekiah, since
the expedition of Sennacherib against this prince was in the fourteenth
year of his reign.

This prophet gives us a fine description of the destruction of Nineveh.
He says that this city should be ruined by a deluge of waters, which
should overflow it and demolish its walls.

Diodorus Siculus and Athenaeus relate, that during the time this city
was besieged by Belesis and by Arbaces, under Sardanapalus, the river
Tigris swelled so as to overthrow twenty furlongs of the walls of
Nineveh. But as the siege mentioned by Nahum was long after the taking
of Nineveh under Sardanapalus, it must needs be that the same thing
happened to Nineveh at the second and last siege, under Nebuchadnezzar
and Astyages. Probably the besiegers at this second siege determined the
course of the waters, and brought on the same fate to the city by the
same means as at the first siege. And as the walls of those ancient
cities were generally formed of brick kneaded with straw and baked in
the sun, a flood of waters could easily effect their dissolution.
Babylon was built in the same manner; and this is the reason why
scarcely any vestiges of those cities are to be found. See on [Nah
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#014) (note.md).

The time of the prophet's death is not known. The Greek meneologies and
the Latin martyrologies place his festival on the first of December.
Petrus Natalis places it on the twenty-fourth of the same month, which
he says was the day of his death, without acquainting us whence he had
learned this circumstance.

The conduct and imagery of this prophetical poem are truly admirable.

The exordium sets forth with grandeur the justice and power of God,
tempered by lenity and goodness, [Nah
1:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001.md).

A sudden address to the Assyrians follows; and a prediction of their
perplexity and overthrow, as devisers of evil against the true God, [Nah
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009.md). Jehovah himself then proclaims
freedom to his people from the Assyrian yoke, and the destruction of the
Assyrian idols, [Nah 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012.md). Upon
which the prophet, in a most lively manner, turns the attention of Judah
to the approach of the messenger who brings such glad tidings, and bids
her celebrate her festivals and offer her thank-offerings, without fear
of so powerful an adversary, [Nah
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015.md).

[Nah 2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001.md). In the next place Nineveh
is called on to prepare for the approach of her enemies, as instruments
in the hands of Jehovah; and the military array and muster of the Medes
and Babylonians, their rapid approach to the city, the process of the
siege, the capture of the place, the captivity, lamentation, and flight
of the inhabitants, the sacking of the wealthy city, and the consequent
desolation and terror, are described in the true spirit of Eastern
poetry, and with many pathetic, vivid, and sublime images, [Nah
2:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001.md).

A grand and animated allegory succeeds this description, [Nah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011.md), [Nah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012.md); which is explained and applied
to the city of Nineveh in [Nah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013.md).

Chap. 3. The prophet denounces a wo against Nineveh for her perfidy and
violence, and strongly places before our eyes the number of her chariots
and cavalry, her burnished arms, and the great and unrelenting slaughter
which she spread around her, [Nah
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001.md).

He assigns her idolatries as one cause of her ignominious and unpitied
fall, [Nah 3:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#004.md).

He foretells that No-Ammon, (the Diospolis in the Delta), her rival in
populousness, confederacies, and situation, should share a like fate
with herself, [Nah 3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008.md); and
beautifully illustrates the ease with which her strong holds should be
taken, [Nah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#012.md), and her
pusillanimity during the siege, [Nah
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#013.md).

He pronounces that all her preparations, [Nah
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#014.md), [Nah
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015.md), her numbers, her opulence, her
multitude of chief men, would be of no avail, [Nah
3:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015.md).

He foretells that her tributaries would desert her, [Nah
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018.md).

He concludes with a proper epiphonema; the topics of which are, the
greatness and incurableness of her wound, and the just triumph of others
over her on account of her extensive oppressions, [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019.md).

To sum up all with the decisive judgment of an eminent critic: "Not one
of the minor prophets equals the sublimity, genius, and spirit of Nahum.
Besides, his prophecy is a perfect poem. The exordium is exceedingly
majestic. The apparatus for the destruction of Nineveh, and the
description of that catastrophe, are painted in the most glowing
colours, and are admirably clear and powerful." Lowth, Praelect. Hebrews
21, p. 282.

It must be farther observed, that this prophecy was highly interesting
to the Jews; as the Assyrians had often ravaged their country, and I
suppose had recently destroyed the kingdom of Israel. See Calmet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 1](nah001.md)

</div>
