<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nahum Index](nah)  
  [Previous](nah001)  [Next](nah003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)

[Nahum](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">nah 2:0</span></span>

Nineveh is now called upon to prepare for the approach of her enemies,
the instruments of Jehovah's vengeance, [Nah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001); and the military array and
muster, the very arms and dress, of the Medes and Babylonians in the
reigns of Cyaxares and Nabopolassar; their rapid approach to the city;
the process of the siege, and the inundation of the river; the capture
of the place; the captivity, lamentation, and flight of the inhabitants;
the sacking of this immense, wealthy, and exceedingly populous city; and
the consequent desolation and terror, are all described in the pathetic,
vivid, and sublime imagery of Hebrew poetry, [Nah
2:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002). This description is succeeded
by a very beautiful and expressive allegory, [Nah
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011); which is immediately
explained, and applied to the city of Nineveh, [Nah
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013). It is thought by some
commentators that the metropolitan city of the Assyrian empire is also
intended by the tender and beautiful simile, in the seventh verse, of a
great princess led captive, with her maids of honor attending her,
bewailing her and their own condition, by beating their breasts, and by
other expressions of sorrow.

[Nahum 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">nah 2:1</span></span>

He that dasheth in pieces - Or scattereth. The Chaldeans and Medes.

Keep the munition - Guard the fenced places. From this to the end of the
fifth verse, the preparations made at Nineveh to repel their enemies are
described. The description is exceedingly picturesque.

Watch the way - By which the enemy is most likely to approach.

Make thy loins strong - Take courage.

Fortify thy power - Muster thy troops; call in all thy allies.

[Nahum 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">nah 2:2</span></span>

For the Lord hath turned away - Bishop Newcome reads, for the Lord
restoreth, by a slight alteration in the text. I do not see that we gain
much by this. The Lord has been opposed to Jacob, and the enemy has
prevailed against him.

Emptied them out - Brought them from their own land into captivity. This
was the emptying!

[Nahum 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">nah 2:3</span></span>

The shield of his mighty men is made red - These things may refer to the
war-like preparations made by the Ninevites: they had red shields, and
scarlet or purple clothing; their chariots were finely decorated, and
proceeded with amazing rapidity.

The fir trees shall be terribly shaken - This may refer to the darts,
arrows, and javelins, flung with destructive power.

[Nahum 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">nah 2:4</span></span>

The chariots shall rage - Those of the besiegers and the besieged,
meeting in the streets, producing universal confusion and carnage.

[Nahum 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">nah 2:5</span></span>

He shall recount his worthies - Muster up his most renowned warriors and
heroes.

Shall make haste to the wall - Where they see the enemies making their
most powerful attacks, in order to get possession of the city.

[Nahum 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">nah 2:6</span></span>

The gates of the rivers shall be opened - I have already referred to
this, see the note on [Nah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008); but it
will be necessary to be more particular. The account given by Diodorus
Siculus, lib. ii., is very surprising. He begins thus: Ην δ' αυτῳ λογιον
παραδεδομενον εκ προγονων, κ.τ.λ. - "There was a prophecy received from
their forefathers, that Nineveh should not be taken till the river first
became an enemy to the city. It happened in the third year of the siege,
that the Euphrates \[query, Tigris\] being swollen with continued rains,
overflowed part of the city, and threw down twenty stadia of the wall.
The king then imagining that the oracle was accomplished, and that the
river was now manifestly become an enemy to the city, casting aside all
hope of safety, and lest he should fall into the hands of the enemy,
built a large funeral pyre in the palace, (εν τοις βασιλειοις), and
having collected all his gold and silver and royal vestments, together
with his concubines and eunuchs, placed himself with them in a little
apartment built in the pyre; burnt them, himself, and the palace
together. When the death of the king (Sardanapalus) was announced by
certain deserters, the enemy entered in by the breach which the waters
had made, and took the city." Thus the prophecy of Nahum was literally
fulfilled:" the gates of the river were opened, and the palace
dissolved," i.e., burnt.

[Nahum 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">nah 2:7</span></span>

And Huzzab shall be led away captive - Perhaps Huzzab means the queen of
Nineveh, who had escaped the burning mentioned above by Diodorus. As
there is no account of the queen being burnt, but only of the king, the
concubines, and the eunuchs, we may, therefore, naturally conclude that
the queen escaped; and is represented here as brought up and delivered
to the conqueror; her maids at the same time bewailing her lot. Some
think Huzzab signifies Nineveh itself.

[Nahum 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">nah 2:8</span></span>

But Nineveh is of old like a pool of water - מימי mimey, from days. Bp.
Newcome translates the line thus: "And the waters of Nineveh are a pool
of waters." There may be reference here to the fact given in the
preceding note, the overflowing of the river by which the city was
primarily destroyed.

Stand, stand - Consternation shall be at its utmost height, the people
shall flee in all directions; and though quarter is offered, and they
are assured of safety it they remain, yet not one looketh back.

[Nahum 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">nah 2:9</span></span>

Take ye the spoil - Though the king burnt his treasures, vestments,
etc., he could not totally destroy the silver and the gold. Nor did he
burn the riches of the city; these fell a prey to the conquerors; and
there was no end of the store of glorious garments, and the most costly
vessels and furniture.

[Nahum 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">nah 2:10</span></span>

She is empty, and void, and waste - The original is strongly emphatic;
the words are of the same sound; and increase in their length as they
point out great, greater, and greatest desolation.

בוקה ומבוקה ומבלקה

Bukah, umebukah, umebullakah.

She is void, empty, and desolate.

The faces of them all gather blackness - This marks the diseased state
into which the people had been brought by reason of famine, etc.; for,
as Mr. Ward justly remarks, "sickness makes a great change in the
countenance of the Hindoos; so that a person who was rather fair when in
health, becomes nearly black by sickness." This was a general case with
the Asiatics.

[Nahum 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">nah 2:11</span></span>

Where is the dwelling of the lions - Nineveh, the habitation of bold,
strong, and ferocious men.

The feeding place of the young lions - Whither her victorious and
rapacious generals frequently returned to consume the produce of their
success. Here they walked at large, and none made them afraid.
Wheresoever they turned their arms they were victors; and all nations
were afraid of them.

[Nahum 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">nah 2:12</span></span>

The lion did tear - This verse gives us a striking picture of the manner
in which the Assyrian conquests and depredations were carried on. How
many people were spoiled to enrich his whelps - his sons, princes, and
nobles! How many women were stripped and slain, whose spoils went to
decorate his lionesses - his queen, concubines, and mistresses. And they
had even more than they could assume; their holes and dens -
treasure-houses, palaces, and wardrobes - were filled with ravin, the
riches which they got by the plunder of towns, families, and
individuals. This is a very fine allegory, and admirably well supported.

[Nahum 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">nah 2:13</span></span>

Behold, I am against thee - Assyria, and Nineveh its capital. I will
deal with you as you have dealt with others.

The voice of thy messengers - Announcing thy splendid victories, and the
vast spoils taken - shall no more be heard - thou and thy riches, and
ill-got spoils, shall perish together.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 3](nah003)

</div>
