<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh004)  [Next](neh006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 5:0</span></span>

The people complain that they are oppressed and enthralled by their
richer brethren, [Neh 5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001). Nehemiah
calls them to account; upbraids them for their cruelty; and obliges them
to swear that they will forgive the debts, restore the mortgaged
estates, and free their servants, [Neh
5:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#004). Nehemiah's generosity and
liberality, [Neh 5:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014). The daily
provision for his table, [Neh 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018),
[Neh 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#019).

[Nehemiah 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 5:2</span></span>

We, our sons, and our daughters, are many - Our families are larger than
we can provide for; we are obliged to go in debt; and our richer
brethren take advantage of our necessitous situation, and oppress us.
The details which are given in the next verse are sufficiently plain.

[Nehemiah 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 5:3</span></span>

Because of the dearth - About the time of Zerubbabel, God had sent a
judicial dearth upon the land, as we learn from Haggai, [Hag
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009), etc., for the people it seems
were more intent on building houses for themselves than on rebuilding
the house of the Lord: "Ye looked for much, and, lo, it is come to
little; because of mine house that is waste; and ye run, every man unto
his own house. Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the
earth is stayed from her fruit. And I called for a drought upon the
land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the new wine,
and upon the oil, and upon that which the ground brought forth; and upon
men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands." This dearth
might have been continued, or its effects still felt; but it is more
likely that there was a new dearth owing to the great number of people,
for whose support the land that had been brought into cultivation was
not sufficient.

[Nehemiah 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 5:4</span></span>

We have borrowed money - This should be read, We have borrowed money for
the king's tribute on our lands and vineyards. They had a tax to pay to
the Persian king in token of their subjection to him, and though it is
not likely it was heavy, yet they were not able to pay it.

[Nehemiah 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 5:5</span></span>

We bring in to bondage our sons - The law permitted parents to sell
their children in times of extreme necessity, [Exo
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007).

[Nehemiah 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 5:7</span></span>

Ye exact usury - This was expressly contrary to the law of God; and was
doubly cruel at this time, when they were just returning out of the land
of their captivity, and were suffering from the effects of a dearth.
Some think that it was about the time of a Sabbatical year, when their
land must have lain at rest without cultivation, and during which they
were expressly commanded not to exact any debt. [Deu
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#002).

I set a great assembly against them - Brought all these delinquents
before the rulers of the people.

[Nehemiah 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 5:9</span></span>

Ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God - If ye wish to accredit
that religion ye profess which comes from the God of justice and mercy;
should you not, in the sight of the heathen, abstain from injustice and
cruelty? Can they credit your profession, when they see such practices?
The inconsistent conduct of some professors of religion does much harm
in the Church of God.

[Nehemiah 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 5:11</span></span>

Also the hundredth part of the money - Houbigant contends,

1\. That the word מאת meath, which we and the Vulgate translate one
hundredth part, never means so anywhere; and

2\. That it would have answered no end to have remitted to people so
distressed merely the one hundredth part of the money which had been
taken from them by usury.

He understands מאת meath as signifying the same as מן את min eth,
contracted into מאת meeth, a preposition and demonstrative particle
joined together, also a part From The money. Neither the Syriac,
Septuagint, nor Arabic acknowledges this hundredth part. Some think that
the hundredth part is that which they obliged the poor debtors to pay
each month, which would amount to what we would call twelve per cent.
interest for the money lent, or the debt contracted. See the
introduction.

[Nehemiah 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 5:13</span></span>

Also I shook my lap - This was a significant action frequent among the
Hebrews; and something of the same nature was practiced among other
nations. "When the Roman ambassadors entered the senate of Carthage,
they had their toga gathered up in their bosom. They said, We carry here
peace and war; you may have which you will. The senate answered, You may
give which you please. They then shook their toga, and said, We bring
you war. To which all the senate answered, We cheerfully accept it." See
Livy. lib. xxi., cap. 18; and see Calmet.

[Nehemiah 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 5:14</span></span>

I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor. - From what
is related here, and in the following verse, we find that the table of
the governor was always supplied by the people with bread and wine; and,
besides, they had forty shekels per diem for their other expenses. The
people were also greatly oppressed by the servants and officers of the
governor; but, during the twelve years that Nehemiah had been with them,
he took not this salary, and ate none of their bread. Nor were his
servants permitted to take or exact any thing from them. Having such an
example, it was scandalous for their chiefs, priests, and nobles, thus
to oppress an afflicted and distressed people.

[Nehemiah 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 5:16</span></span>

Neither bought we any land - Neither he nor his officers took any
advantage of the necessities of the people, to buy their lands, etc. He
even made his own servants to work at the wall.

[Nehemiah 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 5:17</span></span>

A hundred and fifty of the Jews - He kept open house, entertained all
comers; besides having one hundred and fifty Jews who had their food
constantly at his table, and at his expense. To be able to bear all
these expenses, no doubt Nehemiah had saved money while he was
cup-bearer to the Persian king in Susa.

[Nehemiah 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 5:18</span></span>

One ox, and six choice sheep - This was food sufficient for more than
two hundred men.

Once in ten days store of all sorts of wine - It is supposed that every
tenth day they drank wine; at all other times they drank water; unless
we suppose the meaning of the phrase to be, that his servants laid in a
stock of wine every ten days. Though the Asiatics drank sparingly of
wine, yet it is not very likely that, in a case such as that above, wine
was tasted only thrice in each month.

Bishop Pococke mentions the manner in which the bey of Tunis lived. He
had daily twelve sheep, with fish, fowls, soups, oranges, eggs, onions,
boiled rice, etc., etc., His nobles dined with him; after they had done,
the servants sat down; and, when they had finished, the poor took what
was left. Here is no mention of a fat ox; but there were six sheep at
the bey's table more than were at the table of Nehemiah: so the twelve
sheep were equal to six sheep and one ox. Probably the mode of living
between these two was nearly alike.

[Nehemiah 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 5:19</span></span>

Think upon me, my God, for good - Nehemiah wishes for no reward from
man; and he only asks mercy at the hand of his God for what his
providence enabled him to do; and which, according to the good hand of
his God upon him, he had done faithfully. He does not offer his good
deeds to God in extenuation of his sins, or as a compensation for the
heaven he expected. Nothing of the kind: he simply says, what any good
man might say, My God, as I have done good to them, so do good to me; or
as the poet has sung: -

"Teach me to feel another's wo,

To hide the fault I see:

The mercy I to others show,

That mercy show to me!"

Pope.

This is according to the precept of Christ: "Forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven; give, and it shall be given unto you."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 6](neh006)

</div>
