<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh011)  [Next](neh013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 12:0</span></span>

Account of the priests and Levites that come up with Zerubbabel, [Neh
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001). Of the Levites, [Neh
12:8-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#008). The Levites in the days of
Eliashib, [Neh 12:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022). Of the
dedication of the wall, and its ceremonies, vv. 27-43. Different
officers appointed, [Neh 12:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044).

[Nehemiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 12:1</span></span>

Now these are the priests - Not the whole, but the chief of them, as we
are informed, [Neh 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#007), [Neh
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022), [Neh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023), and [Neh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024). The Septuagint omit [Neh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#003), except the word Shechaniah; as
also [Neh 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#004), [Neh
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#005),[Neh
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#006), [Neh
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#009),[Neh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#037), [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039), [Neh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#040), and [Neh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#041). The Arabic omits the first
twenty-six verses, and [Neh 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#029).
Mention is made of Ezra in this verse; and he is generally allowed to be
that Ezra whose book the reader has already passed over, and who came to
Jerusalem in the time of Cyrus, with Zerubbabel. If this were the same,
he must have been at this time upward of a hundred years of age: and
this case is not improbable, as an especial providence might preserve
such a very useful man beyond the ordinary age of men. See what has been
said on the case of Nehemiah, [Neh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)
(note).

[Nehemiah 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 12:7</span></span>

The chief of the priests - They were twenty-four orders or courses in
number, all subordinate to each other; as established by David, [Ch1
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#018). And these orders or courses
were continued till the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. See
Calmet.

[Nehemiah 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 12:8</span></span>

Over the thanksgiving - The principal singers: See on [Neh
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#017) (note).

[Nehemiah 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 12:22</span></span>

Jaddua - This was probably the high priest who went in his pontifical
robes, accompanied by his brethren, to meet Alexander the Great, when he
was advancing towards Jerusalem, with the purpose to destroy it, after
having conquered Tyre and Gaza. Alexander was so struck with the
appearance of the priest, that he forbore all hostilities against
Jerusalem, prostrated himself before Jaddua, worshipped the Lord at the
temple, and granted many privileges to the Jews. See Josephus, Ant. lib.
xi., c. 3, and Prideaux's Connections, lib. 7, p. 695.

To the reign of Darius the Persian - Calmet maintains that this must
have been Darius Codomanus, who was defeated by Alexander the Great: but
Archbishop Usher understands it of Darius Nothus, in whose reign he
thinks Jaddua was born, who was high priest under Darius Codomanus.

[Nehemiah 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 12:23</span></span>

The book of the chronicles - This is not the book of Chronicles which we
have now, no such list being found in it; but some other book or
register, which is lost.

[Nehemiah 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">neh 12:25</span></span>

The thresholds of the gates - Some understand this of a sort of
porticoes at the gates, and are puzzled about it, because they find no
mention of porticoes elsewhere: but why may we not suppose these to
resemble our watch-boxes or some temporary moveable shelters for those
who took care of the gates? That there must have been some such
conveniences, common sense dictates.

[Nehemiah 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">neh 12:27</span></span>

At the dedication of the wall - They sent for the Levites from all
quarters, that this dedication might be as solemn and majestic as
possible; and it is likely that this was done as soon as convenient
after the walls were finished. The dedication seems to have consisted in
processions of the most eminent persons around the walls, and
thanksgivings to God, who had enabled them to bring the work to so happy
a conclusion: and no doubt to all this were added a particular
consecration of the city to God, and the most earnest invocation that he
would take it under his guardian care, and defend it and its inhabitants
against all their enemies.

The ancients consecrated their cities to the gods, and the very walls
were considered as sacred. Ovid gives us an account of the ceremonies
used in laying the foundations of the walls of the city of Rome, by
Romulus. After having consulted together who should give name to the
city, and have the direction of the wall by which it was necessary to
surround it, they agreed to let the case be decided by the flight of
birds. One brother went to the top of the Mons Palatinus, the other to
that of Mount Aventine. Romulus saw twelve birds, Remus saw but six; the
former, therefore, according to agreement, took the command. The poet
thus describes the ceremonies used on the occasion: -

Apta dies legitur, qua moenia signet aratro;

Sacra Palis suberant; inde movetur opus.

Fossa fit ad solidum: fruges jaciuntur in ima.

Et de vicino terra petita solo

Fossa repletur humo, plenaeque imponitur ara;

Et novus accenso finditur igne focus.

Inde, premens stivam, designat moenia sulco;

Alba jugum niveo cum bove vacca tulit.

Vox tuit haec regis; Condenti Jupiter urbem,

Et genitor Mavors, Vestaque mater ades:

Quosque pium est adhibere deos, advertite cuncti:

Auspicibus vobis hoc mihi surgat opus.

Longa sit huic aetas, dominaeque potentia terrae:

Sitque sub hac oriens occiduusque dies! Ille precabatur.

Ovid, Fast. lib. iv., ver. 819.

"A proper day is chosen in which he may mark out the walls with the
plough: the festival of Pales was at hand when the work was begun. A
ditch is dug down to the solid clay, into which they cast the fruits of
the season; and bring earth from the neighboring ground, with which they
fill up the trench; and on it build an altar, by whose flames the newly
made hearth is cleft asunder. Then Romulus, seizing the plough, which a
white heifer yoked with a snowy bull drew along, marked out the walls
with a furrow. And thus spoke the king: 'O Jupiter, and Father Mars,
with Matron Vesta, prosper me in founding this city! And all ye gods,
approach, whomsoever it is right to invoke! Under your auspices may the
work arise; may it endure for countless ages, and be the mistress of the
world; and may the East and the West be under its control!' Thus he
prayed."

The above is a literal version, and the account is not a little curious.

[Nehemiah 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">neh 12:29</span></span>

From the house of Gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth -
Or, from Beth-Gilgal; a village erected in the place where the
Israelites encamped after they had, under the direction of Joshua,
passed over Jordan.

[Nehemiah 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">neh 12:30</span></span>

The priests and the Levites purified themselves - This consisted in
washings, abstinence from wine, and other matters, which, on all other
occasions, were lawful. And as to the purifying of the gates and the
walls, nothing was requisite but to remove all filth from the former,
and all rubbish that might have been laid against the latter.

[Nehemiah 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">neh 12:31</span></span>

Then I brought up the princes - Perhaps this verse should be read thus:
"Then I caused the princes of Judah to go upon the wall, and appointed
two great choirs, \[to sing praises\], and two processions, one on the
right hand, etc.

The following seems to have been the order of the procession: he divided
the priests, the Levites, the magistrates, and the people into two
companies; each company to go round one half of the wall. They began at
the dung gate, one party going to the right and the other to the left,
till they met at the great space opposite to the temple, where they all
offered many sacrifices to God, and rejoiced with exceeding great joy;
shouting so that the noise was heard a great way off.

[Nehemiah 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">neh 12:38</span></span>

The broad wall - What part this was, we know not: it might have been a
place designed for a public promenade, or a parade for assembling the
troops or guard of the temple.

[Nehemiah 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">neh 12:47</span></span>

All Israel - gave the portions of the singers - The singers and the
porters were supported by the people at large; and each of these had
their portions served out to them daily.

And they sanctified - unto the Levites - The things which were provided
for sacred uses were delivered by the people to the Levites, and the
Levites presented them to the priests.

The children of Aaron - This may refer principally to the tithes which
the people brought to the Levites; the tithe or tenth of which the
Levites gave to the priests. The presenting these tithes is termed
sanctifying them; that is, dedicating them to those sacred or
ecclesiastical uses for which they were designed: this is a very general
meaning of the word sanctify in Scripture.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 13](neh013)

</div>
