<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num022)  [Next](num024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 23:0</span></span>

Being arrived at the high places of Baal, ([Num
22:41](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#041)), Balaam orders Balak to build
seven altars, and prepare oxen and rams for sacrifice, [Num
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#001), [Num
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#002). Balaam inquires of the Lord,
receives an answer, with which he returns to Balak, [Num
23:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#003). Balak, finding that this was
a prediction of the prosperity of the Israelites, is greatly troubled,
[Num 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#011). Balaam excuses himself,
[Num 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#012). He brings him to another
place, where he might see only a part of Israel, and repeats his
sacrifices, [Num 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#013), [Num
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#014). Balaam again consults the Lord,
[Num 23:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#015). Returns with his
answer, and again predicts the glory of Israel, [Num
23:18-24](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#018). Balak is angry, [Num
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#025); and Balaam again excuses
himself. Balak proposes another trial, takes him to another place, and
repeats the same sacrifices, [Num
23:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#026).

[Numbers 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 23:1</span></span>

Build me here seven altars, etc. - The oxen and the rams were such as
the Mosaic law had ordered to be offered to God in sacrifice; the
building of seven altars was not commanded. Some think that these seven
altars were built to the seven planets: this is most gratuitously said;
of it there is no proof whatever; it is mere trifling, even with
conjecture. As seven was a number of perfection, Balaam chose it on this
occasion, because he intended to offer a grand sacrifice, and to offer a
bullock and a ram upon each of the altars; the whole to be made a
burnt-offering at the same time. And as he intended to offer seven
bullocks and seven rams at the same time, it could not be conveniently
done on one altar, therefore he ordered seven to be built. We need go no
farther to find out his reasons.

[Numbers 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 23:3</span></span>

Stand by thy burnt-offering - We have already seen that blessing and
cursing in this way were considered as religious rites, and therefore
must be always preceded by sacrifice. See this exemplified in the case
of Isaac, before he blessed Jacob and Esau, Genesis 27 (note), and the
notes there. The venison that was brought to Isaac, of which he did eat,
was properly the preparatory sacrifice.

[Numbers 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 23:7</span></span>

And he took up his parable - משלו meshalo, see on [Num
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027) (note). All these oracular
speeches of Balaam are in hemistich metre in the original. They are
highly dignified, and may be considered as immediate poetic productions
of the Spirit of God; for it is expressly said, [Num
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#005), that God put the word in
Balaam's mouth, and that the Spirit of God came upon him, [Num
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#002).

[Numbers 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 23:8</span></span>

How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? - It was granted on all
hands that no incantations nor imprecations could avail, unless God
concurred and ratified them. From God's communication to Balaam he saw
that God was determined to bless and defend Israel, and therefore all
endeavors to injure them must be in vain.

[Numbers 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 23:9</span></span>

From the top of the rocks I see him - That is, from the high places of
Baal where he went, [Num 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#041), that
he might the more advantageously see the whole camp of Israel.

The people shall dwell alone - They shall ever be preserved as a
distinct nation. This prophecy has been literally fulfilled through a
period of 3300 years to the present day. This is truly astonishing.

[Numbers 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 23:10</span></span>

Let me die the death of the righteous - Probably Balaam had some
presentiment that he should be taken off by a premature death, and
therefore he lodges this petition against it. The death of the righteous
in those times implied being gathered to one's fathers in a good old
age, having seen his children, and children's children; and to this,
probably, the latter part of this petition applies: And let my last end
be like his, (ותהי אחריתי כמהו uthehi acharithi chamohu, And let my
Posterity be like his). It has been generally supposed that Balaam is
here praying for a happy death, such as true Christians die who die in
the Lord; and in this way his words are generally applied; but I am
satisfied this is not their meaning. The prayer, however, understood in
the common way, is a good one, and may be offered to God profitably. A
righteous man is one who is saved from his sins, who is justified and
sanctified through the blood of the covenant, and who lives, not only an
innocent, but also a holy and useful life. He who would die well should
live well; for a bad death must be the issue of a bad life.

[Numbers 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 23:13</span></span>

Thou shalt see but the utmost part of them - Balak thought that the
sight of such an immense camp had intimidated Balaam, and this he might
gather from what he said in the tenth verse: Who can count the dust of
Jacob, etc.; he thought therefore that he might get Balaam to curse them
in detached parties, till the whole camp should be devoted to
destruction by successive execrations.

[Numbers 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 23:17</span></span>

What hath the Lord spoken? - Balak himself now understood that Balaam
was wholly under the influence of Jehovah, and would say nothing but
what God commanded him; but not knowing Jehovah as Balaam did, he hoped
that he might be induced to change his mind, and curse a people whom he
had hitherto determined to bless.

[Numbers 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 23:19</span></span>

God is not a man, that he should lie - This seems to be spoken to
correct the foregoing supposition of Balak that God could change his
mind. Even the heathen would not allow that their supreme god could be
caught in a falsity. Hence Aeschylus, in Prometh. vinct. 1068: -

Ψευδηγορειν γαρ ουκ επισταται στομα

Το Διον, αλλα παν επος τελει.

"The mouth of Jove knows not to frame a lie;

But every word finds full accomplishment."

[Numbers 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 23:21</span></span>

He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness
in Israel - This is a difficult passage; for if we take the words as
spoken of the people Israel, as their iniquity and their perverseness
were almost unparalleled, such words cannot be spoken of them with
strict truth. If we consider them as spoken of the patriarch Jacob and
Israel, or of Jacob after he became Israel, they are most strictly true,
as after that time a more unblemished and noble character (Abraham
excepted) is not to be found in the page of history, whether sacred or
profane; and for his sake, and for the sake of his father Isaac, and his
grandfather Abraham, God is ever represented as favoring, blessing, and
sparing a rebellious and undeserving people; see the note on [Gen
49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033). In this way, I think, this
difficult text may be safely understood.

There is another way in which the words may be interpreted, which will
give a good sense. און aven not only signifies iniquity, but most
frequently trouble, labor, distress, and affliction; and these indeed
are its ideal meanings, and iniquity is only an accommodated or
metaphorical one, because of the pain, distress, etc., produced by sin.
עמל amal, translated here perverseness, occurs often in Scripture, but
is never translated perverseness except in this place. It signifies
simply labor, especially that which is of an afflictive or oppressive
kind. The words may therefore be considered as implying that God will
not suffer the people either to be exterminated by the sword, or to be
brought under a yoke of slavery. Either of these methods of
interpretation gives a good sense, but our common version gives none.

Dr. Kennicott contends for the reading of the Samaritan, which, instead
of לא הביט lo hibbit, he hath not seen, has לא אבט lo abbit, I do not
see, I do not discover any thing among them on which I could ground my
curse. But the sense above given is to be preferred.

[Numbers 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 23:22</span></span>

The strength of a unicorn - ראם reem and ראים reim. It is generally
allowed that there is no such beast in nature as the unicorn; i. e., a
creature of the horse kind, with one long rich curled horn in the
forehead. The creature painted from fancy is represented as one of the
supporters of the royal arms of Great Britain. It is difficult to say
what kind of beast is intended by the original word. The Septuagint
translate the word μονοκερως, the unicorn, or one-horned animal; the
Vulgate, sometimes, unicornus; and in the text rhinocerotis, by which
the rhinoceros, a creature which has its name from the horn on its nose,
is supposed to be meant. That no single-horned animal can be intended by
the reem of Moses, is sufficiently evident from this, that Moses,
speaking of Joseph, says, "he has the Horns of A unicorn," or reem,
where the horns are spoken of in the plural, the animal in the singular.
The creature referred to is either the rhinoceros, some varieties of
which have two horns on the nose, or the wild bull, urus, or buffalo;
though some think the beast intended is a species of goat; but the
rhinoceros seems the most likely. There is literally a monoceros, or
unicorn, with one large curled ivory horn growing horizontally out of
his snout; but this is not a land animal, it is the modiodan or nurwal,
a marine animal of the whale kind, a horn of which is now before me,
measuring seven feet four inches; but I believe the rhinoceros is that
intended by the sacred writers.

[Numbers 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 23:23</span></span>

There is no enchantment, etc. - Because God has determined to save them,
therefore no enchantment can prevail against them.

According to this time, etc. - I think this clause should be read thus:
"As at this time it shall be told to Jacob and to Israel what God
worketh;" i. e., this people shall always have prophetic information of
what God is about to work. And indeed, they are the only people under
heaven who ever had this privilege. When God himself designed to punish
them because of their sins, he always forewarned them by the prophets;
and also took care to apprise them of all the plots of their enemies
against them.

[Numbers 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 23:24</span></span>

Behold, the people shall rise up as a great lion - לביא labi, the great,
mighty, or old lion, the king of the forest, who is feared and respected
by all the other beasts of the field; so shall Israel be the subduer and
possessor of the whole land of Canaan. And as a young lion, ארי ari from
ארה arah, to tear off, the predatory lion, or the lion in the act of
seizing and tearing his prey; - the nations against whom the Israelites
are now going shall be no more able to defend themselves against their
attacks, than the feeblest beasts of the forest are against the attacks
of the strong lion.

[Numbers 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 23:28</span></span>

Unto the top of Peor - Probably the place where the famous Baal-peor had
his chief temple. He appears to have been the Priapus of the Moabites,
and to have been worshipped with the same obscene and abominable rites.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 24](num024)

</div>
