<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num021)  [Next](num023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 22:0</span></span>

The Israelites pitch in the plains of Moab, [Num
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001). Balak, king of Moab, is greatly
terrified, [Num 22:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#002); and sends to
Balaam, a diviner, to come and curse them, [Num
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005), [Num
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#006). The elders of Moab take a reward
and carry it to Balaam, [Num 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#007). He
inquires of the Lord, and is positively ordered not to go with them,
[Num 22:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#008). He communicates this to
the elders of Moab, [Num 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#013). They
return to Balak with this information, [Num
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#014). He sends some of his princes to
Balaam with promises of great honor, [Num
22:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#015). He consults God, and is
permitted! to go, on certain conditions, [Num
22:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#018). Balaam sets off, is opposed
by an angel of the Lord, and the Lord miraculously opens the mouth of
his ass to reprove him, [Num 22:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#021).
Balaam sees the angel, and is reproved by him, [Num
22:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#031). He humbles himself, and
offers to go back, [Num 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#034); but is
ordered to proceed, on the same conditions as before, [Num
22:35](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#035). The king of Moab goes out to
meet him, [Num 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#036). His address to
him, [Num 22:37](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#037). Balaam's firm answer,
[Num 22:38](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#038). Balak sacrifices, and
takes Balaam to the high places of Baal, that he may see the whole of
the Israelitish camp, [Num 22:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#039).

[Numbers 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 22:1</span></span>

And pitched in the plains of Moab - They had taken no part of the
country that at present appertained to the Moabites; they had taken only
that part which had formerly belonged to this people, but had been taken
from them by Sihon, king of the Amorites.

On this side Jordan - On the east side. By Jericho, that is, over
against it.

[Numbers 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 22:5</span></span>

To Pethor, which is by the river of the land of the children of his
people - Dr. Kennicott justly remarks, that "the description now given
of Balaam's residence, instead of being particular, agrees with any
place in any country where there is a river; for he lived by Pethor,
which is by the river of the land of the children of his people. But was
Pethor then near the Nile in Egypt? Or in Canaan, near Jordan? Or in
Mesopotamia, near the Euphrates, and belonging to the Ammonites? This
last was in fact the case; and therefore it is well that twelve Hebrew
MSS. (with two of De Rossi's) confirm the Samaritan text here in
reading, instead of עמו ammo, his people, עמון Ammon, with the Syriac
and Vulgate versions." Houbigant properly contends for this reading; and
necessity urges the propriety of adopting it. It should therefore stand
thus: by the river of the land of the children of Ammon; and thus it
agrees with [Deu 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004).

[Numbers 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 22:6</span></span>

Come now, therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people - Balaam, once a
prophet of the true God, appears to have been one of the Moshelim, (see
[Num 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027)), who had added to his
poetic gift that of sorcery or divination. It was supposed that prophets
and sorcerers had a power to curse persons and places so as to confound
all their designs, frustrate their counsels, enervate their strength,
and fill them with fear, terror, and dismay. See [Gen
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025); [Psa
109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006), [Psa
109:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#020); [Jos
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#026); [Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005), [Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006).

Macrobius has a whole chapter De carmine quo evocari solebant dii
tutelares, et aut urbes, aut exercitus devoveri. "Of the incantations
which were used to induce the tutelary gods to forsake the cities, etc.,
over which they presided, and to devote cities and whole armies to
destruction." See Saturnal., lib. iii., cap. ix. He gives us two of the
ancient forms used in reference to the destruction of Carthage; the
first, to call over the protecting deities, was pronounced by the
dictator or general, and none other, when they began the siege. It is as
follows, literatim et punctatim: -

Si. Deus. si. Dea. est. cui. popolus. civitas. que. Karthaginiensis. est
in. tutela. te. que. maxime, ille. qui. urbis. hujus. popoli. que.
tutelam. recepisti. precor. veneror, que. veniam. que. a. vobis. peto.
ut. vos. popolum. civitatem. que. Karthaginiensem. deseratis. loca.
templa. sacra. urbem. que. eorum. relinquatis. absque. his. abeatis. ei.
que. popolo. civitati. que. metum. formidinem. oblivionem. injiciatis.
proditi. que. Romam. ad. me. meos. que. veniatis. nostra. que. vobis.
loca. templa. sacra. urbs. acceptior. probatior. que. sit. mihi. que.
popolo. que. Romano. militibus. que. meis. praepositi. sitis. ut.
sciamus. intelligamus. que. Si. ita. feceritis. voveo. vobis. templa.
ludos. que. facturum.

"Whether it be god or goddess, under whose protection the people and
city of Carthage are placed; and thee, especially, who hast undertaken
to defend this city and people; I pray, beseech, and earnestly entreat
that you would forsake the people and city of Carthage, and leave their
places, temples, sacred things, and city, and depart from them: and that
you would inspire this people and city with fear, terror, and
forgetfulness: and that, coming out from them, you would pass over to
Rome, to me, and to mine: and that our places, temples, sacred things,
and city may be more agreeable and more acceptable to you: and that you
would preside over me, the Roman people, and my soldiers; that we may
know and perceive it. If ye will do this, I promise to consecrate to
your honor both temples and games."

The second, to devote the city to destruction, which it was supposed the
tutelary gods had abandoned, is the following:

Dis. Pater. Vejovis. Manes. sive. vos. quo. allo. nomine. fas. est.
nominare. ut. omnes. iliam. urbem. Karthaginem. exercitum. que. quem.
ego. me. sentio. dicere. fuga. formidine. terrore. que. compleatis. qui.
que. adversum. legiones. exercitum. que. nostrum. arma. tela. que.
ferent. Uti. vos. eum. exercitum. eos. hostes. eos. que. homines. urbes.
agros. que. eorum. et. qui. in. his. locis. regionibus. que. agris.
urbibus. ve. habitant. abducatis. lumine. supero. privetis. exercitum.
que. hostium. urbes. agros. que. eorum. quos. me. sentio. dicere. uti.
vos. eas. urbes. agros. que. capita. aetates. que. eorum. devotas.
consecratas. que. habeatis. illis. legibus. quibus. quando. que. sunt.
maxime. hostes. devoti. eos. que. ego. vicarios. pro. me. fide.
magistratu. que. meo. pro. popolo. Romano. exercitibus. legionibus. que.
nostris. do. devoveo. ut. me. meam. que. fidem. imperium. que. legiones.
exercitum. que. nostrum. qui. in. his. rebus. gerundis. sunt. bene.
salvos. siritis. esse. Si. haec. ita. faxitis. ut. ego. sciam. sentiam.
intelligam. que. tune. quisquis. hoc. votum. faxit. ubi. ubi. faxit.
recte. factum. esto. ovibus. atris. tribus. Tellus. mater. te. que.
Juppiter. obtestor.

"Dis. Pater. Vejosis. Manes., or by whatsoever name you wish to be
invoked, I pray you to fill this city of Carthage with fear and terror;
and to put that army to flight which I mention, and which bears arms or
darts against Our legions and armies: and that ye may take away this
army, those enemies, those men, their cities and their country, and all
who dwell in those places, regions, countries, or cities; and deprive
them of the light above: and let all their armies, cities, country,
chiefs, and people be held by you consecrated and devoted, according to
those laws by which, and at what time, enemies can be most effectually
devoted. I also give and devote them as vicarious sacrifices for myself
and my magistracy; for the Roman people, and for all our armies and
legions; and for the whole empire, and that all the armies and legions
which are employed in these countries may be preserved in safety. If
therefore ye will do these things, as I know, conceive, and intend, then
he who makes this vow wheresoever and whensoever he shall make it, I
engage shall sacrifice three black sheep to thee, O mother Earth, and to
thee. O Jupiter." "When the execrator mentions the earth, he stoops down
and places both his hands on it; and when he names Jupiter, he lifts up
both his hands to heaven; and when he mentions his vow, he places his
hands upon his breast." Among the ancient records, Macrobius says he
found many cities and people devoted in this way. The Romans held that
no city could be taken till its tutelary god had forsaken it; or if it
could be taken, it would be unlawful, as it would be sacrilegious to
have the gods in captivity. They therefore endeavored to persuade the
gods of their enemies to come over to their party. Virgil intimates that
Troy was destroyed, only because the tutelary gods had forsaken it: -

Excessere omnes, adytis arisque relictis,

Dii, quibus imperium hoc steterat.

Aen., lib. ii., ver. 351.

"All the gods, by whose assistance the empire had hitherto been
preserved, forsook their altars and their temples."

And it was on this account that the Greeks employed all their artifice
to steal away the Palladium, on which they believed the safety of Troy
depended.

Tacitus observes that when Suetonius Paulinus prepared his army to cross
over into Mona, (Anglesea), where the Britons and Druids made their last
stand, the priestesses, with dishevelled hair, white vestments, and
torches in their hands, ran about like furies, devoting their enemies to
destruction; and he farther adds that the sight, the attitude, and
horrible imprecations of these priestesses had such effect on the Roman
soldiers, that for a while they stood still and suffered themselves to
be pierced with the darts of the Britons, without making any resistance.
Tacit. Ann., l. xiv., c. 29. Many accounts are related in the Hindoo
Pooran of kings employing sages to curse their enemies when too powerful
for them - Ward's Customs.

The Jews also had a most horrible form of execration, as may be seen in
Buxtorf's Talmudical Lexicon under the word תדם. These observations and
authorities, drawn out in so much detail, are necessary to cast light on
the strange and curious history related in this and the two following
chapters.

[Numbers 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 22:7</span></span>

The rewards of divination - Whoever went to consult a prophet took with
him a present, as it was on such gratuitous offerings the prophets
lived; but here more than a mere present is intended, perhaps every
thing necessary to provide materials for the incantation. The drugs,
etc., used on such occasions were often very expensive. It appears that
Balaam was very covetous, and that he loved the wages of
unrighteousness, and probably lived by it; see [Pe2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#015).

[Numbers 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 22:8</span></span>

I will bring you word again, as the Lord shall speak - So it appears he
knew the true God, and had been in the habit of consulting him, and
receiving oracles from his mouth.

[Numbers 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 22:12</span></span>

Thou shalt not go with them; thou shalt not curse the people - That is,
Thou shalt not go with them to curse the people. With them he might go,
as we find he afterwards did by God's own command, but not to curse the
people; this was wholly forbidden. Probably the command, Thou shalt not
go, refers here to that time, viz., the first invitation: and in this
sense it was most punctually obeyed by Balaam; see [Num
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#013).

[Numbers 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 22:14</span></span>

Balaam refuseth to come with us - "Observe," says Mr. Ainsworth,
"Satan's practice against God's word, seeking to lessen the same, and
that from hand to hand, till he bring it to naught. Balaam told the
princes less than God told him, and they relate to Balak less than
Balaam told them; so that when the answer came to the king of Moab, it
was not the word of God, but the word of man; it was simply, Balaam
refuseth to come, without ever intimating that God had forbidden him."
But in this Balaam is not to blame; he told the messengers in the most
positive manner, Jehovah refuseth to give me leave to go with you, [Num
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#013); and more explicit he could not
be.

[Numbers 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 22:18</span></span>

I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God - Balaam knew God too
well to suppose he could reverse any of his purposes; and he respected
him too much to attempt to do any thing without his permission. Though
he was covetous, yet he dared not, even when strongly tempted both by
riches and honors, to go contrary to the command of his God. Many make
all the professions of Balaam, without justifying them by their conduct.
"They pretend," says one, "they would not do any thing against the word
of God for a house full of gold, and yet will do it for a handful!"

[Numbers 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 22:19</span></span>

What the Lord will say unto me more - He did not know but God might make
a farther discovery of his will to him, and therefore he might very
innocently seek farther information.

[Numbers 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 22:20</span></span>

If the men come - go with them - This is a confirmation of what was
observed on the twelfth verse; though we find his going was marked with
the Divine displeasure, because he wished, for the sake of the honors
and rewards, to fulfill as far as possible the will of the king of Moab.
Mr. Shuckford observes that the pronoun הוא hu is sometimes used to
denote a person's doing a thing out of his own head, without regard to
the directions of another. Thus in the case of Balaam, when God had
allowed him to go with the messengers of Balak, if they came in the
morning to call him; because he was more hasty than he ought to have
been, and went to them instead of staying till they should come to him,
it was said of him, not כי הלך ki halach, that he went, but כי הולך הוא
ki holech hu, i. e., he went of his own head - without being called; and
in this, Mr. Shuckford supposes, his iniquity chiefly lay - Connex.,
vol. iii., p. 115. How many are restrained from sinning, merely through
the fear of God! They would gladly do the evil, but it is forbidden on
awful penalties; they wish the thing were not prohibited for they have a
strong desire to do it.

[Numbers 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 22:23</span></span>

And the ass saw the angel - When God granted visions those alone who
were particularly interested saw them while others in the same company
saw nothing; see [Dan 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007); [Act
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007).

[Numbers 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 22:26</span></span>

And the angel - stood in a narrow place - In this carriage of the angel
says Mr. Ainsworth the Lord shows us the proceedings of his judgments
against sinners: First he mildly shakes his rod at them but lets them go
untouched. Secondly he comes nearer and touches them with an easy
correction as it were wringing their foot against the wall. Thirdly,
when all this is ineffectual, he brings them into such straits, that
they can neither turn to the right hand nor to the left, but must fall
before his judgments, if they do not fully turn to him.

[Numbers 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 22:28</span></span>

The Lord opened the mouth of the ass - And where is the wonder of all
this? If the ass had opened her own mouth, and reproved the rash
prophet, we might well be astonished; but when God opens the mouth, an
ass can speak as well as a man. It is worthy of remark here, that Balaam
testifies no surprise at this miracle, because he saw it was the Lord's
doing. Of animate and inanimate things receiving for a short time the
gift of speech, the heathen mythology furnishes many fictitious
examples, with which I do not deem it proper to occupy the reader's
time.

[Numbers 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 22:33</span></span>

Surely now also I had slain thee - How often are the meanest animals,
and the most trivial occurrences, instruments of the preservation of our
lives, and of the salvation of our souls! The messenger of justice would
have killed Balaam, had not the mercy of God prevented the ass from
proceeding.

[Numbers 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 22:34</span></span>

If it displease thee, I will get me back again - Here is a proof, that
though he loved the wages of unrighteousness, yet he still feared God;
and he is now willing to drop the enterprise if God be displeased with
his proceeding. The piety of many called Christians does not extend thus
far; they see that the thing displeases God, and yet they proceed.
Reader, is this thy case?

[Numbers 22:38](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 22:38</span></span>

The word that God putteth in my mouth, that shall I speak - Here was a
noble resolution, and he was certainly faithful to it: though he wished
to please the king, and get wealth and honor, yet he would not displease
God to realize even these bright prospects. Many who slander this poor
semi-antinomian prophet, have not half his piety.

[Numbers 22:40](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 22:40</span></span>

And Balak offered oxen, etc. - This was to gain the favor of his gods,
and perhaps to propitiate Jehovah, that the end for which he had sent
for Balaam might be accomplished.

[Numbers 22:41](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 22:41</span></span>

That - he might see the utmost part of the people - As he thought Balaam
must have them all in his eye when he pronounced his curse, lest it
might not extend to those who were not in sight. On this account he took
him up into the high places of Baal.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 23](num023)

</div>
