<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num034)  [Next](num036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 35:0</span></span>

The Israelites are commanded to give the Levites, out of their
inheritances, cities and their suburbs for themselves and for their
cattle, goods, etc., [Num 35:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001). The
suburbs to be 3,000 cubits round about from the wall of the city, [Num
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#004), [Num
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#005). The cities to be forty-two, to
which six cities of refuge should be added, in all forty-eight cities,
[Num 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#006), [Num
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#007). Each tribe shall give of these
cities in proportion to its possessions, [Num
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#008). These cities to be appointed for
the person who might slay his neighbor unawares, [Num
35:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#009). Of these six cities there
shall be three on each side Jordan, [Num
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#013), [Num
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#014). The cities to be places of
refuge for all who kill a person unawares, whether they be Israelites,
strangers, or sojourners, [Num 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#015).
Cases of murder to which the benefit of the cities of refuge shall not
extend, [Num 35:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016). Cases of
manslaughter to which the benefits of the cities of refuge shall extend,
[Num 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#022), [Num
35:23](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#023). How the congregation shall act
between the manslayer and the avenger of blood, [Num
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#024), [Num
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025). The manslayer shall abide in
the city of refuge till the death of the high priest; he shall then
return to the land of his possession, [Num
35:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#026). Two witnesses must attest a
murder before a murderer can be put to death, [Num
35:29](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#029), [Num
35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030). Every murderer to be put to
death, [Num 35:31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#031). The manslayer is
not to be permitted to come to the land of his inheritance till the
death of the high priest, [Num 35:32](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#032).
The land must not be polluted with blood, for the Lord dwells in it,
[Num 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033), [Num
35:34](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#034).

[Numbers 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 35:4</span></span>

And the suburbs of the cities - shall reach from the wall of the city
and outward a thousand cubits round about.

[Numbers 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 35:5</span></span>

And ye shall measure from without the city - two thousand cubits, etc. -
Commentators have been much puzzled with the accounts in these two
verses. In [Num 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#004) the measure is
said to be 1,000 cubits from the wall; in [Num
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#005) the measure is said to be 2,000
from without the city. It is likely these two measures mean the same
thing; at least so it was understood by the Septuagint and Coptic, who
have δισχιλιους πηχεις, 2,000 cubits, in the fourth, as well as in the
fifth verse; but this reading of the Septuagint and Coptic is not
acknowledged by any other of the ancient versions, nor by any of the
MSS. collated by Kennicott and De Rossi. We must seek therefore for some
other method of reconciling this apparently contradictory account.
Sundry modes have been proposed by commentators, which appear to me, in
general, to require full as much explanation as the text itself.
Maimonides is the only one intelligible on the subject. "The suburbs,"
says he, "of the cities are expressed in the law to be 3,000 cubits on
every side from the wall of the city and outwards. The first thousand
cubits are the suburbs, and the 2,000, which they measured without the
suburbs, were for fields and vineyards." The whole, therefore, of the
city, suburbs, fields, and vineyards, may be represented by the diagram.

[Numbers 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 35:11</span></span>

Ye shall appoint - cities of refuge - The cities of refuge among the
Israelites were widely different from the asyla among the Greeks and
Romans, as also from the privileged altars among the Roman Catholics.
Those among the Hebrews were for the protection of such only as had
slain a person involuntarily. The temples and altars among the latter
often served for the protection of the most profligate characters.
Cities of refuge among the Hebrews were necessary, because the old
patriarchal law still remained in force, viz., that the nearest akin had
a right to avenge the death of his relation by slaying the murderer; for
the original law enacted that whosoever shed man's blood, by man should
his blood be shed, [Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006), and none
was judged so proper to execute this law as the man who was nearest akin
to the deceased. As many rash executions of this law might take place,
from the very nature of the thing, it was deemed necessary to qualify
its claims, and prevent injustice; and the cities of refuge were judged
proper for this purpose. Nor do we ever read that they were ever found
inefficient, or that they were ever abused.

[Numbers 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 35:12</span></span>

Until he stand before the congregation in judgment - So one of these
cities was not a perpetual asylum; It was only a pro tempore refuge,
till the case could be fairly examined by the magistrates in the
presence of the people, or the elders their representatives; and this
was done in the city or place where he had done the murder, [Jos
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#004), [Jos
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#006). If he was found worthy of death,
they delivered him to the avenger that he might be slain, [Deu
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#012); if not, they sent him back to
the city of refuge, where he remained till the death of the high priest,
[Num 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025). Before the cities of
refuge were appointed, the altar appears to have been a sanctuary for
those who had killed a person unwittingly; see on [Exo
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#013) (note), and [Exo
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014) (note).

[Numbers 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 35:19</span></span>

The revenger of blood - גאל הדם goel haddam, the redeemer of blood; the
next in blood to him who was slain. See on [Num
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012) (note).

[Numbers 35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 35:30</span></span>

But one witness shall not testify against any - This was a just and
necessary provision. One may be mistaken, or so violently prejudiced as
to impose even on his own judgment, or so wicked as to endeavor through
malice to compass the life of his neighbor: but it is not likely that
two or more should be of this kind; and even were they, their separate
examination would lead to a discovery of the truth, and to their
conviction.

[Numbers 35:31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 35:31</span></span>

Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer - No atonement
could be made for him, nor any commutation, so as to save him from
death. All the laws of the civilized world have either adjudged the
murderer to death, or to a punishment equivalent to it; such as
perpetual imprisonment, in a dungeon, under ground, on a stone floor,
without light, and to be fed on a small portion of bread and water. In
such circumstances a man could live but a short time; and though it is
not called the punishment of death, yet, from its inevitable
consequences, it only differed from it by being a little longer respite
than was usual where the punishment of death was awarded. See the note
on [Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006).

[Numbers 35:32](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 35:32</span></span>

Until the death of the priest - Probably intended to typify, that no
sinner can be delivered from his banishment from God, or recover his
forfeited inheritance, till Jesus Christ, the great high priest, had
died for his offenses, and risen again for his justification.

[Numbers 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 35:33</span></span>

For blood it defileth the land - The very land was considered as guilty
till the blood of the murderer was shed in it. No wonder God is so
particularly strict in his laws against murderers,

1\. Because he is the author of life, and none have any right to dispose
of it but himself.

2\. Because life is the time to prepare for the eternal world, and on it
the salvation of the soul accordingly depends; therefore it is of
infinite consequence to the man that his life be lengthened out to the
utmost limits assigned by Divine Providence. As he who takes a man's
life away before his time may be the murderer of his soul as well as of
his body, the severest laws should be enacted against this, both to
punish and prevent the crime.

The Mosaic cities of refuge have in general been considered, not merely
as civil institutions, but as types or representations of infinitely
better things; and in this light St. Paul seems to have considered them
and the altar of God, which was a place of general refuge, as it is
pretty evident that he had them in view when writing the following
words: "God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise
the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath; that by two
immutable things, (his oath and promise), in which it was impossible for
God to lie, we might have a strong consolation who have Fled for Refuge
to lay Hold upon the Hope set before us," [Heb
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017), [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018). Independently of this, it was a
very wise political institute; and while the patriarchal law on this
point continued in force, this law had a direct tendency to cool and
moderate the spirit of revenge, to secure the proper accomplishment of
the ends of justice, and to make way for every claim of mercy and
equity. But this is not peculiar to the ordinance of the cities of
refuge; every institution of God is distinguished in the same way,
having his own glory, in the present and eternal welfare of man,
immediately in view.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 36](num036)

</div>
