<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1002)  [Next](pe1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 3:0</span></span>

The duty of wives to their husbands, how they are to be adorned, and be
in subjection as Sarah was to Abraham, [Pe1
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001). The duty of husbands to their
wives, [Pe1 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007). How to obtain
happiness, and live a long and useful life, [Pe1
3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008). God loves and succours them
that do good; but his face is against the wicked, [Pe1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#012), [Pe1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013). They should suffer persecution
patiently, and be always ready to give a reason of the hope that is in
them; and preserve a good conscience, though they suffered for
righteousness, [Pe1 3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014). Christ
suffered for us, and was put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit, [Pe1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018). How he preached to
the old world, while Noah was preparing the ark, [Pe1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019), [Pe1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020). The salvation of Noah and his
family a type of baptism, [Pe1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021).
Christ is ascended to heaven, all creatures being subject to him, [Pe1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022).

[1 Peter 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 3:1</span></span>

Ye wives, be in subjection - Consider that your husband is, by God's
appointment, the head and ruler of the house; do not, therefore, attempt
to usurp his government; for even though he obey not the word - is not a
believer in the Christian doctrine, his rule is not thereby impaired;
for Christianity never alters civil relations: and your affectionate,
obedient conduct will be the most likely means of convincing him of the
truth of the doctrine which you have received.

Without the word - That your holy conduct may be the means of begetting
in them a reverence for Christianity, the preaching of which they will
not hear. See the notes on [Co1 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#034),
and the other places referred to in the margin.

[1 Peter 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 3:2</span></span>

Chaste conversation - with fear - While they see that ye join modesty,
chastity, and the purest manners, to the fear of God. Or perhaps fear,
φοβος, is taken, as in [Eph 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#033), for
the reverence due to the husband.

[1 Peter 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 3:3</span></span>

Whose adorning - Κοσμος. See the note on [Heb
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#001), where the word κοσμος, world or
ornament, is defined; and also the note on [Gen
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001).

Plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold - Plaiting the hair, and
variously folding it about the head, was the most ancient and most
simple mode of disposing of this chief ornament of the female head. It
was practised anciently in every part of the east, and is so to the
present day in India, in China, and also in Barbary. It was also
prevalent among the Greeks and Romans, as ancient gems, busts, and
statues, still remaining, sufficiently declare. We have a remarkable
instance of the plaiting of the hair in a statue of Agrippina, wife of
Germanicus, an exact representation of which may be seen in a work of
Andre Lens, entitled Le Costume de Peuple de I' Antiquite, pl. 33. Many
plates in the same work show the different modes of dressing the hair
which obtained among the Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Persians, and other
nations. Thin plates of gold were often mixed with the hair, to make it
appear more ornamental by the reflection of light and of the solar rays.
Small golden buckles were also used in different parts; and among the
Roman ladies, pearls and precious stones of different colors. Pliny
assures us, Hist. Nat., l. ix. c. 35, that these latter ornaments were
not introduced among the Roman women till the time of Sylla, about 110
years before the Christian era. But it is evident, from many remaining
monuments, that in numerous cases the hair differently plaited and
curled was the only ornament of the head. Often a simple pin, sometimes
of ivory, pointed with gold, seemed to connect the plaits. In monuments
of antiquity the heads of the married and single women may be known, the
former by the hair being parted from the forehead over the middle of the
top of the head, the latter by being quite close, or being plaited and
curled all in a general mass.

There is a remarkable passage in Plutarch, Conjugalia Praecept., c.
xxvi., very like that in the text: Κοσμος γαρ εστιν, ὡς ελεγε Κρατης, το
κοσμουν· κοσμει δε το κοσμιωτεραν γυναικα ποιουν· ποιει δε ταυτην ου
χρυσος, ουτε σμαραγδος, ουτε κοκκος, αλλ' ὁσα σεμνοτητος, ευταξιας,
αιδους εμφασιν περιτιθησιν· Opera a Wyttenb., vol. i., page 390. "An
ornament, as Crates said, is that which adorns. The proper ornament of a
woman is that which becomes her best. This is neither gold, nor pearls,
nor scarlet; but those things which are an evident proof of gravity,
regularity, and modesty." The wife of Phocion, a celebrated Athenian
general, receiving a visit from a lady who was elegantly adorned with
gold and jewels, and her hair with pearls, took occasion to call the
attention of her guest to the elegance and costliness of her dress,
remarking at the same time, "My ornament is my husband, now for the
twentieth year general of the Athenians." Plut., in vit. Phoc. How few
Christian women act this part! Women are in general at as much pains and
cost in their dress, as if by it they were to be recommended both to God
and man. It is, however, in every case, the argument either of a shallow
mind, or of a vain and corrupted heart.

[1 Peter 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 3:4</span></span>

The hidden man of the heart - Ὁ κρυπτος της καρδιας ανθρωπος. This
phrase is of the same import with that of St. Paul, [Rom
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022), ὁ εσω ανθρωπος, the inner man;
that is, the soul, with the whole system of affections and passions.
Every part of the Scripture treats man as a compound being: the body is
the outward or visible man; the soul, the inward, hidden, or invisible
man. The term ανθρωπος, man, is derived, according to the best
etymologists, from ανα τρεπων ωπα, turning the face upward. This
derivation of the word is beautifully paraphrased by Ovid. The whole
passage is beautiful; and, though well known, I shall insert it. After
speaking of the creation and formation of all the irrational animals, he
proceeds thus: -

"Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altae

Deerat adhuc, et quod dominari in caetera posset.

Natus Homo est: sive hunc divino semine fecit

Ille opifex rerum, mundi melioris origo;

Sive recens tellus, seductaque nuper ab alto

Aethere, cognati retinebat semina coeli. -

Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,

Os Homini Sublime Dedit; Coelumque Tueri

Jussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere veltus."

Metam, lib. i. ver. 76.

"A creature of a more exalted kind

Was wanting yet, and then was Man design'd;

Conscious of thought, of more capacious breast,

For empire form'd, and fit to rule the rest.

Whether with particles of heavenly fire

The God of nature did his soul inspire,

Or earth but new divided from the sky,

Which still retain'd th' ethereal energy. -

Thus, while the mute creation downward bend

Their sight, and to their earthly mother tend,

Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes

Beholds his own hereditary skies."

Dryden.

The word ανθρωπος, man, is frequently applied to the soul, but generally
with some epithet. Thus ὁ εσω ανθρωπος, the inner man, [Rom
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022), to distinguish it from the body,
which is called ὁ εξω ανθρωπος, the outer man, [Co2
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016); ὁ κρυπτος ανθρωπος, the hidden
man, as in the text; ὁ καινος ανθρωπος, the new man, the soul renewed in
righteousness, [Eph 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015), to
distinguish him from ὁ παλαιος ανθρωπος, the old man, that is, man
unregenerate or in a state of sin, [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). And the soul is thus
distinguished by the Greek philosophers.

A meek and quiet spirit - That is, a mind that will not give provocation
to others, nor receive irritation by the provocation of others. Meekness
will prevent the first; quietness will guard against the last.

Great price - All the ornaments placed on the head and body of the most
illustrious female, are, in the sight of God, of no worth; but a meek
and silent spirit are, in his sight, invaluable, because proceeding from
and leading to himself, being incorruptible, surviving the ruins of the
body and the ruins of time, and enduring eternally.

[1 Peter 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 3:5</span></span>

For after this manner - Simplicity reigned in primitive times; natural
ornaments alone were then in use. Trade and commerce brought in
luxuries; and luxury brought pride, and all the excessive nonsense of
Dress. No female head ever looks so well as when adorned with its own
hair alone. This is the ornament appointed by God. To cut it off or to
cover it is an unnatural practice; and to exchange the hair which God
has given for hair of some other color, is an insult to the Creator. How
the delicacy of the female character can stoop to the use of false hair,
and especially when it is considered that the chief part of this kind of
hair was once the natural property of some ruffian soldier, who fell in
battle by many a ghastly wound, is more than I can possibly comprehend.
See the notes on [Co1 11:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014) (note);
and [Ti1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009) (note).

Who trusted in God - The women who trust Not in God are fond of dress
and frippery; those who trust in God follow nature and common sense.

Being in subjection unto their own husbands - It will rarely be found
that women who are fond of dress, and extravagant in it, have any
subjection to their husbands but what comes from mere necessity. Indeed,
their dress, which they intend as an attractive to the eyes of others,
is a sufficient proof that they have neither love nor respect for their
own husbands. Let them who are concerned refute the charge.

[1 Peter 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 3:6</span></span>

Even as Sara obeyed - Almost the same words are in Rab. Tanchum, fol. 9,
3: "The wife of Abraham reverenced him, and called him lord, as it is
written, [Gen 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012) : And my lord is
old." The words of the apostle imply that she acknowledged his
superiority, and her own subjection to him, in the order of God.

Whose daughters ye are - As Abraham is represented the father of all his
male believing descendants, so Sara is represented as the mother of all
her believing female posterity. A son of Abraham is a true believer; a
daughter of Sarah is the same.

As long as ye do well - For you cannot maintain your relationship to her
longer than ye believe; and ye cannot believe longer than ye continue to
obey.

And are not afraid with any amazement - It is difficult to extract any
sense out of this clause. The original is not very easy; Μη φοβουμεναι
μηδεμιαν πτοησιν may be rendered, And not fearing with any terror. If ye
do well, and act conscientiously your part as faithful wives, ye will at
no time live under the distressing apprehension of being found out, or
terrified at every appearance of the discovery of infidelities, or
improper conduct. Being not guilty of these, you will not have occasion
to fear detection. On this subject a learned man has quoted these words,
which I have produced elsewhere, [Eph
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014) : -

\- hic murus aheneus esto,

Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.

"Let this be my brazen wall, to be self-convicted of no private
delinquency, nor to change color at being charged with a fault."

Happy is the wife, and happy is the husband, who can conscientiously
adopt the saying.

[1 Peter 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 3:7</span></span>

Dwell with them according to knowledge - Give your wives, by no species
of unkind carriage, any excuse for delinquency. How can a man expect his
wife to be faithful to him, if he be unfaithful to her? and vice versa.

Giving honor unto the wife - Using your superior strength and experience
in her behalf, and thus honouring her by becoming her protector and
support. But the word τιμη honor, signifies maintenance as well as
respect; - maintain, provide for the wife.

As - the weaker vessel - Being more delicately, and consequently more
slenderly, constructed. Roughness and strength go hand in hand; so
likewise do beauty and frailty. The female has what the man wants -
beauty and delicacy. The male has what the female wants - courage and
strength. The one is as good in its place as the other: and by these
things God has made an equality between the man and the woman, so that
there is properly very little superiority on either side. See the note
on [Th1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#004).

Being heirs together - Both the man and woman being equally called to
eternal glory: and as prayer is one great means of obtaining a meetness
for it, it is necessary that they should live together in such a manner
as to prevent all family contentions, that they may not be prevented, by
disputes or misunderstandings, from uniting daily in this most important
duty - family and social prayer.

[1 Peter 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 3:8</span></span>

Be ye all of one mind - Unity, both in the family and in the Church,
being essentially necessary to peace and salvation. See on [Rom
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016) (note); [Rom
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#005) (note).

Having compassion - Συμπαθεις· Being sympathetic; feeling for each
other; bearing each other's burdens.

Love as brethren - Φιλαδελφοι· Be lovers of the brethren.

Pitiful - Ευσπλαγχνοι· Tender-hearted; let your bowels yearn over the
distressed and afflicted.

Courteous - Φιλοφρονες· Be friendly-minded; acquire and cultivate a
friendly disposition. But instead of this word, ταπεινοφρονες, be
humble-minded, is the reading of ABC, more than twenty others, with the
Syriac, Arabic of Erpen, Coptic, Armenian, Slavonic, and some of the
fathers. This is probably the true reading, and Griesbach has admitted
it into the text.

[1 Peter 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 3:9</span></span>

Not rendering evil for evil - Purposing, saying, doing nothing but good;
and invariably returning good for evil.

Ye are thereunto called - This is your calling - your business in life,
to do good, and to do good for evil, and to implore God's blessing even
on your worst enemies. And this is not only your duty, but your
interest; for in so doing you shall obtain God's blessing, even life for
evermore.

[1 Peter 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 3:10</span></span>

For he that will love life - This is a quotation from [Psa
34:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012), as it stands in the
Septuagint; only the aorist of the imperative is changed from the second
into the third person, etc. He who wishes to live long and prosperously,
must act as he is here directed.

1\. He must refrain from evil-speaking, lying, and slandering.

2\. He must avoid flattery and fair speeches, which cover hypocritical
or wicked intentions.

3\. He must avoid evil, keep going away εκκλινατω, from evil.

4\. He must do good; he must walk in the way of righteousness.

5\. He must live peaceably with all men; seek peace where it has been
lost; restore it where it has been broken; and pursue it where it seems
to be flying away.

He who lives thus must live happy in himself. And as excess in action
and passion always tends to the shortening of life, and nothing preys on
the constitution more than disorderly passions, he must live not only
happiest but longest who avoids them. It is an edifying story that is
told in the book Mussar, chap. 1., quoted by Rosenmuller: "A certain
person, travelling through the city, continued to call out, Who wants
the elixir of life? The daughter of Rabbi Joda heard him, and told her
father. He said, Call the man in. When he came in, the rabbi said, What
is that elixir of life thou sellest? He answered, Is it not written,
What man is he that loveth life, and desireth to see good days, let him
refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking guile? This is
the elixir of life, and is found in the mouth of man."

[1 Peter 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 3:12</span></span>

The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous - That is, He is continually
under God's notice and his care; God continually watches for him and
watches over him, and he is under his constant protection.

And his ears are open unto their prayers - The original is very
emphatic: The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears to
their prayers. The righteous man ever attracts the Divine notice, and
wherever he is, there is the ear of God; for, as every righteous man is
a man of prayer, wherever he prays, there is the ear of God, into which
the prayer, as soon as formed, enters.

But the face of the Lord - Far from his eye being upon them, or his ear
open to their requests, (for prayer they have none), his face, his
approbation, his providence and blessing, are turned away from them; and
he only looks upon them to abhor them, and to turn the arm of his
justice against them.

[1 Peter 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 3:13</span></span>

Who is he that will harm you - Is it possible that a man can be wretched
who has God for his friend? "All the devices which the devil or wicked
men work against such must be brought to naught, and by the providence
of his goodness be dispersed."

If ye be followers, etc. - Εαν Του Αγαθου μιμηται γενησθε· If ye be
imitators of the good One, i.e. of God. Ὁ Αγαθος, the good One, is one
of God's prime epithets, see [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017), and Satan is distinguished by
the reverse, ὁ πονηρος, the Evil one, [Mat
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#019) (note). Instead of μιμηται,
followers, or rather imitators, ζηλωται, zealous of what is good, is the
reading of ABC, fifteen others, both the Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, the
Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian and Vulgate, with some of the fathers. This
is a very probable reading, and Griesbach has placed it in the margin as
a candidate for the place of that in the text.

[1 Peter 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 3:14</span></span>

But and if ye suffer - God may permit you to be tried and persecuted for
righteousness' sake, but this cannot essentially harm you; he will press
even this into your service, and make it work for your good.

Happy are ye - This seems to refer to [Mat
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010), etc. Blessed or happy, are ye
when men persecute you, etc. It is a happiness to suffer for Christ; and
it is a happiness, because if a man were not holy and righteous the
world would not persecute him, so he is happy in the very cause of his
sufferings.

Be not afraid of their terror - Τον δε φοβον αυτων μη φοβηθητε· Fear not
their fear; see [Isa 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012). Sometimes
fear is put for the object of a man's religious worship; see [Gen
31:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042); [Pro
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026), and the place in Isaiah just
quoted. The exhortation may mean, Fear not their gods, they can do you
no hurt; and supposing that they curse you by them, yet be not troubled;
"He who fears God need have no other fear."

[1 Peter 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe1 3:15</span></span>

But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts - To sanctify God may signify
to offer him the praises due to his grace, but as to sanctify literally
signifies to make holy, it is impossible that God should be thus
sanctified. We have often already seen that ἁγιαζω signifies to separate
from earth, that is, from any common use or purpose, that the thing or
person thus separated may be devoted to a sacred use. Perhaps we should
understand Peter's words thus: Entertain just notions of God; of his
nature, power, will, justice, goodness, and truth. Do not conceive of
him as being actuated by such passions as men; separate him in your
hearts from every thing earthly, human, fickle, rigidly severe, or
capriciously merciful. Consider that he can neither be like man, feel
like man, nor act like man. Ascribe no human passions to him, for this
would desecrate not sanctify him. Do not confine him in your conceptions
to place, space, vacuity, heaven, or earth; endeavor to think worthily
of the immensity and eternity of his nature, of his omniscience,
omnipresence, and omnipotence. Avoid the error of the heathens, who
bound even their Dii Majores, their greatest gods, by fate, as many
well-meaning Christians do the true God by decrees; conceive of him as
infinitely free to act or not act, as he pleases. Consider the goodness
of his nature; for goodness, in every possible state of perfection and
infinitude, belongs to him. Ascribe no malevolence to him; nor any work,
purpose, or decree, that implies it: this is not only a human passion,
but a passion of fallen man. Do not suppose that he can do evil, or that
he can destroy when he might save; that he ever did, or ever can, hate
any of those whom he made in his own image and in his own likeness, so
as by a positive decree to doom them, unborn, to everlasting perdition,
or, what is of the same import, pass them by without affording them the
means of salvation, and consequently rendering it impossible for them to
be saved. Thus endeavor to conceive of him; and, by so doing, you
separate him from all that is imperfect, human, evil, capricious,
changeable, and unkind. Ever remember that he has wisdom without error,
power, without limits, truth without falsity, love without hatred,
holiness without evil, and justice without rigour or severity on the one
hand, or capricious tenderness on the other. In a word, that he neither
can be, say, purpose, or do, any thing that is not infinitely just,
holy, wise, true, and gracious; that he hates nothing that he has made;
and has so loved the world, the whole human race, as to give his
only-begotten Son to die for them, that they might not perish, but have
everlasting life. Thus sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and you
will ever be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in you to every
serious and candid inquirer after truth. Most religious systems and
creeds are incapable of rational explanation, because founded on some
misconception of the Divine nature.

"They set at odds heaven's jarring attributes,

And with one excellence another wound."

The system of humanizing God, and making him, by our unjust conceptions
of him, to act as ourselves would in certain circumstances, has been the
bane of both religion and piety; and on this ground infidels have
laughed us to scorn. It is high time that we should no longer know God
after the flesh; for even if we have known Jesus Christ after the flesh,
we are to know him so no more.

What I have written above is not against any particular creed of
religious people, it is against any or all to whom it may justly apply,
it may even be against some portions of my own; for even in this respect
I am obliged daily to labor to sanctify the Lord God in my heart, to
abstract him from every thing earthly and human, and apprehend him as
far as possible in his own essential nature and attributes through the
light of his Spirit and the medium of his own revelation. To act thus
requires no common effort of soul: and just apprehensions of this kind
are not acquired without much prayer, much self-reflection, much time,
and much of the grace and mercy of God.

Instead of τον Θεον, God, ABC, four others, both the Syriac, Erpen's
Arabic, the Coptic, Vulgate, and Armenian, with Clement and Fulgentius,
read τον Χριστον, Christ. Sanctify Christ in your hearts. This reading
is at least equal to the other in the authorities by which it is
supported; but which was written by St. Peter we know not.

A reason of the hope - An account of your hope of the resurrection of
the dead and eternal life in God's glory. This was the great object of
their hope, as Christ was the grand object of their faith.

The word απολογια, which we translate answer, signifies a defense; from
this we have our word apology, which did not originally signify an
excuse for an act, but a defense of that act. The defences of
Christianity by the primitive fathers are called apologies. See the note
on [Act 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#001).

With meekness and fear - Several excellent MSS. add the word αλλα, but,
here, and it improves the sense considerably: Be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you,
But with meekness and fear. Do not permit your readiness to answer, nor
the confidence you have in the goodness of your cause, to lead you to
answer pertly or superciliously to any person; defend the truth with all
possible gentleness and fear, lest while you are doing it you should
forget his presence whose cause you support, or say any thing unbecoming
the dignity and holiness of the religion which you have espoused, or
inconsistent with that heavenly temper which the Spirit of your
indwelling Lord must infallibly produce.

[1 Peter 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe1 3:16</span></span>

Having a good conscience - The testimony of God in your own soul, that
in simplicity and godly sincerity you have your conversation in the
world. See on the term conscience at the end of Hebrews.

Whereas they speak evil of you - See the same sentiment in [Pe1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011) and the note there.

[1 Peter 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 3:17</span></span>

For it is better - See on [Pe1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019),
[Pe1 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020) (note).

[1 Peter 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 3:18</span></span>

Christ also hath once suffered - See the notes on [Rom
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006); [Heb
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028) (note).

Put to death in the flesh - In his human nature.

But quickened by the Spirit - That very dead body revived by the power
of his Divinity. There are various opinions on the meaning of this
verse, with which I need not trouble the reader, as I have produced that
which is most likely.

[1 Peter 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe1 3:19</span></span>

By which - Spirit, his own Divine energy and authority.

He went and preached - By the ministry of Noah, one hundred and twenty
years.

Unto the spirits in prison - The inhabitants of the antediluvian world,
who, having been disobedient, and convicted of the most flagrant
transgressions against God, were sentenced by his just law to
destruction. But their punishment was delayed to see if they would
repent; and the long-suffering of God waited one hundred and twenty
years, which were granted to them for this purpose; during which time,
as criminals tried and convicted, they are represented as being in
prison - detained under the arrest of Divine justice, which waited
either for their repentance or the expiration of the respite, that the
punishment pronounced might be inflicted. This I have long believed to
be the sense of this difficult passage, and no other that I have seen is
so consistent with the whole scope of the place. That the Spirit of God
did strive with, convict, and reprove the antediluvians, is evident from
[Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003) : My Spirit shall not always
strive with man, forasmuch as he is flesh; yet his days shall be one
hundred and twenty years. And it was by this Spirit that Noah became a
preacher of righteousness, and condemned that ungodly world, [Heb
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007), who would not believe till wrath
- Divine punishment, came upon them to the uttermost. The word πνευμασι,
spirits, is supposed to render this view of the subject improbable,
because this must mean disembodied spirits; but this certainly does not
follow, for the spirits of just men made perfect, [Heb
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#023), certainly means righteous men,
and men still in the Church militant; and the Father of spirits, [Heb
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009), means men still in the body; and
the God of the spirits of all flesh, [Num
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#022); [Num
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#016), means men not in a disembodied
state.

But even on this word there are several various readings; some of the
Greek MSS. read πνευματι, in spirit, and one Πνευματι Ἁγιῳ, in the Holy
Spirit. I have before me one of the first, if not the very first edition
of the Latin Bible; and in it the verse stands thus: In quo et hiis, qui
in carcere erant, Spiritualiter veniens praedicavit; "by which he came
spiritually, and preached to them that were in prison."

In two very ancient MSS. of the Vulgate before me, the clause is thus:
In quo et his qui in carcere erant Spiritu venient praedicavit; "in
which, coming by the Spirit, he preached to those who were in prison."
This is the reading also in the Complutensian Polyglot.

Another ancient MS. in my possession has the words nearly as in the
printed copy: In quo et hiis qui in carcere Conclusi erant Spiritualiter
veniens praedicavit; "in which, coming spiritually, he preached to those
who were Shut Up in prison."

Another MS., written about a.d. 1370, is the same as the printed copy.

The common printed Vulgate is different from all these, and from all the
MSS. of the Vulgate which I have seen in reading spiritibus, "to the
spirits."

In my old MS. Bible, which contains the first translation into English
ever made, the clause is the following: In whiche thing and to hem that
weren closid togyder in prison, hi commynge in Spirit, prechide. The
copy from which this translation was taken evidently read conclusi
erdnt, with one of the MSS. quoted above, as closid togyder proves.

I have quoted all these authorities from the most authentic and correct
copies of the Vulgate, to show that from them there is no ground to
believe that the text speaks of Christ's going to hell to preach the
Gospel to the damned, or of his going to some feigned place where the
souls of the patriarchs were detained, to whom he preached, and whom he
delivered from that place and took with him to paradise, which the
Romish Church holds as an article of faith.

Though the judicious Calmet holds with his Church this opinion, yet he
cannot consider the text of St. Peter as a proof of it. I will set down
his own words: Le sentiment qui veut que Jesus Christ soit descendu aux
enfers, pour annoncer sa venue aux anciens patriarches, et pour les
tirer de cette espece de prison, ou ils Pattendoient si long tems, est
indubitable; et nous le regardons comme un article de notre foi: mais on
peut douter que ce soit le sens de Saint Pierre en cet endroit. "The
opinion which states that Jesus Christ descended into hell, to announce
his coming to the ancient patriarchs, and to deliver them from that
species of prison, where they had so long waited for him, is
incontrovertible; and we (the Catholics) consider it as an article of
our faith: but we may doubt whether this be the meaning of St. Peter in
this place." Some think the whole passage applies to the preaching of
the Gospel to the Gentiles; but the interpretation given above appears
to me, after the fullest consideration, to be the most consistent and
rational, as I have already remarked.

[1 Peter 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe1 3:20</span></span>

When once the long-suffering of God waited - In Pirkey Aboth, cap. v. 2,
we have these words: "There were ten generations from Adam to Noah, that
the long-suffering of God might appear; for each of these generations
provoked him to anger, and went on in their iniquity, till at last the
deluge came."

Were saved by water - While the ark was preparing, only Noah's family
believed; these amounted to eight persons; and these only were saved
from the deluge δι' ὑδατος, on the water: all the rest perished in the
water; though many of them, while the rains descended, and the waters
daily increased, did undoubtedly humble themselves before God, call for
mercy, and receive it; but as they had not repented at the preaching of
Noah, and the ark was now closed, and the fountains of the great deep
broken up, they lost their lives, though God might have extended mercy
to their souls.

[1 Peter 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe1 3:21</span></span>

The like figure whereunto, etc. - Dr. Macknight has translated this
verse so as to make the meaning more clear: By which (water) the
antitype baptism (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but
the answer of a good conscience towards God) now saveth us also, through
the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

He remarks that the relative ᾡ being in the neuter gender, its
antecedent cannot be κιβωτος, the ark, which is feminine, but ὑδωρ,
water, which is neuter.

There are many difficulties in this verse; but the simple meaning of the
place may be easily apprehended. Noah believed in God; walked uprightly
before him, and found grace in his sight; he obeyed him in building the
ark, and God made it the means of his salvation from the waters of the
deluge. Baptism implies a consecration and dedication of the soul and
body to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. He who is faithful to his
baptismal covenant, taking God through Christ, by the eternal Spirit,
for his portion, is saved here from his sins; and through the
resurrection of Christ from the dead, has the well-grounded hope of
eternal glory. This is all plain; but was it the deluge, itself, or the
ark, or the being saved by that ark from the deluge, that was the
antitype of which St. Peter speaks? Noah and his family were saved by
water; i.e. it was the instrument of their being saved through the good
providence of God. So the water of baptism, typifying the regenerating
influence of the Holy Spirit, is the means of salvation to all those who
receive this Holy Spirit in its quickening, cleansing efficacy. Now as
the waters of the flood could not have saved Noah and his family, had
they not made use of the ark; so the water of baptism saves no man, but
as it is the means of his getting his heart purified by the Holy Spirit,
and typifying to him that purification. The ark was not immersed in the
water; had it been so they must all have perished; but it was borne up
on the water, and sprinkled with the rain that fell from heaven. This
text, as far as I can see, says nothing in behalf of immersion in
baptism; but is rather, from the circumstance mentioned above, in favor
of sprinkling. In either case, it is not the sprinkling, washing, or
cleansing the body, that can be of any avail to the salvation of the
soul, but the answer of a good conscience towards God - the internal
evidence and external proof that the soul is purified in the laver of
regeneration, and the person enabled to walk in newness of life. We are
therefore strongly cautioned here, not to rest in the letter, but to
look for the substance.

[1 Peter 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe1 3:22</span></span>

Who is gone into heaven - Having given the fullest proof of his
resurrection from the dead, and of his having accomplished the end for
which he came into the world.

On the right hand of God - In the place of the highest dignity, honor,
and influence.

The Vulgate, one copy of the Itala, Augustine, Fulgentius, Cassiodorus,
and Bede, have the following remarkable addition after the above words:
Deglutiens mortem, ut vitae aeternae haeredes efficeremur. "Having
abolished (swallowed down) death, that we might be made heirs of eternal
life." But this addition is found in no Greek copy, nor in any other of
the ancient versions.

Angels and authorities and powers - That is, all creatures and beings,
both in the heavens and in the earth, are put under subjection to Jesus
Christ. He has all power in the heavens and in the earth. He alone can
save; and he alone can destroy. None need fear who put their trust in
him, as he can do whatsoever he will in behalf of his followers, and has
good and evil spirits under his absolute command. Well may his enemies
tremble, while his friends exult and sing. He can raise the dead, and
save to the uttermost all that come unto the Father through him.

If he have all power, if angels and authorities and powers be subject to
him, then he can do what he will, and employ whom he will. To raise the
dead can be no difficulty to him, because he has power over all things.
He created the world; he can destroy it, and he can create it anew. We
can conceive nothing too difficult for Omnipotence. This same omnipotent
Being is the friend of man. Why then do we not come to him with
confidence, and expect the utmost salvation of which our souls and
bodies are capable?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 4](pe1004)

</div>
