<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1.md)  
  [Previous](jam005)  [Next](pe1001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the First and Second Epistles of Peter

Dr. Lardner and Professor Michaelis have done much to remove several
difficulties connected with the person of St. Peter, the people to whom
he wrote, the places of their dispersion, and the time of writing. I
shall extract what makes more immediately for my purpose.

"The land of Palestine, says Cave, at and before the coming of our
blessed Savior, was distinguished into three several provinces, Judea,
Samaria, and Galilee. In the upper, called also Galilee of the Gentiles,
within the division belonging to the tribe of Naphtali, stood Bethsaida,
formerly an obscure and inconsiderable village, till lately re-edified
and enlarged by Philip the Tetrarch; and, in honor of Julia, daughter of
Augustus, called by him Julias. It was situated upon the banks of the
sea of Galilee, called also the lake of Tiberias, and the lake of
Gennesareth, which was about forty furlongs in breadth, and a hundred in
length; and had a wilderness on the other side called the desert of
Bethsaida, whither our Savior used often to retire.

"At this place was born Simon, surnamed Cephas, or Petros, Petrus,
Peter, signifying a stone, or fragment of a rock. He was a fisherman
upon the forementioned lake or sea, as was also in all probability his
father Jonas, Jonah, or John. He had a brother named Andrew: which was
the eldest of the two is not certain; for, concerning this, there were
different opinions among the ancients. Epiphanius supposed Andrew to be
the elder; but, according to Chrysostom, Peter was the first-born. So
likewise Bede and Cassian, who even make Peter's age the ground of his
precedence among the apostles; and Jerome himself has expressed himself
in like manner, saying, 'that the keys were given to all the apostles
alike, and the Church was built upon all of them equally; but, for
preventing dissension, precedency was given to one. John might have been
the person, but he was too young; and Peter was preferred on account of
his age.'

"The call of Andrew and Peter to a stated attendance on Jesus is
recorded in three evangelists. Their father Jonas seems to have been
dead; for there is no mention of him, as there is of Zebedee, when his
two sons were called. It is only said of Andrew and Peter that, when
Jesus called them, they left their nets and followed him. Follow me,
said he, and, I will make you fishers of men.

"Simon Peter was married when called by our Lord to attend upon him; and
upon occasion of that alliance, it seems, had removed from Bethsaida to
Capernaum, where was his wife's family. Upon her mother our Savior
wrought a great miracle of healing. And, I suppose, that when our Lord
left Nazareth, and came and dwelled at Capernaum, he made Peter's house
the place of his usual abode when he was in those parts. I think we have
a proof of it in the history just noticed. When Jesus came out of the
synagogue at Capernaum, he entered into Simon's house, [Luk
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038.md). Compare [Mar
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029.md), which is well paraphrased by Dr.
Clarke: 'Now when Jesus came out of the synagogue, he went home to
Peter's house;' and there it was that the people resorted unto him.

"Some time after this, when our Lord had an opportunity of private
conversation with the disciples, he inquired of them what men said of
him; and then whom they thought him to be. 'Simon Peter answered and
said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God;' [Mat
16:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013.md). So far likewise in [Mar
8:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#027.md), and [Luk
9:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#018.md). Then follows, in [Mat
16:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017.md) : 'And Jesus answered and
said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and blood
hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven:' that
is, 'it is not a partial affection for me, thy Master, nor a fond and
inconsiderate regard for the judgments of others for whom thou hast a
respect, that has induced thee to think thus of me; but it is a just
persuasion formed in thy mind by observing the great works thou hast
seen me do by the power of God in the confirmation of my mission and
doctrine.' 'And I say unto thee, thou art Peter, and upon this rock will
I build my Church - and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven.' By which many of our interpreters suppose that our Lord
promised to Peter that he should have the honor of beginning to preach
the Gospel after his resurrection to Jews and Gentiles, and of receiving
them into the Church; if so that is personal. Nevertheless, what
follows, 'And whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in
heaven;' this, I say, must have been the privilege of all the apostles,
for the like things are expressly said to them, [Luk
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#029.md), [Luk
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030.md), [Joh
20:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021.md). Moreover, all the apostles
concurred with Peter in the first preaching both to Jews and Gentiles.
As he was president in the college of the apostles, it was very fit, and
a thing of course, that he should be primarily concerned in the first
opening of things. The confession now particularly before us was made by
him; but it was in answer to a question that had been put to all; and he
spoke the sense of all the apostles, and in their name. I suppose this
to be as true in this instance, as in the other before mentioned, which
is in [Joh 6:68](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#068.md), [Joh
6:69](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#069.md). In the account which St. John
has given us of our Savior's washing the disciples' feet, Peter's
modesty and fervor are conspicuous. When the Jewish officers were about
to apprehend our Lord, 'Peter, having a sword, drew it, and smote a
servant of the high priest, and cut of his right ear.' Our Lord having
checked Peter, touched the servant's ear, and healed him. So great is
Jesus everywhere! They that laid hold of Jesus led him away to the house
of Caiaphas; the rest of the disciples now forsook him and fled; 'but
Peter followed him afar off, unto the high priest's palace; and went in
and sat with the servants to see the end.' Here Peter thrice disowned
his Lord, peremptorily denying that he was one of the disciples, or had
any knowledge of him, as related by all the evangelists; for which he
soon after humbled himself, and wept bitterly. We do not perceive that
Peter followed our Lord any farther; or that he at all attended the
crucifixion. It is likely that he was under too much concern of mind to
appear in public; and that he chose retirement, as most suitable to his
present temper and circumstances.

"On the first day of the week, early in the morning, when Mary Magdalene
and other women came to the sepulcher, bringing sweet spices which they
had prepared, 'they saw an angel, who said unto them, Be not affrighted;
ye seek Jesus who was crucified: he is not here, for he is risen: Go
quickly, and tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead.' As in
Matthew, 'Tell his disciples and Peter.' As in Mark, 'Behold he goeth
before you into Galilee.' That was a most gracious disposal of
Providence to support the disciples, Peter in particular, in their great
affliction.

"Our Lord first showed himself to Mary Magdalene, and afterwards to some
other women. On the same day likewise on which he arose from the dead,
he showed himself to Peter, though the circumstances of this appearance
are nowhere related. And it has been observed, that as Mary Magdalene
was the first woman, so Peter was the first man, to whom Jesus showed
himself after he was risen from the dead.

"We have nowhere any distinct account of this apostle's travels: he
might return to Judea, and stay there a good while after having been at
Antioch, at the time spoken of by St. Paul in the Epistle to the
Galatians. However, it appears from Epiphanius that Peter was often in
the countries of Pontus and Bithynia; and by Eusebius we are assured
that Origen, in the third tome of his Exposition of the Book of Genesis,
writes to this purpose: 'Peter is supposed to have preached to the Jews
of the dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Bithynia, Cappadocia, and Asia;
who, at length coming to Rome, was crucified with his head downwards,
himself having desired it might be in that manner.' For the time of
Peter's coming to Rome, no ancient writer is now more regarded by
learned moderns than Lactantius, or whoever is the author of the book of
the Deaths of Persecutors; who says that Peter came thither in the time
of Nero. However, it appears to me very probable that St. Peter did not
come to Rome before the year of Christ 63 or 64, nor till after St.
Paul's departure thence at the end of his two years' imprisonment in
that city. The books of the New Testament afford a very plausible, if
not certain, argument for it. After our Lord's ascension we find Peter,
with the rest of the apostles, at Jerusalem. He and John were sent by
the apostles from Jerusalem to Samaria, whence they returned to
Jerusalem. When Paul came to Jerusalem, three years after his
conversion, he found Peter there. Upon occasion of the tranquility of
the Churches in Judea, Galilee, and Samaria, near the end of the reign
of Caligula, Peter left Jerusalem, and visited the Churches in several
parts of that country, particularly at Lydda and Joppa, where he tarried
many days. Thence he went to Caesarea, by the seaside, where he preached
to Cornelius and his company. Thence he returned to Jerusalem, and
sometime afterwards was imprisoned there by Herod Agrippa. This brings
down the history of our apostle to the year 44. A few years after this
he was present at the council of Jerusalem; nor is there any evidence
that he came there merely on that occasion. It is more probable that he
had not yet been out of Judea: soon after that council he was at
Antioch, where he was reproved by St. Paul.

"The books of the New Testament afford no light for determining where
Peter was for several years after that. But to me it appears not
unlikely that he returned after a short time to Judea from Antioch, and
that he stayed in Judea a good while before he went thence any more; and
it seems to me that, when he left Judea, he went again to Antioch, the
chief city of Syria. Thence he might go to other parts of the continent,
particularly Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, which are
expressly mentioned in the beginning of his first epistle. In those
countries he might stay a good while; and it is very likely that he did
so; and that he was well acquainted with the Christians there, to whom
he afterwards wrote two epistles. When he left those parts, I think he
went to Rome, but not till after Paul had been in that city and was gone
from it. Several of St. Paul's epistles furnish out a cogent argument of
Peter's absence from Rome for a considerable space of time. St. Paul, in
the last chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, written, as we suppose,
in the beginning of the year 58, salutes many by name, without
mentioning Peter; and the whole tenor of the epistle makes it reasonable
to think that the Christians there had not yet had the benefit of the
apostle's presence and instructions. During his two years' confinement
at Rome, which ended, as we suppose, in the spring of the year 63, St.
Paul wrote four or five epistles; those to the Ephesians, the Second
Epistle to Timothy, to the Philippians, the Colossians, and Philemon; in
none of which is any mention of Peter, nor is any thing said or hinted
whence it can be concluded that he had ever been there. I think,
therefore, that Peter did not come to Rome before the year 63, or
perhaps 64. And, as I suppose, obtained the crown of martyrdom in the
year 64 or 65; consequently, St. Peter could not reside very long at
Rome before his death.

"Cave likewise, in his life of St. Peter, written in English in 1676,
places his death in 64 or 65; nor was his mind much altered when he
published his Historia Literaria in 1688; for there also he supposes
that St. Peter died a martyr at Rome, in the year of Christ 64, at the
beginning of Nero's persecution; and indeed he expresses himself with a
great deal of assurance and positiveness. Jerome concludes his article
of St. Peter saying, 'He was buried at Rome, in the Vatican, near the
triumphal way; and is in veneration all over the world.' "It is not
needful to make any remarks upon this tradition; but it is easy to
observe it is the general, uncontradicted, disinterested testimony of
ancient writers, in the several parts of the world, Greeks, Latins, and
Syrians. As our Lord's prediction concerning the death of Peter is
recorded in one of the four gospels, it is very likely that Christians
would observe the accomplishment of it, which must have been in some
place, and about this place there is no difference among Christian
writers of ancient times; never any other place was named besides Rome;
nor did any other city ever glory in the martyrdom of Peter. There were,
in the second and third centuries, disputes between the bishop of Rome
and other bishops and Churches about the time of keeping Easter, and
about the baptism of heretics; yet none denied the bishop of Rome what
they called the chair of Peter. It is not for our honor or interest,
either as Christians or Protestants, to deny the truth of events
ascertained by early and well attested tradition.

If any make an ill use of such facts, we are not accountable for it. We
are not, from the dread of such abuses, to overthrow the credit of all
history, the consequences of which would be fatal. Fables and fictions
have been mixed with the account of Peter's being at Rome; but they are
not in the most early writers, but have been added since: and it is well
known that fictions have been joined with histories of the most certain
and important facts.1 Peter-1

"Having written the history of the Apostle Peter, I now proceed to his
epistles; concerning which three or four things are to be considered by
us; their genuineness, the persons to whom they were sent, the place
where, and the time when, they were written.

"The first epistle was all along considered, by catholic Christians, as
authentic and genuine; this we learn from Eusebius, who says: 'Of the
controverted books of the New Testament; yet well known and approved by
many, are that called the Epistle of James, and that of Jude, and the
second and third of John.' And in another place, 'One epistle of Peter,
called the first, is universally received. This the presbyters of
ancient times have quoted in their writings as undoubtedly genuine; but
that called his second, we have been informed, (by tradition), has not
been received as a part of the New Testament; nevertheless, appearing to
many to be useful, it has been carefully studied with other scriptures.'
By which, I think, we may be assured that a great regard was shown to
this epistle by many Christians in the time of our learned
ecclesiastical historian. Jerome says, 'Peter wrote two epistles called
catholic, the second of which is denied by many to be his, because of
the difference of the style from the former.' And Origen before them, in
his commentaries upon the gospel of St. Matthew, as cited by Eusebius,
says, 'Peter, on whom the Church is built, has left one epistle
universally acknowledged: let it be granted that he also wrote a second,
for this has been doubted.' "What those learned writers of the third and
fourth centuries say of those two epistles, we have found agreeable to
the testimony of more ancient writers, whom we have consulted: for the
first epistle seems to be referred to by Clement of Rome; it is plainly
referred to by Polycarp several times; it is also referred to by the
martyrs at Lyons; it was received by Theophilus, bishop of Antioch; it
was quoted by Papias; it is quoted in the remaining writings of
Irenaeus, Clement of Alexandria, and Tertullian: consequently it was all
along received. But we do not perceive the second epistle to be quoted
by Papias, nor by Irenaeus, (though in Grabe's edition this epistle is
twice quoted), nor Tertullian, nor Cyprian. However, both these epistles
were generally received in the fourth and following centuries by all
Christians, except the Syrians: for they were received by Athanasius,
Cyril of Jerusalem, the council of Laodicea, Epiphanius, Jerome, Rufin,
Augustine, and others. "The first epistle being allowed to be St.
Peter's, we can argue in favor of the other also, in this manner: It
bears in the inscription the name of the same apostle; for so it begins,
'Simon Peter, a servant and an apostle of Jesus Christ.' And in [Pe2
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014.md) are these words: 'Knowing that I
must shortly put off this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ
has showed me.'

"The writer of this epistle may have had a particular revelation
concerning the time of his death, not long before writing this. But it
is probable that here is a reference to our Lord's prediction concerning
St. Peter's death, and the manner of it, which are recorded in [Joh
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md), [Joh
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019.md). From [Pe2
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md), it appears that the writer
was one of the disciples who were with Jesus in the mount, when he was
transfigured in a glorious manner. This certainly leads us to Peter, who
was there, and whose name the epistle bears in the inscription, [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md) : 'This second epistle, beloved, I
now write unto you; in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of
remembrance;' plainly referring to the former epistle, which has been
always acknowledged to be Peter's. These words are express. But it might
have been argued, with some degree of probability, from [Pe2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012.md), [Pe2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#015.md), that he had before written to
the same persons. Once more, [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015.md), [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016.md), he calls Paul brother, and
otherwise so speaks of him and his epistles as must needs be reckoned
most suitable to an apostle. The writer, therefore, is the Apostle
Peter, whose name the epistle bears in the inscription. We are led here
to the observation which Wall placed at the head of his notes upon this
second epistle: 'It is,' says he, 'a good proof of the cautiousness of
the ancient Christians in receiving any book for canonical, that they
not only rejected all those pieces forged by heretics under the name of
apostles; but also if any good book, affirmed by some men or some
Churches to have been written and sent by some apostle, were offered to
them, they would not, till fully satisfied of the fact, receive it into
their canon.' He adds: 'There is more hazard in denying this to be
Peter's, than in denying some other books to be of that author to whom
they are by tradition ascribed. For they, if they be not of that apostle
to whom they are imputed, yet may be of some other apostle, or
apostolical man; but this author is either the apostle, or else by
setting his name, and by other circumstances, he does designedly
personate him, which no man of piety and truth would do.' And then he
concludes: 'This epistle being written by him but a little before his
death, [Pe2 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014.md), and perhaps no more
than one copy sent, it might be a good while before a number of copies,
well attested, came abroad to the generality of the Christian Churches.'

"Certainly these epistles, and the discourses of Peter, recorded in the
Acts, together with the effects of them, are monuments of Divine
inspiration, and of the fulfillment of the promise which Christ made to
him, when he saw him and his brother Andrew employed in their trade, and
casting a net into the sea; Follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men, [Mat 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019.md).

"Concerning the persons to whom these epistles were sent, there have
been different opinions among both ancients and moderns. Mr. Wetstein
argues from divers texts that the first epistle was sent to the
Gentiles. Mr. Hallett, in his learned introduction to the Epistle to the
Hebrews, observes, 'Some go upon the supposition that St. Peter's
epistles were written to the Jews, but it seems to me more natural to
suppose that they were written to Gentile Christians, if we consider
many passages of the epistles themselves:' where he proceeds to allege
many passages, and in my opinion, very pertinently; some of which will
be also alleged by me by and by.

"To me it seems that St. Peter's epistles were sent to all Christians in
general, Jews and Gentiles, living in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
and Bithynia; the greatest part of whom must have been converted by
Paul, and had been before involved in ignorance and sin, as all people
in general were till the manifestation of the Gospel of Christ. That St.
Peter wrote to all Christians in those countries is apparent, from the
valedictory blessing or wish at the end of the epistle, [Pe1
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#014.md) : Peace be with you all that are
in Christ Jesus. Lewis Capellus, who thought that St. Peter's first
epistle was written to Jewish believers, allows that the second epistle
was written to all Christians in general, and particularly to Gentiles,
induced thereto by the comprehensiveness of the address at the beginning
of that epistle, To them that have obtained like precious faith with us.
He should have concluded as much of the first epistle likewise, for they
were both sent to the same people, as is evident from St. Peter's own
words, [Pe2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md). Moreover, the
inscription of the first epistle seems to be as general as that of the
second. Let us observe it distinctly: to the elect, εκλεκτοις, says Wall
upon the place: 'He uses the word εκλεκτοι, choice ones, just as St.
Paul does the word ἁγιοι, saints, for the word Christians: and as St.
Paul directs almost all his epistles to the saints, that is, the
Christians of such a place; so St. Peter here, to the elect or choice
ones, that is, Christians, sojourning in the dispersions of Pontus,
Galatia, and Bithynia. Strangers, παρεπιδημοις· good men, though at
home, are strangers, especially if they meet with opposition, trouble,
and affliction, as those Christians did to whom St. Peter is here
writing; for he speaks of their trials and temptations, [Pe1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006.md), [Pe1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007.md), and exhorts them, [Pe1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011.md), as sojourners and strangers, ὡς
παροικους και παρεπιδημους, to abstain from fleshly lusts. Says
Ecumenius upon [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md), [Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002.md) : 'He calls them strangers, either
on account of their dispersion, or because all that live religiously are
called strangers on this earth; as David also says, 'I am a sojourner
with thee, and a stranger, as all my fathers were,' [Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012.md). Scattered throughout Pontus, or
of the dispersion of Pontus, Galatia; so he calls them, not because they
had been driven out from their native country, but because he writes to
the Christians of divers countries, who also were but a few or a small
number in every place where they dwelt. I shall now show that these
Christians were, for the most part, of the Gentile stock and original.
[Pe1 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014.md) : 'As obedient children, not
fashioning yourselves according to the former lusts in your ignorance.'
This might be very pertinently said to men converted from Gentilism to
Christianity; but no such thing is ever said by the apostle concerning
the Jewish people, who had been favored with Divine revelation, and had
the knowledge of the true God. And [Pe1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020.md), [Pe1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021.md), he says, that 'through Christ
they did now believe in God;' therefore they were not worshippers till
they were acquainted with the Christian revelation. In like manner, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md), St. Peter speaks of those to whom
he writes as having been 'called out of darkness into God's marvelous
light.' Moreover, they were not once God's people; [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010.md) : 'Which in times past were not a
people, but are now the people of God; which had not obtained mercy, but
now have obtained mercy.' Words resembling those of St. Paul, [Rom
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024.md), [Rom
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025.md), where he is unquestionably
speaking of Gentile converts. There are also other expressions which
plainly show that these persons had been Gentiles, and had lived in the
sins of Gentilism; [Pe1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018.md) :
'Forasmuch as ye know that ye were redeemed from your vain conversation,
received by tradition from your fathers.' And [Pe1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003.md) : 'For the time past may suffice
us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles; when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and
abominable idolatries.' St. Peter does not charge himself with such
things, but they to whom he writes had been guilty in those respects;
and, by way of condescension, and for avoiding offense, and for
rendering his argument more effectual, he joins himself with them. And
more, when St. Peter represents the dignity of those to whom he writes,
upon account of their Christian vocation, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md), as 'a chosen generation, a
peculiar people, a royal priesthood;' certainly the expressions are most
pertinent and emphatical, if understood of such as had been brought from
Gentilism to the faith of the Gospel, as indeed they plainly were. For
he there says, 'they were to show forth the praises of Him who had
called them out of darkness into his marvelous light.' To all which
might be added, what was hinted before, that the persons to whom Peter
writes were for the most part the Apostle Paul's converts. This must be
reckoned probable from the accounts which we have in the Acts of St.
Paul's travels and preaching. Whence we know that he had been in
Galatia, and the other countries mentioned by St. Peter at the beginning
of his first epistle. Moreover he observes, [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015.md), that 'his beloved brother Paul
had written unto them.' We may reasonably suppose that he thereby
intends St. Paul's Epistles to the Galatians, the Ephesians, and
Colossians, all in those countries, and for the most part Gentile
believers. Nor do I see reason to doubt that if Peter had, before now,
seen and read St. Paul's Epistles to Timothy; and if we should add them,
as here intended also, it would be no prejudice to our argument. For
those epistles likewise were designed for the use and benefit of the
Churches in those parts. To me these considerations appear unanswerable;
I shall, therefore, take notice of but one objection, which is grounded
upon [Pe1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012.md) : 'Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles; that whereas they speak against
you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they shall behold,
glorify God in the day of visitation.' Upon the first clause in that
verse Beza says, that this place alone is sufficient to show that this
epistle was sent to Jews. But I think not. From St. Paul may be alleged
a text of the like sort, [Co1 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032.md) :
'Give no offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, (και
Ἑλλησι), nor to the Church of God.' It might be as well argued from that
text that the Corinthians were by descent neither Jews nor Greeks, as
from this, that the persons to whom St. Peter wrote were not originally
Gentiles. In the text of St. Paul just quoted, by Jews, and Gentiles or
Greeks, are intended such as were unbelievers. So it is likewise in the
text of St. Peter which we are considering as is apparent from the
latter part of the verse above transcribed at large. St. Peter had a
right to distinguish those to whom he writes from the Gentile people
among whom they lived, as he had at the beginning of the epistle called
them elect, or choice ones, and strangers; and they likewise went by the
name of Christians, as we perceive from [Pe1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#016.md).

"St. Peter's two epistles, then, were sent to all Christians in general,
living in those countries, the greatest part of whom had been converted
from Gentilism or heathenism.

"Our next inquiry is concerning where these epistles were written.

"At the end of the first epistle St. Peter says: 'The Church that is at
Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you;' which text,
understood literally, has been thought by some to denote,

1\. Babylon in Assyria; or,

2\. Babylon in Egypt.

3\. By others it is interpreted figuratively, and is supposed to denote
Jerusalem; or,

4\. Rome. So that there are four opinions concerning the place where
this epistle was written.

"If St. Peter had read St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans before he wrote
his first epistle, it was written after St. Paul's journey from Corinth
to Jerusalem, described in Acts 20, 21; for the Epistle to the Romans
was written from Corinth. How much later than the time of this journey
the First Epistle of Peter was written it is very difficult, for want of
sufficient data, to determine. The epistle itself has hardly any marks
which can guide us in deciding the year of its composition; and we know
nothing of the history of St. Peter from the time of the apostolic
council at Jerusalem, Acts 15., which is the last place where St. Luke
mentions him, till his arrival many years afterwards at Rome, where,
according to the accounts of ecclesiastical writers, he suffered
martyrdom. However, a comparison of the first with the second epistle of
St. Peter will enable us to form at least an opinion on this subject.
St. Peter says, in his second epistle, [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md) : Ταυτην ηδη, αγαπητοι, δευτεραν
ὑμιν γραφω επιστολην· whence we may conclude that his first epistle was
written to the same persons as the second. But if the second epistle was
written fifteen or twenty years after the first, they who received the
one were not the same persons as they who received the other; and we
might rather expect that in this case St. Peter would have called his
first epistle an epistle which he had written to their fathers. It
appears, then, that the interval between the dates of the two epistles
could not have been very long; and as the second epistle was written
shortly before St. Peter's death; we may infer that the first epistle
was written either not long before, or not long after, the year 60. On
the other hand, Lardner assigns this epistle too late a date; for he is
of opinion that it was written between 63 and 65. This reason for
supposing that it was not written till after 63 is, that an earlier date
cannot be assigned for St. Peter's arrival at Rome; and as he takes the
word Babylon, whence St. Peter dates his epistle, not in its proper but
in a mystical sense, as denoting Rome, he concludes that the epistle was
not written before the time above mentioned. But if we take Babylon in
its proper sense, the argument not only proves not what Lardner
intended, but the very reverse; for if St. Peter's arrival in Rome is to
be dated about the year 63, an epistle written by St. Peter, in Babylon,
must have a date prior to that year.

"St. Peter, in the close of his epistle, sends a salutation from the
Church in Babylon, which, consequently, is the place where he wrote his
epistle. But commentators do not agree in regard to the meaning of the
word Babylon, some taking it in its literal and proper sense, others
giving it a figurative and mystical interpretation. Among the advocates
for the latter sense have been men of such learning and abilities, that
I was misled by their authority in the younger part of my life to
subscribe to it; but at present, as I have more impartially examined the
question, it appears to me very extraordinary that, when an apostle
dates his epistle from Babylon, it should ever occur to any commentator
to ascribe to this work a mystical meaning, instead of taking it in its
literal and proper sense. For, in the first century, the ancient
Babylon, on the Euphrates, was still in existence; and there was
likewise a city on the Tigris, Seleucia, not far distant from the
ancient Babylon, to which the name of modern Babylon was given; but
through some mistake it has been supposed that the ancient Babylon, in
the time of St. Peter, was no longer in being; and in order to furnish a
pretense for a mystical interpretation, it has been denied that Seleucia
was ever so called.

"It is true that the ancient Babylon, in comparison of its original
splendor, might be called in the first century a desolated city; yet it
was not wholly a heap of ruins, nor wholly destitute of inhabitants.
This appears from the account which Strabo, who lived in the time of
Tiberius, has given of it: for he says that Alexander (who died at
Babylon, and who intended, if he had lived, to have made it the place of
his residence) proposed to rebuild there a pyramid, which was a stadium
in length, in breadth, and in height; but that his successors did not
put the design into execution: that the Persians destroyed a part of
Babylon, and that the Macedonians neglected it; but that Babylon had
suffered the most from the building of Seleucia, by Seleucus Nicator, at
the distance of three hundred stadia from it, because Seleucia then
became the capital of the country, and Babylon was drained of its
inhabitants. Strabo then adds: at present Seleucia is greater than
Babylon, which last city has been desolated, so that one may say of it,
what the comic poet said of Megalopolis in Arcadia: 'A great city is
become a great desert.' If this be not sufficient proof that Babylon was
still in existence in the first century, the reader may consult Cellarii
Geographia, tom. ii., page 747; and Assemani Bibliotheca Orientalis,
tom. iii., par. ii., page 7.

"It will be objected, perhaps, that if Babylon still existed in the time
of St. Peter, it was yet in such a state of decay that an apostle would
hardly have gone to preach the Gospel there. But I can see no reason why
he should not; especially as Babylon was at that time so far from being
literally destitute of inhabitants that Strabo draws a parallel between
this city and Seleucia, saying, at present Babylon is not so great as
Seleucia, which was then the capital of the Parthian empire, and,
according to Pliny, contained six hundred thousand inhabitants. To
conclude therefore that Babylon, whence St. Peter dates this epistle,
could not have been the ancient Babylon, because this city was then in a
state of decay; and thence to argue that St. Peter used the word
mystically to denote Rome, is nearly the same as if, on the receipt of a
letter dated from Ghent or Antwerp, in which mention was made of a
Christian community there, I concluded that, because these cities are no
larger than what they were in the sixteenth century, the writer of the
epistle meant a spiritual Ghent or Antwerp, and that the epistle was
really written from Amsterdam.

"It is, therefore, at least possible that St. Peter wrote his first
epistle in the ancient Babylon, on the Euphrates. But before we conclude
that he really did write there, we must first examine whether he did not
mean Seleucia on the Tigris, which was sometimes called the modern
Babylon. According to Strabo, Seleucia was only three hundred stadia
distant from the ancient Babylon; and it was separated by the Tigris
from Ctesiphon, the winter residence of the Parthian kings. At present
it is not called Bagdad, as some have supposed, which is a very
different city; but, in conjunction with Ctesiphon, is named by Syrian
and Arabic writers Medinotho, Medain, Madain, under which name it
appears in D'Anville's maps in the latitude of 33 7.

"Since then, the name of Babylon was given actually to Seleucia, it is
not impossible that St. Peter thus understood the word Babylon, and that
his first epistle therefore was written at Seleucia on the Tigris. But I
have shown in the preceding part of this section that there is likewise
a possibility of its having been written in Babylon, properly so called,
or in the ancient Babylon on the Euphrates. The question therefore is,
which of these two senses shall we ascribe to the word Babylon? For one
of these two we must ascribe to it, unless we give it, without any
reason, a mystical interpretation. In the two last editions of this
introduction I preferred the former sense; but after a more mature
consideration, I think it much more probable, at present, that St. Peter
meant the ancient Babylon. It is true that Lucan, Sidonius Apollinaris,
and Stephanus Byzantinus, gave the name of Babylon to Seleucia; but the
two last of these writers lived so late as the fifth century; and
therefore their authority is perhaps not sufficient to prove that
Seleucia was called Babylon in the first century. Lucan, indeed, was a
contemporary with St. Peter; but then he uses this word in an epic poem,
in which a writer is not bound by the same rules as in prose: and it is
not improbable that he selected the word Babylon, because, partly, its
celebrity added pomp to his diction; and, partly, because neither
Ctesiphon nor Seleucia would have suited the verse. The writer of an
epistle, on the contrary, can allow himself no such latitude; and
perspicuity requires that in the date of his epistle, he should use no
other name for the town where he writes than that which properly belongs
to it. If, therefore, St. Peter had really written at Seleucia, he would
have hardly called this city by the name of Babylon, though this name
was sometimes applied to it: consequently, it is most probable that St.
Peter wrote his first epistle in ancient Babylon on the Euphrates.

"Before I conclude this section, I must take notice of a passage in
Josephus, which not only confutes all notions of a spiritual or mystical
Babylon, but throws a great light on our present inquiry; and this
passage is of so much the more importance, because Josephus was a
historian who lived in the same age with St. Peter; and the passage
itself relates to an event which took place thirty-six years before the
Christian era, namely, the delivery of Hyrcanus, the Jewish high priest,
from imprisonment, by order of Phraates, king of Parthia, with
permission to reside in Babylon, where there was a considerable number
of Jews. This is recorded by Josephus, Antiq. xv. c. 2, in the following
words: Δια τουτο δεσμων μεν αφηκεν, εν Βαβυλωνι δε καταγεσθαι παρειχεν,
ενθα και πληθος ην Ιουδαιων. Josephus then adds, that both the Jews in
Babylon, and all who dwelt in that country, as far as the Euphrates,
respected Hyrcanus, as high priest and king. Now the word Babylon in
this passage of Josephus evidently means a city in the east; and it
cannot possibly be interpreted in a mystical manner either of Jerusalem
or Rome. The only question is, whether he meant the ancient Babylon on
the Euphrates, or Seleucia on the Tigris. The former is the most obvious
interpretation; and is warranted by the circumstance that, in other
places where Josephus speaks of Seleucia on the Tigris, he calls it by
its proper name Seleucia.

"The first argument in favor of a mystical and against a literal
interpretation of the word Babylon is, that in the whole country of
Babylonia there were no Jews in the time of St. Peter; and thence it is
inferred that he could not have gone to preach the Gospel there. Now in
this argument both the premises and inference are false. The inference
is false, because even if there had been no Jews in the whole country of
Babylonia, St. Peter might have gone to preach the Gospel there; for he
preached to the uncircumcised at Caesarea, and he himself declared that
it was ordained by God that the Gentiles, by his mouth, should hear the
word of the Gospel and believe. The premises themselves are also totally
unfounded; for if we except Palestine, there was no country in the world
where the Jews were so numerous and so powerful as in the province of
Babylonia, in which they had their two celebrated seats of learning,
Nehardea and Susa.

"The second argument in favor of a mystical interpretation of the word
Babylon is, that almost all the ancient fathers have explained it in
this manner, and have asserted that St. Peter used it to denote Rome.
But we must recollect that an assertion of this kind is not testimony to
a fact, but a mere matter of opinion, in which the ancients were as
liable to mistake as we are. Nor is it true that all the ancient
ecclesiastical writers have ascribed to the word Babylon a mystical
meaning; for though the Greek and Latin fathers commonly understood
Rome, yet the Syriac and Arabic writers understood it literally, as
denoting a town in the east; and if we are to be guided by opinion, an
oriental writer is surely as good authority, on the present question, as
a European.

"The third argument on which Lardner particularly insists is, that, in
the accounts which we have on record relative to St. Peter's history, no
mention is made of a journey to Babylon. Now this argument would prove
nothing, even if our knowledge of St. Peter's life and transactions were
more perfect than it really is. Let us suppose an instance of some
eminent man in modern times, in the history of whose life no mention is
made that, during his travels, he paid a visit to Vienna, but that among
his letters to his friends, one of them, not withstanding the silence of
his biographer, is dated from Vienna. In this case, unless we had reason
to suppose that the whole epistle was a forgery, or that the author had
used a false date, we should immediately conclude, on the bare authority
of this single epistle, that he had actually been at Vienna; and we
should hardly think of a mystical or spiritual Vienna. Lardner himself
has argued in this very manner with respect to Paul, though his history
is infinitely better known than that of St. Peter, and has inferred from
the single passage, [Tit 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005.md), 'For
this cause left I thee in Crete,' that St. Paul made a voyage into Crete
in the year 56, though this voyage is mentioned neither by St. Luke nor
by any other historian. No reason therefore can be assigned why we
should refuse to argue in the same manner with respect to St. Peter. In
fact, Lardner's argument could nowhere have been more unfortunately
applied than in the present instance.

"From the time of the apostolic council at Jerusalem, in the year 49, at
which St. Peter was present, till the time of his (supposed) arrival in
Rome, which Lardner acknowledges was not before 63, there is an interval
of fourteen years, during which we have no history of him whatsoever.
How then can we form a judgment of his transactions during that period
except from his own writings? And how can the silence of history, in
respect to his journey to Babylon, afford an argument that he was never
there, in contradiction to his own epistle, when the fact is, we have no
history at all of St. Peter during this period? We cannot therefore talk
of its silence in respect to any one particular transaction, since every
transaction of St. Peter, throughout the whole of this interval, is
unrecorded. Lardner indeed conjectures, as the epistle is addressed to
the inhabitants of Pontus, Galatia, Ac., that St. Peter spent a part of
his time in these countries, though he denies that St. Peter ever was in
Babylon, whence the epistle is dated. Now this mode of arguing is nearly
the same as if I concluded, from a letter dated from Vienna, and
addressed to a person in Venice, that the writer of that letter had been
in Venice, but that he never was at Vienna. Lardner supposes also that
St. Peter spent a part of this time in Jerusalem. Now it is impossible
for us to determine what stay St. Peter made in Jerusalem after the
holding of the apostolic council, or whether he remained there at all;
but this I think is certain, that he was not at Jerusalem when St. Paul
returned thither for the last time, since St. Luke makes particular
mention of St. James, and describes him as the head of the Christian
community at Jerusalem, but says nothing of St. Peter, whom he would
hardly have passed over in perfect silence if he had been there. Now St.
Paul's last visit to Jerusalem happened in the year 60, and since I have
shown that the First Epistle of St. Peter was written about this time,
it is not at all improbable that St. Peter, who was absent from
Jerusalem, was then engaged in preaching the Gospel to the Babylonians.

"The last argument in favor of the opinion that the Babylon where Peter
wrote was not Babylon properly so called, is derived from [Pe1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md), where St. Peter commands
obedience to the king, and from [Pe1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017.md), where he says, 'Honor the king.'
Hence Lardner concludes that St. Peter must have written in a place
which was subject to the same king or emperor as the people to whom he
sent the epistle. But these were subject to the Roman emperor, whereas
Babylon, with its whole territory, was then subject, not to the Romans,
but the Parthians, and therefore, according to Lardner, could not have
been the place where St. Peter wrote. Now this argument rests on a
supposition which is contradicted by the common usage of every language,
the expression, 'the king,' in a letter from a person in one country to
a person in another country, may, according to circumstances, denote the
king to which the reader is subject as well as the king to which the
writer is subject.

"It appears, then, that the arguments which have been alleged to show
that St. Peter did not write his first epistle in the country of
Babylonia are devoid of foundation, and consequently the notion of a
mystical Babylon, as denoting either Jerusalem or Rome, loses its whole
support. For in itself the notion is highly improbable, and therefore
the bare possibility that St. Peter took a journey to Babylon, properly
so called, renders it inadmissible. The plain language of epistolary
writing does not admit of the figures of poetry, and, though it would be
very allowable, in a poem written in honor of Gottingen, to style it
another Athens, yet if a professor of this university should, in a
letter written from Gottingen, date it Athens, it would be a greater
piece of pedantry than ever was laid to the charge of the learned. In
like manner, though a figurative use of the word Babylon is not
unsuitable to the animated and poetical language of the Apocalypse, yet
St. Peter, in a plain and unadorned epistle, would hardly have called
the place where he wrote by any other appellation than that which
literally and properly belonged to it."

That many persons both of learning and eminence have been of a different
opinion from Professor Michaelis, the intelligent reader is well aware,
but Dr. Lardner, of all others, has written most argumentatively in
vindication of the mystical Babylon, i.e. Rome, as being the place from
which the apostle wrote this epistle. His weightiest arguments however
are here answered by Michaelis, and to me it appears that there is a
great balance in favor of the opinion that Babylon on the Euphrates is
the place intended. The decision of this question, although not an
article of faith, is nevertheless of some importance. I am still of
opinion that St. Peter did not write from Rome; that he was neither
bishop of Rome nor martyred at Rome, in a word, that he never saw Rome.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 1](pe1001.md)

</div>
