<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1.md)  
  [Previous](pe1001)  [Next](pe1003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001.md)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 2:0</span></span>

We should lay aside all evil dispositions, and desire the sincere milk
of the word, that we may grow thereby, [Pe1
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001.md). And come to God to be made
living stones, and be built up into a spiritual temple, [Pe1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004.md), [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md). The prophecy of Christ as chief
corner stone, precious to believers, but a stumbling stone to the
disobedient, [Pe1 2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006.md). True
believers are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, etc., [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md), [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010.md). They should abstain from fleshly
lusts, [Pe1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011.md). Walk uprightly among
the Gentiles, [Pe1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012.md). Be obedient
to civil authority, according to the will of God, [Pe1
2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md). Make a prudent use of their
Christian liberty, [Pe1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016.md). Fear God
and honor the king, [Pe1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017.md).
Servants should be subject to their masters, and serve them faithfully,
and suffer indignities patiently, after the example of Christ, [Pe1
2:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018.md). Who bore the punishment due
to our sins in his own body upon the tree, [Pe1
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024.md). They were formerly like sheep
going astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of their
souls, [Pe1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025.md).

[1 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 2:1</span></span>

Wherefore, laying aside - This is in close connection with the preceding
chapter, from which it should not have been separated, and the subject
is continued to the end of the 10th verse.

Laying aside all malice - See the notes on [Eph
4:22-31](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022) (note.md). These tempers and
dispositions must have been common among the Jews, as they are
frequently spoken against: Christianity can never admit of such; they
show the mind, not of Christ, but of the old murderer.

[1 Peter 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 2:2</span></span>

As new-born babes - In the preceding chapter, [Pe1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023.md), the apostle states that they had
been born again; and as the new-born infant desires that aliment which
nature has provided for it, so they, being born again - born from above,
should as earnestly require that heavenly nourishment which is suited to
their new nature; and this the apostle calls the sincere milk of the
word, το λογικον αδολον γαλα, or, as some translate, the rational
unadulterated milk; i.e. the pure doctrines of the Gospel, as delivered
in the epistles and gospels, and as preached by the apostles and their
successors. The rabbins frequently express learning to know the law,
etc., by the term sucking, and their disciples are often denominated
those that suck the breast. The figure is very expressive: as a child
newly born shows an immediate desire for that nourishment, and that
only, which is its most proper food; so they, being just born of God,
should show that the incorruptible seed abides in them, and that they
will receive nothing that is not suited to that new nature: and, indeed,
they can have no spiritual growth but by the pure doctrines of the
Gospel.

That ye may grow thereby - Εις σωτηριαν, Unto salvation, is added here
by ABC, and about forty others; both the Syriac, the Arabic of Erpen,
Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Slavonic, Vulgate, and several of the
ancient fathers. The reading is undoubtedly genuine, and is very
important. It shows why they were regenerated, and why they were to
desire the unadulterated doctrines of the Gospel; viz.: that they might
grow up unto salvation. This was the end they should always have in
view; and nothing could so effectually promote this end as continually
receiving the pure truth of God, claiming the fulfillment of its
promises, and acting under its dictates.

[1 Peter 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 2:3</span></span>

If so be ye have tasted - Ειπερ εγευσασθε· Seeing ye have tasted. There
could be no doubt that they had tasted the goodness of Christ who were
born again, of incorruptible seed, and whose hearts were purified by the
truth, and who had like precious faith with the apostles themselves.

That the Lord is gracious - Ὁτι χρηστος ὁ Κυριος· From the similarity of
the letters, many MSS. and several of the fathers have read, Χριστος ὁ
κυριος, the Lord is Christ, or Christ is the Lord.

This seems to refer to [Psa 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008.md) : O
taste and see that the Lord is good; Γευσασθε και ιδετε ὁτι χρηστος ὁ
Κυριος, Sept. And there is still a reference to the sucking child that,
having once tasted its mother's milk, ever after desires and longs for
it. As they were born of God, and had tasted his goodness, they would
naturally desire the same pure unadulterated milk of the word.

[1 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 2:4</span></span>

To whom coming, as unto a living stone - This is a reference to [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md) : Behold, I lay in Zion for a
foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation. Jesus Christ is, in both the prophet and apostle,
represented as the foundation on which the Christian Church is built,
and on which it must continue to rest: and the stone or foundation is
called here living, to intimate that he is the source of life to all his
followers, and that it is in union with him that they live, and answer
the end of their regeneration; as the stones of a building are of no use
but as they occupy their proper places in a building, and rest on the
foundation.

Disallowed indeed of men - That is, rejected by the Jews. This is a
plain reference to the prophecy, [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022.md) : The stone which the builders
refused is become the head stone of the corner.

Chosen of God - To be the Savior of the world, and the Founder of the
Church, and the foundation on which it rests; As Christ is the choice of
the Father, we need have no doubt of the efficacy and sufficiency of all
that he has suffered and done for the salvation of a lost world. God can
never be mistaken in his choice; therefore he that chooses Christ for
his portion shall never be confounded.

Precious - Εντιμον· Honourable. Howsoever despised and rejected by men,
Jesus, as the sacrifice for a lost world, is infinitely honorable in the
sight of God; and those who are united by faith to him partake of the
same honor, being members of that great and glorious body of which he is
the head, and stones in that superb building of which he is the
foundation.

[1 Peter 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 2:5</span></span>

Ye also, as lively stones - Λιθοι ζωντες· Living stones; each being
instinct with the principle of life, which proceeds from him who is the
foundation, called above λιθον ζωντα, a living stone.

The metaphor in this and the following verse is as bold as it is
singular; and commentators and critics have found it difficult to hit on
any principle of explanation. In all metaphors there is something in the
natural image that is illustrative of some chief moral property in the
thing to be represented. But what analogy is there between the stones of
a building and a multitude of human beings? We shall soon see. The
Church of Christ, it is true, is represented under the figure of a
house, or rather household; and as a household or family must have a
place of residence, hence, by a metonymy, the house itself, or material
building, is put for the household or family which occupies it, the
container being put for the contained. This point will receive the
fullest illustration if we have recourse to the Hebrew: in this
language, בית beith signifies both a house and a family; בן ben a son;
בת bath a daughter; and אבן eben a stone. Of all these nouns, בנה banah,
he built, is, I believe, the common root. Now as בית beith, a house, is
built of אבנים abanim, stones, hence בנה banah, he built, is a proper
radix for both stones and building; and as בית beith, a family or
household ([Psa 68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006).md) is constituted
or made up of בנים banim, sons, and בנות banoth daughters, hence the
same root בנה banah, he built, is common to all; for sons and daughters
build up or constitute a family, as stones do a building. Here, then, is
the ground of the metaphor: the spiritual house is the holy or Christian
family or household, this family or household is composed of the sons
and daughters of God Almighty; and hence the propriety of living stones,
because this is the living house or spiritual family. As a building
rests upon a foundation, and this foundation is its support; so a family
or household rests on the father, who is properly considered the
foundation or support of the building. But as every father is mortal and
transitory, none can be called a living stone, foundation, or support,
but He who liveth for ever, and has life independent; so none but Jesus,
who hath life in himself, i.e. independently, and who is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, can be a permanent foundation or support to the
whole spiritual house. And as all the stones - sons and daughters, that
constitute the spiritual building are made partakers of the life of
Christ, consequently, they may with great propriety be called living
stones, that is, sons and daughters of God, who live by Christ Jesus,
because he lives in them. Now, following the metaphor; these various
living stones become one grand temple, in which God is worshipped, and
in which he manifests himself as he did in the temple of old. Every
stone - son and daughter, being a spiritual sacrificer or priest, they
all offer up praise and thanksgiving to God through Christ; and such
sacrifices, being offered up in the name and through the merit of his
Son, are all acceptable in his sight.

This is the true metaphor, and which has not, as far as I know, ever
been properly traced out. To talk of "stones being said to be alive as
long as they are not cut out of the quarry, but continue to partake of
that nourishment which circulates from vein to vein," is as
unsatisfactory as it is unphilosophical; the other is the true metaphor,
and explains every thing.

[1 Peter 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 2:6</span></span>

Behold, I lay in Sion - This intimates that the foundation of the
Christian Church should be laid at Jerusalem; and there it was laid, for
there Christ suffered, and there the preaching of the Gospel commenced.

A chief corner stone - This is the same as the foundation stone; and it
is called here the chief corner stone because it is laid in the
foundation, at an angle of the building where its two sides form the
ground work of a side and end wall. And this might probably be designed
to show that, in Jesus, both Jews and Gentiles were to be united; and
this is probably the reason why it was called a stone of stumbling, and
rock of offense; for nothing stumbled, nothing offended the Jews so much
as the calling of the Gentiles into the Church of God, and admitting
them to the same privileges which had been before peculiar to the Jews.

Elect, precious - Chosen and honorable. See on [Pe1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004.md).

Shall not be confounded - These words are quoted from [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md); but rather more from the
Septuagint than from the Hebrew text. The latter we translate, He that
believeth shall not make haste - he who comes to God, through Christ,
for salvation, shall never be confounded; he need not haste to flee
away, for no enemy shall ever be able to annoy him.

[1 Peter 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 2:7</span></span>

Unto you therefore which believe - You, both Jews and Gentiles.

He is precious - Ὑμιν ουν ἡ τιμη τοις πιστευουσιν· The honor is to you
who believe; i.e. the honor of being in this building, and of having
your souls saved through the blood of the Lamb, and becoming sons and
daughters of God Almighty.

Them which be disobedient - The Jews, who continue to reject the Gospel;
that very person whom they reject is head of the corner - is Lord over
all, and has all power in the heavens and the earth.

[1 Peter 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 2:8</span></span>

A stone of stumbling - Because in him all Jews and Gentiles who believe
are united; and because the latter were admitted into the Church, and
called by the Gospel to enjoy the same privileges which the Jews, as the
peculiar people of God, had enjoyed for two thousand years before;
therefore they rejected the Christian religion, they would have no
partakers with themselves in the salvation of God. This was the true
cause why the Jews rejected the Gospel; and they rejected Christ because
he did not come as a secular prince. In the one case he was a stone of
stumbling - he was poor, and affected no worldly pomp; in the other he
was a rock of offense, for his Gospel called the Gentiles to be a
peculiar people whom the Jews believed to be everlastingly reprobated,
and utterly incapable of any spiritual good.

Whereunto also they were appointed - Some good critics read the verse
thus, carrying on the sense from the preceding: Also a stone of
stumbling, and a rock of offense: The disobedient stumble against the
word, (or doctrine), to which verily they were appointed. - Macknight.

Mr. Wakefield, leaving out, with the Syriac, the clause, The stone which
the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner, reads
[Pe1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007.md), [Pe1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008.md) thus: To you therefore who trust
thereon, this stone is honorable; but to those who are not persuaded,
(απειθουσι), it is a stone to strike upon and to stumble against, at
which they stumble who believe not the word; and unto this indeed they
were appointed; that is, they who believe not the word were appointed to
stumble and fall by it, not to disbelieve it; for the word of the Lord
is either a savor of life unto life, or death unto death, to all them
that hear it, according as they receive it by faith, or reject it by
unbelief. The phrase τιθεναι τινα εις τι is very frequent among the
purest Greek writers, and signifies to attribute any thing to another,
or to speak a thing of them; of which Kypke gives several examples from
Plutarch; and paraphrases the words thus: This stumbling and offense,
particularly of the Jews, against Christ, the corner stone, was long ago
asserted and predicted by the prophets, by Christ, and by others;
compare [Isa 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014.md), [Isa
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#015.md); [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042.md), [Mat
21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044.md); [Luk
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034.md); and [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032.md), [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033.md). Now this interpretation of Kypke
is the more likely, because it is evident that St. Peter refers to [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014.md), [Isa
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#015.md) : And he shall be for a
sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to
both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for a snare to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem: and many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be
broken, etc. The disobedient, therefore, being appointed to stumble
against the word, or being prophesied of as persons that should stumble,
necessarily means, from the connection in which it stands, and from the
passage in the prophet, that their stumbling, falling, and being broken,
is the consequence of their disobedience or unbelief; but there is no
intimation that they were appointed or decreed to disobey, that they
might stumble, and fall, and be broken. They stumbled and fell through
their obstinate unbelief; and thus their stumbling and falling, as well
as their unbelief, were of themselves, in consequence of this they were
appointed to be broken; this was God's work of judgment. This seems to
be the meaning which our Lord attaches to this very prophecy, which he
quotes against the chief priests and elders, [Mat
21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044.md). On the whole of these passages,
see the notes on [Mat 21:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042) (note.md).

[1 Peter 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 2:9</span></span>

Ye are a chosen generation - The titles formerly given to the whole
Jewish Church, i.e. to all the Israelites without exception, all who
were in the covenant of God by circumcision, whether they were holy
persons or not, are here given to Christians in general in the same way;
i.e. to all who believed in Christ, whether Jews or Gentiles, and who
received baptism in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost.

The Israelites were a chosen or elected race, to be a special people
unto the Lord their God, above all people that were upon the face of the
earth, [Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006.md).

They were also a royal priesthood, or what Moses calls a kingdom of
priests, [Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006.md). For all were
called to sacrifice to God; and he is represented to be the King of that
people, and Father of those of whom he was king; therefore they were all
royal.

They were a holy nation, [Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006.md);
for they were separated from all the people of the earth, that they
might worship the one only true God, and abstain from the abominations
that were in the heathen world.

They were also a peculiar people, λαος εις περιποιησιν, a purchased
people; סגלה segullah, a private property, belonging to God Almighty,
[Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006.md); none other having any right
in them, and they being under obligation to God alone. All these things
the apostle applies to the Christians, to whom indeed they belong, in
their spirit and essence, in such a way as they could not belong to the
Hebrews of old. But they were called to this state of salvation out of
darkness - idolatry, superstition, and ungodliness, into his marvellous
light - the Gospel dispensation, which, in reference to the discoveries
it had made of God, his nature, will, and gracious promises towards
mankind, differed as much from the preceding dispensation of the Jews,
as the light of the meridian sun from the faint twinkling of a star. And
they had these privileges that they might show forth the praises of Him
who had thus called them; αρετας, the virtues, those perfections of the
wisdom, justice, truth, and goodness of God, that shone most
illustriously in the Christian dispensation. These they were to exhibit
in a holy and useful life, being transformed into the image of God, and
walking as Christ himself walked.

[1 Peter 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 2:10</span></span>

Which in time past were not a people - This is a quotation from [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009.md), [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010.md); [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023.md), where the calling of the
Gentiles, by the preaching of the Gospel, is foretold. From this it is
evident, that the people to whom the apostle now addresses himself had
been Gentiles, covered with ignorance and superstition, and now had
obtained mercy by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ.

[1 Peter 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe1 2:11</span></span>

As strangers and pilgrims - See the note on [Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md). These were strangers and
pilgrims in the most literal sense of the word, see [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md), for they were strangers scattered
through Asia, Pontus, etc.

Abstain from fleshly lusts - As ye are strangers and pilgrims, and
profess to seek a heavenly country, do not entangle your affections with
earthly things. While others spend all their time, and employ all their
skill, in acquiring earthly property, and totally neglect the salvation
of their souls; they are not strangers, they are here at home; they are
not pilgrims, they are seeking an earthly possession: Heaven is your
home, seek that; God is your portion, seek him. All kinds of earthly
desires, whether those of the flesh or of the eye, or those included in
the pride of life, are here comprised in the words fleshly lusts.

Which war against the soul - Αἱτινες στρατευονται κατα της ψυχης· Which
are marshalled and drawn up in battle array, to fight against the soul;
either to slay it, or to bring it into captivity. This is the object and
operation of every earthly and sensual desire. How little do those who
indulge them think of the ruin which they produce!

[1 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 2:12</span></span>

Having your conversation honest - Living in such a manner among the
Gentiles, in whose country ye sojourn, as becomes the Gospel which ye
profess.

That whereas they speak against you as evil doers - In all the heathen
countries, in the first age of the Church, the Christians and the Jews
were confounded together; and as the latter mere everywhere exceedingly
troublesome and seditious, the Christians shared in their blame, and
suffered no small measure of obloquy and persecution on this very
account. It was doubly necessary, therefore, that the Christians should
be exceedingly cautious; and that their conduct should prove that,
although many of them were of the same nation, yet they who had embraced
Christianity differed widely in their spirit and conduct from those,
whether Jews or Gentiles, who had not received the faith of Christ.

In the day of visitation - I believe this refers to the time when God
should come to execute judgment on the disobedient Jews, in the
destruction of their civil polity, and the subversion of their temple
and city. God did at that time put a remarkable difference between the
Jews and the Christians: all the former were either destroyed or carried
into slavery; not one of the latter: nor did they deserve it; for not
one of them had joined in the sedition against the Roman government.
That the day of visitation means a time in which punishment should be
inflicted, is plain from [Isa 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003.md) :
And what will ye do in the Day of Visitation, and in the desolation
which shall come from afar? To whom will ye flee for help? And where
will ye leave your glory? Some think that by the phrase in this place is
meant the time in which they should be brought before the heathen
magistrates, who, after an impartial examination, should find them
innocent, and declare them as such; by which God would be glorified, the
work appearing to be his own. Others think that it signifies the time in
which God should make them the offer of mercy by Jesus Christ. The
words, however, may refer to the time in which the Christians should be
called to suffer for the testimony of Christ; the heathens, seeing them
bear their sufferings with unconquerable patience, were constrained to
confess that God was with them; and not a few, from being spectators of
their sufferings, became converts to Christianity,

[1 Peter 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 2:13</span></span>

Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man - In every settled state,
and under every form of political government, where the laws are not in
opposition to the laws of God, it may be very soundly and rationally
said: "Genuine Christians have nothing to do with the laws but to obey
them." Society and civil security are in a most dangerous state when the
people take it into their heads that they have a right to remodel and
change the laws. See the whole of this subject fully handled in the
notes on [Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001.md), etc., to which I
beg every reader, who may wish to know the political sentiments of this
work, to have recourse.

The words παση ανθρωπινη κτισει literally signify, not every ordinance
of man, but every human creature; yet κτιζειν signifies sometimes to
arrange, order, as well as to create, and therefore our translation may
do: but as the apostle is evidently speaking here of magistracy, or
legislative authority, and as the appointment of magistrates was termed
a creating of them, it is better to understand the words thus, All the
constituted authorities. So, Decem tribunos plebis per pontificem
creaverunt; Cor. Nep. "They created ten tribunes of the plebeians, by
the high priest." Carthagine quotannis annui bini reges creabantur;
Caesar. "They created two kings every year at Carthage." Consules
creantur Caesar et Servilius; Sallust. "Caesar and Servilius are created
consuls." Creare ducem gerendo bello. "To create a general to conduct
the war." The meaning of St. Peter appears to be this: the Jews thought
it unlawful to obey any ruler that was not of their own stock; the
apostle tells them they should obey the civil magistrate, let him be of
what stock he may, whether a Jew or a Gentile, and let him exercise the
government in whatsoever form. This is the general proposition: and then
he instances emperors and their deputies; and, far from its being
unlawful for them to obey a heathen magistrate, they were to do it for
the Lord's sake, δια τον Κυριον, on account of the Lord, whose will it
was, and who commanded it.

[1 Peter 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 2:14</span></span>

Or unto governors - By king as supreme, the Roman emperor is meant; and
by governors, ἡγεμοσιν, are meant, leaders, governors, presidents,
proconsuls, and other chief magistrates, sent by him into the provinces
dependent on the Roman empire.

For the punishment of evil doers - This was the object of their mission;
they were to punish delinquents, and encourage and protect the virtuous.

[1 Peter 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe1 2:15</span></span>

For so is the will of God - God, as their supreme governor, shows them
that it is his will that they should act uprightly and obediently at all
times, and thus confound the ignorance of foolish men, who were ready
enough to assert that their religion made them bad subjects. The word
φιμουν, which we translate put to silence, signifies to muzzle, i.e.,
stop their mouths, leave them nothing to say; let them assert, but ever
be unable to bring proof to support it.

[1 Peter 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe1 2:16</span></span>

As free - The Jews pretended that they were a free people, and owed
allegiance to God alone; hence they were continually rebelling against
the Roman government, to which God had subjected them because of their
rebellion against him: thus they used their liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness - for a pretext of rebellion, and by it endeavored to
vindicate their seditious and rebellious conduct.

But as the servants of God - These were free from sin and Satan, but
they were the servants of God - bound to obey him; and, as he had made
it their duty to obey the civil magistrate, they served God by
submitting to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake.

[1 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 2:17</span></span>

Honour all men - That is, Give honor to whom honor is due, [Rom
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007.md). Respect every man as a fellow
creature, and as one who may be a fellow heir with you of eternal life;
and therefore be ready to give him every kind of succor in your power.

Love the brotherhood - All true Christians, who form one great family of
which God is the head.

Fear God - Who gives you these commandments, lest he punish you for
disobedience.

Honour the king - Pay that respect to the emperor which his high
authority requires, knowing that civil power is of God; that the
authority with which he, in the course of his providence, has invested
him, must be respected in order to its being obeyed; and that if the man
be even bad, and as a man be worthy of no reverence, yet he should be
respected on account of his office. If respect be banished,
subordination will flee with it, and anarchy and ruin will rise up in
their place. Truly religious persons are never found in seditions.
Hypocrites may join themselves with any class of the workers of
iniquity, and say, Hail, brethren!

[1 Peter 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 2:18</span></span>

Servants, be subject - See the notes on [Eph
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005.md); [Col
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#022) (note.md); and [Tit
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#009) (note.md).

With all fear - With all submission and reverence.

The good and gentle - Those who are ever just in their commands, never
requiring more work than is necessary or proper, and always allowing
sufficient food and sufficient time.

The froward - Σκολιοις· The crooked, perverse, unreasonable morose, and
austere. Your time belongs to your master; obey him in every thing that
is not sinful; if he employs you about unreasonable or foolish things,
let him answer for it. He may waste your time, and thus play the fool
with his own property; you can only fill up your time: let him assign
the work; it is your duty to obey.

[1 Peter 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe1 2:19</span></span>

For this is thankworthy - If, in a conscientious discharge of your duty,
you suffer evil, this is in the sight of God thankworthy, pleasing, and
proper; it shows that you prefer his authority to your own ease, peace,
and emolument; it shows also, as Dr. Macknight has well observed, that
they considered their obligation to relative duties not to depend on the
character of the person to whom they were to be performed, nor on their
performing the duties they owed to their servants, but on the
unalterable relations of things established by God.

[1 Peter 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe1 2:20</span></span>

For what glory is it - It appears from this that the poor Christians,
and especially those who had been converted to Christianity while in a
state of slavery, were often grievously abused, they were buffeted
because they were Christians, and because they would not join with their
masters in idolatrous worship.

[1 Peter 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe1 2:21</span></span>

Hereunto were ye called - Ye were called to a state of suffering when ye
were called to be Christians; for the world cannot endure the yoke of
Christ, and they that will live godly in Christ must suffer persecution;
they will meet with it in one form or other.

Christ also suffered for us - And left us the example of his meekness
and gentleness; for when he was reviled, he reviled not again. Ye cannot
expect to fare better than your master; imitate his example, and his
Spirit shall comfort and sustain you. Many MSS. and most of the
versions, instead of Christ also suffered for Us, leaving Us, etc.,
read, suffered for You, leaving You, etc. This reading, which I think is
genuine, is noticed in the margin.

[1 Peter 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe1 2:22</span></span>

Who did no sin - He suffered, but not on account of any evil he had
either done or said. In deed and word he was immaculate, and yet he was
exposed to suffering; expect the same, and when it comes bear it in the
same spirit. It is very likely that the apostle mentions guile, because
those who do wrong generally strive to screen themselves by
prevarication and lies. These words appear to be a quotation from [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009.md).

[1 Peter 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pe1 2:23</span></span>

But committed himself - Though he could have inflicted any kind of
punishment on his persecutors, yet to give us, in this respect also, an
example that we should follow his steps, he committed his cause to him
who is the righteous Judge. To avoid evil tempers, and the uneasiness
and danger of avenging ourselves, it is a great advantage in all such
cases to be able to refer our cause to God, and to be assured that the
Judge of all the earth will do right.

The Vulgate, one copy of the Itala, St. Cyprian, and Fulgentius, read,
Tradebat autem judicanti se injuste; "He delivered himself to him who
judged unrighteously;" meaning Pontius Pilate. Some critics approve of
this reading, but it has not sufficient evidence to recommend it as
genuine.

[1 Peter 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pe1 2:24</span></span>

Who his own self - Not another in his place, as some anciently supposed,
because they thought it impossible that the Christ should suffer.

Bare our sins in his own body - Bore the punishment due to our sins. In
no other sense could Christ bear them. To say that they were so imputed
to him as if they had been his own, and that the Father beheld him as
blackened with imputed sin, is monstrous, if not blasphemous.

That we, being dead to sins - Ἱνα ταις ἁμαρτιαις απογενομενοι· That we,
being freed from sin - delivered out of its power, and from under its
tyranny.

Should live unto righteousness - That righteousness should be our master
now, as sin was before. He is speaking still lo servants who were under
an oppressive yoke, and were cruelly used by their masters, scourged,
buffeted, and variously maltreated.

By whose stripes ye were healed - The apostle refers here to [Isa
53:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md); and he still keeps the case of
these persecuted servants in view, and encourages them to suffer
patiently by the example of Christ, who was buffeted and scourged, and
who bore all this that the deep and inveterate wounds, inflicted on
their souls by sin, might be healed.

[1 Peter 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pe1 2:25</span></span>

For ye were as sheep going astray - Formerly ye were not in a better
moral condition than your oppressors; ye were like stray sheep, in the
wilderness of ignorance and sin, till Christ, the true and merciful
Shepherd, called you back from your wanderings, by sending you the
Gospel of his grace.

Bishop of your souls - Unless we consider the word bishop as a
corruption of the word επισκοπος episcopos, and that this literally
signifies an overseer, an inspector, or one that has the oversight, it
can convey to us no meaning of the original. Jesus Christ is the
Overseer of souls; he has them continually under his eye; he knows their
wants, wishes, dangers, etc., and provides for them. As their shepherd,
he leads them to the best pastures, defends them from their enemies, and
guides them by his eye. Jesus is the good Shepherd that laid down his
life for his sheep. All human souls are inexpressibly dear to him, as
they are the purchase of his blood. He is still supreme Bishop or
Overseer in his Church. He alone is Episcopus episcoporum, "the Bishop
of bishops;" a title which the Romish pontiffs have blasphemously
usurped. But this is not the only attribute of Jesus on which they have
laid sacrilegious hands. And besides this, with force and with cruelty
have they ruled the sheep: but the Lord is breaking the staff of their
pride, and delivering the nations from the bondage of their corruption.
Lord, let thy kingdom come!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 3](pe1003.md)

</div>
