<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1.md)  
  [Previous](pe1000)  [Next](pe1002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md)

Of the persons to whom this epistle was directed, and their spiritual
state, [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md), [Pe1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002.md). He describes their privileges,
and thanks God for the grace by which they were preserved faithful in
trials and difficulties, [Pe1 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003.md).
The spiritual benefit they were to receive out of their afflictions,
[Pe1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006.md), [Pe1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007.md). Their love to Christ, [Pe1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008.md). And the salvation they received
through believing, [Pe1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009.md). This
salvation was predicted by the prophets, who only saw it afar off and
had only a foretaste of it, [Pe1
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010.md). They should take
encouragement, and be obedient and holy, [Pe1
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013.md). Thy should pray, and deeply
consider the price at which they were purchased, that their faith and
hope might be in God, [Pe1 1:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017.md). As
their souls had been purified by obeying the truth through the Spirit,
they should love each other with a pure and fervent love, [Pe1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022.md), [Pe1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023.md). The frailty of man, and the
unchangeableness of God, [Pe1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024.md),
[Pe1 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025.md).

[1 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 1:1</span></span>

Peter, an apostle - Simon Peter, called also Kephas: he was a fisherman,
son of Jonah, brother of Andrew, and born at Bethsaida; and one of the
first disciples of our Lord. See the preface.

The strangers scattered throughout - Jews first, who had believed the
Gospel in the different countries here specified; and converted Gentiles
also. Though the word strangers may refer to all truly religious people,
see [Gen 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009.md); [Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012.md), in the Septuagint, and [Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md), yet the inscription may have a
special reference to those who were driven by persecution to seek refuge
in those heathen provinces to which the influence of their persecuting
brethren did not extend.

Pontus - An ancient kingdom of Asia Minor, originally a part of
Cappadocia; bounded on the east by Colchis, on the west by the river
Halys, on the north by the Euxine Sea, and on the south by Armenia
Minor. This country probably derived its name from the Pontus Euxinus,
on which it was partly situated. In the time of the Roman emperors it
was divided into three parts:

1\. Pontus Cappadocius;

2\. Pontus Galaticus; and,

3\. Pontus Polemoniacus.

The first extended from the Pontus Polemoniacus to Colchis, having
Armenia Minor and the upper stream of the Euphrates for its southern
boundary. The second extended from the river Halys to the river
Thermodon. The third extended from the river Thermodon to the borders of
the Pontus Cappadocius.

Six kings of the name of Mithridates reigned in this kingdom, some of
whom are famous in history. The last king of this country was David
Comnenus, who was taken prisoner, with all his family, by Mohammed II.
in the year 1462, and carried to Constantinople; since which time this
country (then called the empire of Trebizond, from Trapezas, a city
founded by the Grecians, on the uttermost confines of Pontus) has
continued under the degrading power of the Turks.

Galatia - The ancient name of a province of Asia Minor, now called
Amasia. It was called also Gallograecia, and Gallia Parva. It was
bounded on the east by Cappadocia, on the south by Pamphylia, on the
north by the Euxine Sea, and on the west by Bithynia. See the preface to
the Epistle to the Galatians.

Cappadocia - An ancient kingdom of Asia, comprehending all the country
lying between Mount Taurus and the Euxine Sea.

Asia - This word is taken in different senses: It signifies,

1\. One of the three general divisions of our continent, and one of the
four of the whole earth. It is separated from Europe by the
Mediterranean Sea, the Archipelago, the Black Sea, the Palus Maeolis,
the rivers Don and Dwina; and from Africa by the Arabic Gulf, or Red
Sea: it is everywhere else surrounded by water. It is situated between
latitude 2 and 77 N., and between longitude 26 E. and 170 W.; and is
about 7, 583 miles in length, and 5, 200 miles in breadth.

2\. Asia Minor, that part of Turkey in Asia, now called Natolia, which
comprehends a great number of province situated between the Euxine,
Mediterranean, and Archipelago.

3\. That province of Asia Minor of which Ephesus was the capital. It
appears, says Calmet, that it is in this latter sense that it is used
here by St. Peter, because Pontus, Galatia, and Bithynia, are comprised
in the provinces of Asia Minor. See Calmet.

Bithynia - An ancient kingdom of Asia, formerly called Mysia, Mygdonia,
Bebrycia, and Bithonia. It was bounded on the west by the Bosphorus,
Thracius, and part of the Propontis, on the south by the river
Rhyndacus, and Mount Olympus, on the north by the Euxine Sea, and on the
east by the river Parthenius. This place is in some sort rendered
infamous by the conduct of Prusias, one of its kings, who delivered up
Hannibal, who had fled to him for protection, into the hands of the
Romans. Nicomedes IV. bequeathed it to the Romans; and it is now in the
hands of the Turks.

[1 Peter 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe1 1:2</span></span>

Elect according to the foreknowledge of God - If the apostle had
directed his letter to persons elected to eternal life, no one, as Drs.
Lardner and Macknight properly argue, could have received such a letter,
because no one could have been sure of his election in this way till he
had arrived in heaven. But the persons to whom the apostle wrote were
all, with propriety, said to be elect according to the foreknowledge of
God; because, agreeably to the original purpose of God, discovered in
the prophetical writings, Jews and Gentiles, indiscriminately, were
called to be the visible Church, and entitled to all the privileges of
the people of God, on their believing the Gospel. In this sense the word
elected is used in other places of Scripture; see [Th1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#004.md), and the note there.

The Rev. J. Wesley has an excellent note on this passage, which I shall
transcribe for the benefit of those of my readers who may not have his
works at hand.

"Strictly speaking, there is no foreknowledge, no more than
afterknowledge, with God; but all things are known to him as present,
from eternity to eternity. Election, in the scriptural sense, is God's
doing any thing that our merit or power has no part in. The true
predestination or foreappointment of God is,

1\. He that believeth shall be saved from the guilt and power of sin.

2\. He that endureth to the end shall be saved eternally.

3\. They who receive the precious gift of faith thereby become the sons
of God; and, being sons, they shall receive the Spirit of holiness, to
walk as Christ also walked.

Throughout every part of this appointment of God, promise and duty go
hand in hand. All is free gift; and yet, such is the gift, that it
depends in the final issue on our future obedience to the heavenly call.
But other predestination than this, either to life or death eternal, the
Scripture knows not of: moreover,

1\. It is cruel respect of persons; an unjust regard of one, and an
unjust disregard of another: it is mere creature partiality, and not
infinite justice.

2\. It is not plain Scripture doctrine, (if true), but rather
inconsistent with the express written word that speaks of God's
universal offers of grace; his invitations, promises, threatenings,
being all general.

3\. We are bid to choose life, and reprehended for not doing it.

4\. It is inconsistent with a state of probation in those that must be
saved, or must be lost.

5\. It is of fatal consequence; all men being ready, on very slight
grounds, to fancy themselves of the elect number.

But the doctrine of predestination is entirely changed from what it
formerly was: now it implies neither faith, peace, nor purity; it is
something that will do without them all. Faith is no longer, according
to the modern predestination scheme, a Divine evidence of things not
seen wrought in the soul by the immediate power of the Holy Ghost; not
an evidence at all, but a mere notion: neither is faith made any longer
a means of holiness, but something that will do without it. Christ is no
more a Savior from sin, but a defense and a countenancer of it. He is no
more a fountain of spiritual life in the souls of believers, but leaves
his elect inwardly dry, and outwardly unfruitful; and is made little
more than a refuge from the image of the heavenly, even from
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost."

Through sanctification of the Spirit - through the renewing and
purifying influences of his Spirit on their souls, unto obedience - to
engage and enable them to yield themselves up to all holy obedience, the
foundation of all which is the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ -
the atoning blood of Jesus Christ which was typified by the sprinkling
of the blood of sacrifices under the law, in allusion to which it is
called the blood of sprinkling.

[1 Peter 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be the God and Father - Ευλογητος ὁ Θεος και Πατηρ· Blessed be
God even the Father, or blessed be God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The και, and, is omitted by the Syriac, Erpen's Arabic, and the
Ethiopic. But if we translate και, even, a meaning which it frequently
has in the New Testament, then we have a very good sense: Let that God
have praise who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and who deserves
the praise of every human being for his infinite mercy to the world, in
its redemption by Christ Jesus.

Begotten us again unto a lively hope - I think the apostle has a
reference here to his own case, and that of his fellow apostles, at the
time that Christ was taken by the Jews and put to death. Previously to
this time they had strong confidence that he was the Messiah, and that
it was he who should redeem Israel; but when they found that he actually
expired upon the cross, and was buried, they appear to have lost all
hope of the great things which before they had in prospect. This is
feelingly expressed by the two disciples whom our Lord, after his
resurrection, overtook on the road going to Emmaus, see [Luk
24:13-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013.md). And the hope, that with
them, died with their Master, and seemed to be buried in his grave, was
restored by the certainty of his resurrection. From Christ's preaching,
miracles, etc., they had a hope of eternal life, and all other blessings
promised by him; by his death and burial this hope became nearly, if not
altogether, extinct; but by his resurrection the hope was revived. This
is very properly expressed here by being begotten again to a living
hope, εις ελπιδα ζωσαν·, as some MSS. and versions have it, εις ελπιδα
ζωης, to the hope of life; which one copy of the Itala, with Augustine,
Gildas, Vigilius of Tapsum, and Cassiodorus, have considered as meaning
eternal life, agreeably to the context; and therefore they read vitae
aeternae.

The expressions, however, may include more particulars than what are
above specified; as none can inherit eternal life except those who are
children in the heavenly family, and none are children but those who are
born again: then St. Peter may be considered as laying here the
foundation of the hope of eternal life in the regeneration of the soul;
for none can legally inherit but the children, and none are children of
God till they are spiritually begotten and born again.

It is the Gospel alone that gives the well grounded hope of eternal
life; and the ground on which this hope rests is the resurrection of
Christ himself. The certainty of our Lord's resurrection is the great
seal of the Gospel. Without this what is vision, what is prophecy, what
is promise, what are even miracles, to that unbelief which is natural to
man on such a subject as this? But the resurrection of the human nature
of Christ, the incontestable proofs of this resurrection, and the
ascension of our nature to heaven in his person, are such evidences of
the possibility and certainty of the thing, as for ever to preclude all
doubt from the hearts of those who believe in him.

[1 Peter 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe1 1:4</span></span>

To an inheritance - Called an inheritance because it belongs to the
children of God. Eternal life cannot be a gift to any but these; for,
even in heaven, the lot is dealt out according to law: if children, then
heirs; if not children, then not heirs.

Incorruptible - Αφθαρτον· It has no principles of dissolution or decay
in it; and, therefore, must be totally different from this earth.

Undefiled - Αμιαντον· Nothing impure can enter it; it not only has no
principles or seeds of dissolution in itself, but it can never admit
any; therefore its deterioration is impossible.

Fadeth not away - Αμαρνατον· It cannot wither, it is always in bloom; a
metaphor taken from those flowers that never lose their hue nor their
fragrance. From the Greek αμαραντος we have our flowers called
amaranths, because they preserve their hue and odour for a long time.

Reserved in heaven - Such a place as that described above is not to be
expected on earth; it is that which was typified by the earthly Canaan,
and in reference to which the patriarchs endured all trials and
difficulties in this life, as seeing Him who is invisible.

[1 Peter 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe1 1:5</span></span>

Who are kept - Φρουρουμενους· Who are defended as in a fortress or
castle. There is a remarkable correspondence between the two verbs used
in this sentence: the verb τηρεω, signifies to keep, watch, guard; and
τηρησις, is a place of custody or prison. And φρουρεω, from φρουρος, a
sentinel, signifies to keep as under a military guard. See on [Gal
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022.md), [Gal
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023.md). The true disciples of Christ are
under the continual watchful care of God, and the inheritance is guarded
for them. In some countries military posts are constantly kept on the
confines, in order to prevent irruptions from a neighboring people; and,
in many cases, heirs, while in their minority, are kept in fortified
places under military guards.

By the power of God - Εν δυναμει Θεου· By the mighty and miracle-working
power of God; for nothing less is necessary to keep and preserve, in
this state of continual trial, a soul from the contagion that is in the
world. But this power of God is interested in the behalf of the soul by
faith; to believe is our work, the exertion of the almighty power is of
God. No persevering without the power, and no power without faith.

Ready to be revealed - Or rather, Prepared to be revealed. The
inheritance is prepared for you; but its glories will not be revealed
till the last time - till ye have done with life, and passed through
your probation, having held fast faith and a good conscience. Some by
salvation understand the deliverance of the Christians from the sackage
of Jerusalem, the end of the Jewish polity being called the last time;
others suppose it to refer to the day of judgment, and the glorification
of the body and soul in heaven.

[1 Peter 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 1:6</span></span>

Wherein ye greatly rejoice - Some refer wherein, εν ᾡ, to the salvation
mentioned above; others, to the last time, καιρῳ εσχατῳ, in [Pe1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#005.md); others think that it applies to
the being kept by the power of God through faith; and others, that it
refers to all the preceding advantages and privileges. It was in the
present salvation of God that they rejoiced or gloried, though not
without having an eye to the great recompense of reward.

Though now for a season - Ολιγον αρτι· A little while yet - during your
pilgrimage here below, which is but a point when compared with eternity.

If need be - Ει δεον εστι· If it be necessary - if your situation and
circumstances be such that you are exposed to trials and persecutions
which you cannot avoid, unless God were to work a miracle for your
deliverance, which would not be for your ultimate good, as he purposes
to turn all your trials and difficulties to your advantage.

Sometimes there is a kind of necessity that the followers of God should
be afflicted; when they have no trials they are apt to get careless, and
when they have secular prosperity they are likely to become
worldly-minded. "God," said a good man, "can neither trust me with
health nor money; therefore I am both poor and afflicted." But the
disciples of Christ may be very happy in their souls, though grievously
afflicted in their bodies and in their estates. Those to whom St. Peter
wrote rejoiced greatly, danced for joy, αγαλλιασθε, while they were
grieved, λυπηθεντες, with various trials. The verb λυπεω signifies to
grieve, to make sorrowful: perhaps heaviness is not the best rendering
of the original word, as this can scarcely ever consist with rejoicing;
but to be sorrowful on account of something external to ourselves, and
yet exulting in God from a sense of his goodness to us, is quite
compatible: so that we may say with St. Paul, always sorrowing, yet
still rejoicing.

[1 Peter 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe1 1:7</span></span>

That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold - As
by the action of fire gold is separated from all alloy and heterogeneous
mixtures, and is proved to be gold by its enduring the action of the
fire without losing any thing of its nature, weight, color, or any other
property, so genuine faith is proved by adversities, especially such as
the primitive Christians were obliged to pass through. For the word was
then, "Renounce Jesus and live," "Cleave to him and die;" for every
Christian was in continual danger of losing his life. He then who
preferred Christianity to his life gave full proof, not only of his own
sincerity, but also of the excellency of the principle by which he was
influenced; as his religion put him in possession of greater blessings,
and more solid comforts, than any thing the earth could afford.

Though it be tried with fire - That is: Though gold will bear the action
of the fire for any given time, even millions of years, were they
possible, without losing the smallest particle of weight or value, yet
even gold, in process of time, will wear away by continual use; and the
earth, and all its works, will be burnt up by that supernatural fire
whose action nothing can resist. But on that day the faith of Christ's
followers will be found brighter, and more glorious. The earth, and
universal nature, shall be dissolved; but he who doeth the will of God
shall abide for ever, and his faith shall then be found to the praise of
God's grace, the honor of Christ, and the glory or glorification of his
own soul throughout eternity. God himself will praise such faith, angels
and men will hold it in honor, and Christ will crown it with glory. For
some remarks on the nature and properties of gold see at the end of the
chapter.

[1 Peter 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe1 1:8</span></span>

Whom having not seen, ye love - Those to whom the apostle wrote had
never seen Christ in the flesh; and yet, such is the realizing nature of
faith, they loved him as strongly as any of his disciples could, to whom
he was personally known. For faith in the Lord Jesus brings him into the
heart; and by his indwelling all his virtues are proved, and an
excellence discovered beyond even that which his disciples beheld, when
conversant with him upon earth. In short, there is an equality between
believers in the present time, and those who lived in the time of the
incarnation; for Christ, to a believing soul, is the same to-day that he
was yesterday and will be for ever.

Ye rejoice with joy unspeakable - Ye have unutterable happiness through
believing; and ye have the fullest, clearest, strongest evidence of
eternal glory. Though they did not see him on earth, and men could not
see him in glory, yet by that faith which is the evidence of things not
seen, and the subsistence of things hoped for, they had the very highest
persuasion of their acceptance with God, their relation to him as their
Father, and their sonship with Christ Jesus.

[1 Peter 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe1 1:9</span></span>

Receiving the end of your faith - Ye are put in possession of the
salvation of your souls, which was the thing presented to your faith,
when ye were called by the Gospel of Christ. Your faith has had a proper
issue, and has been crowned with a proper recompense. The word τελος,
end, is often used so as to imply the issue or reward of any labor or
action.

Salvation of your souls - The object of the Jewish expectations in their
Messiah was the salvation or deliverance of their bodies from a foreign
yoke; but the true Messiah came to save the soul from the yoke of the
devil and sin. This glorious salvation these believers had already
received.

[1 Peter 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 1:10</span></span>

Of which salvation the prophets have inquired - The incarnation and
suffering of Jesus Christ, and the redemption procured by him for
mankind, were made known, in a general way, by the prophets; but they
themselves did not know the time when these things were to take place,
nor the people among and by whom he was to suffer, etc.; they therefore
inquired accurately or earnestly, εξεζητησαν, and searched diligently,
εξηρευνησαν, inquiring of others who were then under the same
inspiration, and carefully searching the writings of those who had,
before their time, spoken of these things. The prophets plainly saw that
the grace which was to come under the Messiah's kingdom was vastly
superior to any thing that had ever been exhibited under the law; and in
consequence they made all possible inquiry, and searched as after grains
of gold, hidden among sand or compacted with ore, (for such is the
meaning of the original word), in order to ascertain the time, and the
signs of that time, in which this wondrous display of God's love and
mercy to man was to take place; but all that God thought fit to instruct
them in was what is mentioned [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012.md).

[1 Peter 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe1 1:11</span></span>

The glory that should follow - Not only the glory of his resurrection,
ascension, exaltation, and the effusion of his Spirit; but that grand
manifestation of God's infinite love to the world in causing the Gospel
of his Son to be everywhere preached, and the glorious moral changes
which should take place in the world under that preaching, and the final
glorification of all them who had here received the report, and
continued faithful unto death. And we may add to this the ineffable
glorification of the human nature of Jesus Christ, which, throughout
eternity, will be the glorious Head of his glorified body, the Church.

[1 Peter 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe1 1:12</span></span>

Unto whom it was revealed - We may presume that, in a great variety of
cases, the prophets did not understand the meaning of their own
predictions. They had a general view of God's designs; but of particular
circumstances, connected with those great events, they seem to have
known nothing, God reserving the explanation of all particulars to the
time of the issue of such prophecies. When they wished to find out the
times, the seasons, and the circumstances, God gave them to understand
that it was not for themselves, but for us, that they did minister the
things which are now reported unto us by the preaching of the Gospel.
This was all the satisfaction they received in consequence of their
earnest searching; and this was sufficient to repress all needless
curiosity, and to induce them to rest satisfied that the Judge of all
the earth would do right. If all succeeding interpreters of the
prophecies had been contented with the same information relative to the
predictions still unaccomplished, we should have had fewer books, and
more wisdom.

Angels desire to took into - Παρακυψαι· To stoop down to; the posture of
those who are earnestly intent on finding out a thing, especially a
writing difficult to be read; they bring it to the light, place it so
that the rays may fall on it as collectively as possible, and then stoop
down in order to examine all the parts, that they may be able to make
out the whole. There is evidently an allusion here to the attitude of
the cherubim who stood at the ends of the ark of the covenant, in the
inner tabernacle, with their eyes turned towards the mercy-seat or
propitiatory in a bending posture, as if looking attentively, or, as we
term it, poring upon it. Even the holy angels are struck with
astonishment at the plan of human redemption, and justly wonder at the
incarnation of that infinite object of their adoration. If then these
things be objects of deep consideration to the angels of God, how much
more so should they be to us; in them angels can have no such interest
as human beings have.

We learn from the above that it was the Spirit of Christ in the Jewish
prophets that prophesied of Christ; it was that Spirit which revealed
him; and it is the same Spirit which takes of the things of Christ, and
shows them unto us. Christ was never known by prophecy, but through his
own Spirit; and he never was known, nor can be known, to the salvation
of any soul, but by a revelation of the same Spirit. It is he alone that
bears witness with our spirits that we are the children of God.

[1 Peter 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 1:13</span></span>

Gird up the loins of your mind - Take courage from this display of God's
love now made known to you; and though you must expect trials, yet
fortify your minds with the consideration that he who has given you his
Son Jesus will withhold from you no manner of thing that is good. The
allusion here is to the long robes of the Asiatics, which, when they
were about to perform any active service, they tucked in their girdles:
this they did also when they waited on their superiors at meals.

Hope to the end for the grace - Continue to expect all that God has
promised, and particularly that utmost salvation, that glorification of
body and soul, which ye shall obtain at the revelation of Christ, when
he shall come to judge the world.

But if the apostle alludes here to the approaching revelation of Christ
to inflict judgment on the Jews for their final rebellion and obstinacy,
then the grace, χαριν, benefit, may intend their preservation from the
evils that were coming upon that people, and their wonderful escape from
Jerusalem at the time that the Roman armies came against it.

[1 Peter 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe1 1:14</span></span>

Not fashioning yourselves - As the offices of certain persons are known
by the garb or livery they wear, so are transgressors: where we see the
world's livery we see the world's servants; they fashion or habit
themselves according to their lusts, and we may guess that they have a
worldly mind by their conformity to worldly fashions.

[1 Peter 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe1 1:15</span></span>

But as he which hath called you - Heathenism scarcely produced a god
whose example was not the most abominable; their greatest gods,
especially, were paragons of impurity; none of their philosophers could
propose the objects of their adoration as objects of imitation. Here
Christianity has an infinite advantage over heathenism. God is holy, and
he calls upon all who believe in him to imitate his holiness; and the
reason why they should be holy is, that God who has called them is holy,
[Pe1 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#015.md).

[1 Peter 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 1:17</span></span>

And if ye call on the Father - Seeing ye invoke the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and your Father through Christ, and profess to be obedient
children, and sojourners here below for a short time only, see that ye
maintain a godly reverence for this Father, walking in all his
testimonies blameless.

Who without respect of persons - God is said to be no respecter of
persons for this reason among many others, that, being infinitely
righteous, he must be infinitely impartial. He cannot prefer one to
another, because he has nothing to hope or fear from any of his
creatures. All partialities among men spring from one or other of these
two principles, hope or fear; God can feel neither of them, and
therefore God can be no respecter of persons. He approves or disapproves
of men according to their moral character. He pities all, and provides
salvation for all, but he loves those who resemble him in his holiness;
and he loves them in proportion to that resemblance, i.e. the more of
his image he sees in any, the more he loves him; and e contra. And every
man's work will be the evidence of his conformity or nonconformity to
God, and according to this evidence will God judge him. Here, then, is
no respect of persons; God's judgment will be according to a man's work,
and a man's work or conduct will be according to the moral state of his
mind. No favouritism can prevail in the day of judgment; nothing will
pass there but holiness of heart and life. A righteousness imputed, and
not possessed and practiced, will not avail where God judgeth according
to every man's work. It would be well if those sinners and spurious
believers who fancy themselves safe and complete in the righteousness of
Christ, while impure and unholy in themselves, would think of this
testimony of the apostle.

[1 Peter 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe1 1:18</span></span>

Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things - To redeem, λυτροω,
signifies to procure life for a captive or liberty for a slave by paying
a price, and the precious blood of Christ is here stated to be the price
at which the souls of both Jews and Gentiles were redeemed; is was a
price paid down, and a price which God's righteousness required.

Corruptible things mean here any thing that man usually gives in
exchange for another; but the term necessarily includes all created
things, as all these are corruptible and perishing. The meaning of the
apostle is, evidently, that created things could not purchase the souls
of men, else the sacrifice of Christ had not been offered; could any
thing less have done, God would not have given up his only-begotten Son.
Even silver and gold, the most valuable medium of commerce among men,
bear no proportion in their value to the souls of a lost world, for
there should be a congruity between the worth of the thing purchased and
the valuable consideration which is given for it; and the laws and
customs of nations require this: on this ground, perishable things, or
things the value of which must be infinitely less than the worth of the
souls of men, cannot purchase those souls. Nothing, therefore, but such
a ransom price as God provided could be a sufficient ransom, oblation,
and satisfaction, for the sins of the world.

Vain conversation - Empty, foolish, and unprofitable conduct, full of
vain hopes, vain fears, and vain wishes.

Received by tradition from your fathers - The Jews had innumerable
burdens of empty ceremonies and useless ordinances, which they received
by tradition from their fathers, rabbins, or doctors. The Gentiles were
not less encumbered with such than the Jews; all were wedded to their
vanities, because they received them from their forefathers, as they had
done from theirs. And this antiquity and tradition have been the ground
work of many a vain ceremony and idle pilgrimage, and of numerous
doctrines which have nothing to plead in their behalf but this mere
antiquity. But such persons seem not to consider that error and sin are
nearly coeval with the world itself.

[1 Peter 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe1 1:19</span></span>

The precious blood of Christ - Τιμιῳ αἱματι· The valuable blood; how
valuable neither is nor could be stated.

As of a lamb - Such as was required for a sin-offering to God; and The
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world.

Without blemish - In himself, and without spot from the world; being
perfectly pure in his soul, and righteous in his life.

[1 Peter 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe1 1:20</span></span>

Who verily was foreordained - Προεγνωσμενου· Foreknown; appointed in the
Divine purpose to be sent into the world, because infinitely approved by
the Divine justice.

Before the foundation of the world - Before the law was given, or any
sacrifice prescribed by it. Its whole sacrificial system was appointed
in reference to this foreappointed Lamb, and consequently from him
derived all its significance and virtue. The phrase καταβολη κοσμου,
foundation of the world, occurs often in the New Testament, and is
supposed by some learned men and good critics to signify the
commencement of the Jewish state. Perhaps it may have this meaning in
[Mat 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035.md); [Luk
11:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#050.md); [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004.md); [Heb
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#003.md); [Heb
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026.md). But if we take it here in its
common signification, the creation of universal nature, then it shows
that God, foreseeing the fall and ruin of man, appointed the remedy that
was to cure the disease. It may here have a reference to the opinion of
the Jewish doctors, who maintain that seven things existed before the
creation of the world, one of which was the Messiah.

Last times - The Gospel dispensation, called the last times, as we have
often seen, because never to be succeeded by any other.

[1 Peter 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe1 1:21</span></span>

Who by him do believe in God - This is supposed to refer to the
Gentiles, who never knew the true God till they heard the preaching of
the Gospel: the Jews had known him long before, but the Gentiles had
every thing to learn when the first preachers of the Gospel arrived
amongst them.

Gave him glory - Raised him to his right hand, where, as a Prince and a
Savior, he gives repentance and remission of sins.

That your faith - In the fulfillment of all his promises, and your hope
of eternal glory, might be in God, who is unchangeable in his counsels,
and infinite in his mercies.

[1 Peter 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe1 1:22</span></span>

Seeing ye have purified your souls - Having purified your souls, in
obeying the truth - by believing in Christ Jesus, through the influence
and teaching of the Spirit; and giving full proof of it by unfeigned
love to the brethren; ye love one another, or ye will love each other,
with a pure heart fervently. These persons,

First, heard the truth, that is, the Gospel; thus called in a great
variety of places in the New Testament, because it contains The truth
without mixture of error, and is the truth and substance of all the
preceding dispensations by which it was typified.

Secondly, they obeyed that truth, by believing on Him who came into the
world to save sinners.

Thirdly, through this believing on the Son of God, their hearts were
purified by the word of truth applied to them by the Holy Spirit.

Fourthly, the love of God being shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy
Ghost, they loved the brethren with pure hearts fervently, εκτενως,
intensely or continually; the full proof that their brotherly love was
unfeigned, φιλαδελφιαν ανυποκριτον, a fraternal affection without
hypocrisy.

[1 Peter 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pe1 1:23</span></span>

Being born again - For being born of Abraham's seed will not avail to
the entering of the kingdom of heaven.

Not of corruptible seed - By no human generation, or earthly means; but
of incorruptible - a Divine and heavenly principle which is not liable
to decay, nor to be affected by the changes and chances to which all
sublunary things are exposed.

By the word of God - Δια λογου ζωντος Θεου· By the doctrine of the
living God, which remaineth for ever; which doctrine shall never change,
any more than the source shall whence it proceeds.

[1 Peter 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pe1 1:24</span></span>

For all flesh is as grass - Earthly seeds, earthly productions, and
earthly generations, shall fail and perish like as the grass and flowers
of the field; for the grass withereth, and the flower falleth off,
though, in the ensuing spring and summer, they may put forth new verdure
and bloom.

[1 Peter 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pe1 1:25</span></span>

But the word of the Lord - The doctrine delivered by God concerning
Christ endureth for ever, having, at all times and in all seasons, the
same excellence and the same efficacy.

And this is the word - Το ῥημα, What is spoken, by the Gospel preached
unto you. "This is a quotation from [Isa
40:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006.md), where the preaching of the
Gospel is foretold; and recommended from the consideration that every
thing which is merely human, and, among the rest, the noblest races of
mankind, with all their glory and grandeur, their honor, riches, beauty,
strength, and eloquence, as also the arts which men have invented, and
the works they have executed, shall decay as the flowers of the field.
But the Gospel, called by the prophet the word of the Lord, shall be
preached while the world standeth." - Macknight. All human schemes of
salvation, and plans for the melioration of the moral state of man,
shall come to naught; and the doctrine of Christ crucified, though a
stumbling block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles, shall be
alone the power of God for salvation to every soul that believeth.

As the apostle, on [Pe1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007.md), mentions
gold, and gold chemically examined and tried; and as this figure
frequently occurs in the sacred writings; I think it necessary to say
something here of the nature and properties of that metal.

Gold is defined by chemists to be the most perfect, the most ductile,
the most tenacious, and the most unchangeable of all metals. Its
specific gravity is about 19.3. A cubic foot of pure gold, cast and not
hammered, weighs 1348lbs. In its native state, without mixture, it is
yellow, and has no perceptible smell nor taste. When exposed to the
action of the fire it becomes red hot before it melts, but in melting
suffers no alteration; but if a strong heat be applied while in fusion,
it becomes of a beautiful green color. The continual action of any
furnace, howsoever long applied, has no effect on any of its properties.
It has been kept in a state of fusion for several months, in the furnace
of a glass house, without suffering the smallest change. The electric
and galvanic fluids inflame and convert it into a purple oxide, which is
volatilized in the form of smoke. In the focus of a very powerful
burning glass it becomes volatilized, and partially vitrified; so that
we may say with the apostle, that, though gold is tried by the fire -
abides the action of all culinary fires, howsoever applied, yet it
perisheth by the celestial fire and the solar influence; the rays of the
sun collected in the focus of a powerful burning glass, and the
application of the electric fluid, destroy its color, and alter and
impair all its properties. This is but a late discovery; and previously
to it a philosopher would have ridiculed St. Peter for saying, gold that
perisheth.

Gold is so very tenacious that a piece of it drawn into wire, one-tenth
of an inch in diameter, will sustain a weight of 500lbs. without
breaking.

One grain of gold may be so extended, by its great malleability, as to
be easily divided into two millions of parts; and a cubic inch of gold
into nine thousand, five hundred and twenty-three millions, eight
hundred and nine thousand, five hundred and twenty-three parts; each of
which may be distinctly seen by the naked eye!

A grain and a half of gold may be beaten into leaves of one inch square,
which, if intersected by parallel lines, drawn at right angles to each
other, and distant only the 100th part of an inch; will produce
twenty-five millions of little squares, each of which may be distinctly
seen without the help of glasses!

The surface of any given quantity of gold, according to Mr. Magellan,
may be extended by the hammer 159,092 times!

Eighty books, or two thousand leaves, of what is called leaf gold, each
leaf measuring 3.3 inches square, viz. each leaf containing 10.89 square
inches, weigh less than 384 grains; each book, therefore, or twenty-five
leaves, is equal to 272.25 inches, and weighs about 4.8 grains; so that
each grain of gold will produce 56.718, or nearly fifty-seven square
inches!

The thickness of the metal thus extended appears to be no more than the
one 282.020th of an inch! One pound, or sixteen ounces of gold, would be
sufficient to gild a silver wire, sufficient in length to encompass the
whole terraqueous globe, or to extend 25,000 miles!

Notwithstanding this extreme degree of tenuity, or thinness, which some
carry much higher, no pore can be discerned in it by the strongest
magnifying powers; nor is it pervious to the particles of light, nor can
the most subtile fluids pass through it. Its ductility has never yet
been carried to the uttermost pitch, and to human art and ingenuity is
probably unlimited.

Sulphur, in the state of a sulphuret, dissolves it; tin and lead greatly
impair its tenacity; and zinc hardens and renders it very brittle.
Copper heightens its color, and renders it harder, without greatly
impairing its ductility. It readily unites with iron, which it hardens
in a remarkable manner.

The oxigenated muriatic acid, and the nitro-muriatic acid, dissolve
gold. In this state it is capable of being applied with great success to
the gilding of steel. The process is very simple, and is instantaneously
performed, viz.: -

To a solution of gold in the nitro-muriatic acid add about twice the
quantity of sulphuric ether. In order to gild either iron or steel, let
the metal be well polished, the higher the better: the ether which has
taken up the gold may be applied by a camel hair pencil, or small brush;
the ether then evaporates, and the gold becomes strongly attached to the
surface of the metal. I have seen lancets, penknives, etc., gilded in a
moment, by being dipped in this solution. In this manner all kinds of
figures, letters, mottoes, etc., may be delineated on steel, by
employing a pen or fine brush.

The nitro-muriatic acid, formerly called aqua regia, is formed by adding
muriatic acid, vulgarly spirit of salt, to the nitric acid, formerly
aqua fortis. Two parts of the muriatic acid to one of the nitric
constitute this solvent of gold and platina, which is called the
nitro-muriatic acid.

Gold was considered the heaviest of all metals till the year 1748, when
the knowledge of platina was brought to Europe by Don Antonio Ulloa:
this, if it be a real metal, is the hardest and weightiest of all
others. The specific gravity of gold is, as we have seen, 19.3; that of
platina is from 20.6 to 23: but gold will ever be the most valuable of
all metals, not merely from its scarcity, but from its beautiful color
and great ductility, by which it is applicable to so many uses, and its
power of preserving its hue and polish without suffering the least
tarnish or oxidation from the action of the air.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 2](pe1002.md)

</div>
