<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2.md)  
  [Previous](pe2000)  [Next](pe2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

The apostolical address, and the persons to whom the epistle was sent
described by the state into which God had called, and in which he had
placed, them, [Pe2 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md). What graces
they should possess in order to be fruitful in the knowledge of God,
[Pe2 1:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005.md). The miserable state of
those who either have not these graces, or have fallen from them, [Pe2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009.md). Believers should give diligence
to make their calling and election sure, [Pe2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010.md), [Pe2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#011.md). The apostle's intimations of his
speedy dissolution, and his wish to confirm and establish those Churches
in the true faith, [Pe2 1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012.md). The
certainty of the Gospel, and the convincing evidence which the apostle
had of its truth from being present at the transfiguration, by which the
word of prophecy was made more sure, [Pe2
1:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md). How the prophecies came, and
their nature, [Pe2 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020.md), [Pe2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021.md).

[2 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 1:1</span></span>

Simon Peter - Symeon, Συμεων, is the reading of almost all the versions,
and of all the most important MSS. And this is the more remarkable, as
the surname of Peter occurs upwards of seventy times in the New
Testament, and is invariably read Σιμων, Simon, except here, and in [Act
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014.md), where James gives him the name
of Symeon. Of all the versions, only the Armenian and Vulgate have
Simon. But the edit. princ., and several of my own MSS. of the Vulgate,
write Symon; and Wiclif has Symont.

A servant - Employed in his Master's work.

And an apostle - Commissioned immediately by Jesus Christ himself to
preach to the Gentiles, and to write these epistles for the edification
of the Church. As the writer was an apostle, the epistle is therefore
necessarily canonical. All the MSS. agree in the title apostle; and of
the versions, only the Syriac omits it.

Precious faith - Ισοτιμον πιστιν· Valuable faith; faith worth a great
price, and faith which cost a great price. The word precious is used in
the low religious phraseology for dear, comfortable, delightful, etc.;
but how much is the dignity of the subject let down by expressions and
meanings more proper for the nursery than for the noble science of
salvation! It is necessary however to state, that the word precious
literally signifies valuable, of great price, costly; and was not used
in that low sense in which it is now employed when our translation was
made. That faith must be of infinite value, the grace of which Christ
purchased by his blood; and it must be of infinite value also when it is
the very instrument by which the soul is saved unto eternal life.

With us - God having given to you - believing Gentiles, the same faith
and salvation which he had given to us - believing Jews.

Through the righteousness of God - Through his method of bringing a lost
world, both Jews and Gentiles, to salvation by Jesus Christ; through his
gracious impartiality, providing for Gentiles as well as Jews. See the
notes on [Rom 3:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021) (note.md).

Of God and our Savior Jesus Christ - This is not a proper translation of
the original του Θεου ἡμων και σωτηρος Ιησου Χριστου, which is
literally, Of our God and Savior Jesus Christ; and this reading, which
is indicated in the margin, should have been received into the text; and
it is an absolute proof that St. Peter calls Jesus Christ God, even in
the properest sense of the word, with the article prefixed. It is no
evidence against this doctrine that one MS. of little authority, and the
Syriac and two Arabic versions have Κυριου, Lord, instead of Θεου, God,
as all other MSS. and versions agree in the other reading, as well as
the fathers. See in Griesbach.

[2 Peter 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 1:2</span></span>

Grace - God's favor; peace - the effects of that favor in the
communication of spiritual and temporal blessings.

Through the knowledge of God - Εν επιγνωσει· By the acknowledging of
God, and of Jesus our Lord. For those who acknowledge him in all their
ways, he will direct their steps. Those who know Christ; and do not
acknowledge him before men, can get no multiplication of grace and
peace.

[2 Peter 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 1:3</span></span>

As his Divine power - His power, which no power can resist, because it
is Divine - that which properly belongs to the infinite Godhead.

Hath given unto us - Δεδωρημενης· Hath endowed us with the gifts; or,
hath gifted us, as Dr. Macknight translates it, who observes that it
refers to the gifts which the Holy Spirit communicated to the apostles,
to enable them to bring men to life and godliness; which were,

1\. A complete knowledge of the doctrines of the Gospel.

2\. Power to preach and defend their doctrines in suitable language,
which their adversaries were not able to gainsay or resist.

3\. Wisdom to direct them how to behave in all cases, where and when to
labor; and the matter suitable to all different cases, and every variety
of persons.

4\. Miraculous powers, so that on all proper and necessary occasions
they could work miracles for the confirmation of their doctrines and
mission.

By life and godliness we may understand,

1\. a godly life; or,

2\. eternal life as the end, and godliness the way to it; or,

3\. what was essentially necessary for the present life, food, raiment,
etc., and what was requisite for the life to come.

As they were in a suffering state, and most probably many of them
strangers in those places, one can scarcely say that they had all things
that pertained to life; and yet so had God worked in their behalf, that
none of them perished, either through lack of food or raiment. And as to
what was necessary for godliness, they had that from the Gospel
ministry, which it appears was still continued among them, and the gifts
of the Holy Spirit which were not withdrawn; and what was farther
necessary in the way of personal caution, comfort, and instruction, was
supplied by means of these two epistles.

That hath called us to glory and virtue - To virtue or courage as the
means; and glory - the kingdom of heaven, as the end. This is the way in
which these words are commonly understood, and this sense is plain
enough, but the construction is harsh. Others have translated δια δοξης
και αρετης, by his glorious benignity, a Hebraism for δια της ενδοξου
αρετης· and read the whole verse thus: God by his own power hath
bestowed on us every thing necessary for a happy life and godliness,
having called us to the knowledge of himself, by his own infinite
goodness. It is certain that the word αρετη, which we translate virtue
or courage, is used, [Pe1 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md), to
express the perfection of the Divine nature: That ye may show forth τας
αρετας, the virtues or Perfections, of him who hath called you from
darkness into his marvellous light.

But there is a various reading here which is of considerable importance,
and which, from the authorities by which it is supported, appears to be
genuine: Του καλεσαντος ἡμας ιδια δοξῃ και αρετῃ, through the knowledge
of him who hath called us by his own glory and power, or by his own
glorious power. This is the reading of AC, several others; and, in
effect, of the Coptic, Armenian, Syriac, Ethiopic, Vulgate, Cyril,
Cassiodorus, etc.

[2 Peter 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 1:4</span></span>

Whereby are given unto us - By his own glorious power he hath freely
given unto us exceeding great and invaluable promises. The Jews were
distinguished in a very particular manner by the promises which they
received from God; the promises to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and the
prophets. God promised to be their God; to protect, support, and save
them; to give them what was emphatically called the promised land; and
to cause the Messiah to spring from their race. St. Peter intimates to
these Gentiles that God had also given unto them exceeding great
promises; indeed all that he had given to the Jews, the mere settlement
in the promised land excepted; and this also he had given in all its
spiritual meaning and force. And besides τα μεγιστα επαγγελματα, these
superlatively great promises, which distinguished the Mosaic
dispensation, he had given them τα τιμια επαγγελματα; the valuable
promises, those which came through the great price; enrolment with the
Church of God, redemption in and through the blood of the cross, the
continual indwelling influence of the Holy Ghost, the resurrection of
the body, and eternal rest at the right hand of God. It was of
considerable consequence to the comfort of the Gentiles that these
promises were made to them, and that salvation was not exclusively of
the Jews.

That by these ye might be partakers - The object of all God's promises
and dispensations was to bring fallen man back to the image of God,
which he had lost. This, indeed, is the sum and substance of the
religion of Christ. We have partaken of an earthly, sensual, and
devilish nature; the design of God by Christ is to remove this, and to
make us partakers of the Divine nature; and save us from all the
corruption in principle and fact which is in the world; the source of
which is lust, επιθυμια, irregular, unreasonable, in ordinate, and
impure desire; desire to have, to do, and to be, what God has
prohibited, and what would be ruinous and destructive to us were the
desire to be granted.

Lust, or irregular, impure desire, is the source whence all the
corruption which is in the world springs. Lust conceives and brings
forth sin; sin is finished or brought into act, and then brings forth
death. This destructive principle is to be rooted out; and love to God
and man is to be implanted in its place. This is every Christian's
privilege; God has promised to purify our hearts by faith; and that as
sin hath reigned unto death, even so shall grace reign through
righteousness unto eternal life; that here we are to be delivered out of
the hands of all our enemies, and have even "the thoughts of our hearts
so cleansed by the inspiration of God's Holy Spirit, that we shall
perfectly love him, and worthily magnify his holy name." This blessing
may be expected by those who are continually escaping, αποφυγοντες,
flying from, the corruption that is in the world and in themselves. God
purifies no heart in which sin is indulged. Get pardon through the blood
of the Lamb; feel your need of being purified in heart; seek that with
all your soul; plead the exceeding great and invaluable promises that
refer to this point; abhor your inward self; abstain from every
appearance of evil; flee from self and sin to God; and the very God of
peace will sanctify you through body, soul, and spirit, make you burning
and shining lights here below, (a proof that he can save to the
uttermost ail that come to him by Christ), and afterwards, having guided
you by his counsel through life, will receive you into his eternal
glory.

[2 Peter 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 1:5</span></span>

And beside this - Notwithstanding what God hath done for you, in order
that ye may not receive the grace of God in vain;

Giving all diligence - Furnishing all earnestness and activity: the
original is very emphatic.

Add to your faith - Επιχορηγησατε· Lead up hand in hand; alluding, as
most think, to the chorus in the Grecian dance, who danced with joined
hands. See the note on this word, [Co2
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#010) (note.md).

Your faith - That faith in Jesus by which ye have been led to embrace
the whole Gospel, and by which ye have the evidence of things unseen.

Virtue - Αρετην· Courage or fortitude, to enable you to profess the
faith before men, in these times of persecution.

Knowledge - True wisdom, by which your faith will be increased, and your
courage directed, and preserved from degenerating into rashness.

[2 Peter 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 1:6</span></span>

Temperance - A proper and limited use of all earthly enjoyments, keeping
every sense under proper restraints, and never permitting the animal
part to subjugate the rational.

Patience - Bearing all trials and difficulties with an even mind,
enduring in all, and persevering through all.

Godliness - Piety towards God; a deep, reverential, religious fear; not
only worshipping God with every becoming outward act, but adoring,
loving, and magnifying him in the heart: a disposition indispensably
necessary to salvation, but exceedingly rare among professors.

[2 Peter 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 1:7</span></span>

Brotherly kindness - Φιλαδελφιαν· Love of the brotherhood - the
strongest attachment to Christ's flock; feeling each as a member of your
own body.

Charity - Αγαπην· Love to the whole human race, even to your
persecutors: love to God and the brethren they had; love to all mankind
they must also have. True religion is neither selfish nor insulated;
where the love of God is, bigotry cannot exist. Narrow, selfish people,
and people of a party, who scarcely have any hope of the salvation of
those who do not believe as they believe, and who do not follow with
them, have scarcely any religion, though in their own apprehension none
is so truly orthodox or religious as themselves.

After αγαπην, love, one MS. adds these words, εν δε τη αγαπῃ την
παρακλησιν, and to this love consolation; but this is an idle and
useless addition.

[2 Peter 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 1:8</span></span>

For if these things be in you and abound - If ye possess all there
graces, and they increase and abound in your souls, they will make -
show, you to be neither αργους, idle, nor ακαρπους, unfruitful, in the
acknowledgment of our Lord Jesus Christ. The common translation is here
very unhappy: barren and unfruitful certainly convey the same ideas; but
idle or inactive, which is the proper sense of αργους, takes away this
tautology, and restores the sense. The graces already mentioned by the
apostle are in themselves active principles; he who was possessed of
them, and had them abounding in him, could not be inactive; and he who
is not inactive in the way of life must be fruitful. I may add, that he
who is thus active, and consequently fruitful, will ever be ready at all
hazard to acknowledge his Lord and Savior, by whom he has been brought
into this state of salvation.

[2 Peter 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 1:9</span></span>

But he that lacketh these things - He, whether Jew or Gentile, who
professes to have Faith in God, and has not added to that Faith
fortitude, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly
kindness, and universal love; is blind - his understanding is darkened,
and cannot see afar off, μυωπαζων, shutting his eyes against the light,
winking, not able to look truth in the face, nor to behold that God whom
he once knew was reconciled to him: and thus it appears he is wilfully
blind, and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins - has at
last, through his nonimprovement of the grace which he received from
God, his faith ceasing to work by love, lost the evidence of things not
seen; for, having grieved the Holy Spirit by not showing forth the
virtues of him who called him into his marvellous light, he has lost the
testimony of his sonship; and then, darkness and hardness having taken
place of light and filial confidence, he first calls all his former
experience into doubt, and questions whether he has not put enthusiasm
in the place of religion. By these means his darkness and hardness
increase, his memory becomes indistinct and confused, till at length he
forgets the work of God on his soul, next denies it, and at last asserts
that the knowledge of salvation, by the remission of sins, is
impossible, and that no man can be saved from sin in this life. Indeed,
some go so far as to deny the Lord that bought them; to renounce Jesus
Christ as having made atonement for them; and finish their career of
apostasy by utterly denying his Godhead. Many cases of this kind have I
known; and they are all the consequence of believers not continuing to
be workers together with God, after they had experienced his pardoning
love.

Reader, see that the light that is in thee become not darkness; for if
it do, how great a darkness!

[2 Peter 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 1:10</span></span>

Wherefore - Seeing the danger of apostasy, and the fearful end of them
who obey not the Gospel, and thus receive the grace of God in vain; give
all diligence, σπουδασατε, hasten, be deeply careful, labor with the
most intense purpose of soul.

To make your calling - From deep Gentile darkness into the marvellous
light of the Gospel.

And election - Your being chosen, in consequence of obeying the heavenly
calling, to be the people and Church of God. Instead of κλησιν, calling,
the Codex Alexandrinus has παρακλησιν, consolation.

Sure - Βεβαιαν· Firm, solid. For your calling to believe the Gospel, and
your election to be members of the Church of Christ, will be ultimately
unprofitable to you, unless you hold fast what you have received by
adding to your faith virtue, knowledge, temperance, etc.

For if ye do these things - If ye be careful and diligent to work out
your own salvation, through the grace which ye have already received
from God; ye shall never fall, ου μη πταισητε ποτε, ye shall at no time
stumble or fall; as the Jews have done, and lost their election, [Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011.md), where the same word is used,
and as apostates do, and lose their peace and salvation. We find,
therefore, that they who do not these things shall fall; and thus we see
that there is nothing absolute and unconditional in their election.
There is an addition here in some MSS. and versions which should not
pass unnoticed: the Codex Alexandrinus, nine others, with the Syriac,
Erpen's Arabic, Coptic, Ethiopic, Armenian, later Syriac with an
asterisk, the Vulgate, and Bede, have ινα δια των καλων (ὑμων) εργων,
That By (your) Good Works ye may make your calling and election firm.
This clause is found in the edition of Colinaeus, Paris, 1534, and has
been probably omitted by more recent editors on the supposition that the
edition does not make a very orthodox sense. But on this ground there
need be no alarm, for it does not state that the good works thus
required merit either the calling and election, or the eternal glory, of
God. He who does not by good works confirm his calling and election,
will soon have neither; and although no good works ever did purchase or
ever can purchase the kingdom of God, yet no soul can ever scripturally
expect to see God who has them not. I was hungry, and ye gave me no
meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: go, ye cursed. I was hungry, and
ye gave me meat; etc., etc.; come, ye blessed.

[2 Peter 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 1:11</span></span>

For so an entrance shall be ministered - If ye give diligence; and do
not fall, an abundant, free, honorable, and triumphant entrance shall be
ministered to you into the everlasting kingdom. There seems to be here
an allusion to the triumphs granted by the Romans to their generals who
had distinguished themselves by putting an end to a war, or doing some
signal military service to the state. (See the whole account of this
military pageant in the note on [Co2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014)..md) "Ye shall have a triumph, in
consequence of having conquered your foes, and led captivity captive."
Instead of everlasting kingdom, αιωνιον βασιλειαν, two MSS. have
επουρανιον, heavenly kingdom; and several MSS. omit the word και
Σωτηρος, and Savior.

[2 Peter 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 1:12</span></span>

Wherefore I will not be negligent - He had already written one epistle,
this is the second; and probably he meditated more should he be spared.
He plainly saw that there was no way of entering into eternal life but
that which he described from the 5th to the 10th verse; and although
they knew and were established in the present truth, yet he saw it
necessary to bring these things frequently to their recollection.

[2 Peter 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 1:13</span></span>

As long as I am in this tabernacle - By tabernacle we are to understand
his body; and hence several of the versions have σωματι, body, instead
of σκηνωματι, tabernacle. Peter's mode of speaking is very remarkable:
as long as I AM in this tabernacle, so then the body was not Peter, but
Peter dwelt in that body. Is not this a proof that St. Peter believed
his soul to be very distinct from his body? As a man's house is the
place where he dwells, so the body is the house where the soul dwells.

[2 Peter 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 1:14</span></span>

Knowing that shortly I must put off - St. Peter plainly refers to the
conversation between our Lord and himself, related [Joh
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md), [Joh
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019.md). And it is likely that he had
now a particular intimation that he was shortly to seal the truth with
his blood. But as our Lord told him that his death would take place when
he should be old, being aged now he might on this ground fairly suppose
that his departure was at hand.

[2 Peter 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 1:15</span></span>

Moreover, I will endeavor - And is not this endeavor seen in these two
epistles? By leaving these among them, even after his decease, they had
these things always in remembrance.

After my decease - Μετα την εμην εξοδον· After my going out, i.e. of his
tabernacle. The real Peter was not open to the eye, nor palpable to the
touch; he was concealed in that tabernacle vulgarly supposed to be
Peter. There is a thought very similar to this in the last conversation
of Socrates with his friends. As this great man was about to drink the
poison to which he was condemned by the Athenian judges, his friend
Crito said, "But how would you be buried? - Socrates: Just as you
please, if you can but catch me, and I do not elude your pursuit. Then,
gently smiling, he said: I cannot persuade Crito, ὡς εγω ειμι οὑτος ὁ
Σωκρατης ὁ νυνι διαλεγομενος, that I AM that Socrates who now converses
with you; but he thinks that I am he, ὁν οψεται ολιγον ὑστερον νεκρον,
και ερωτα πως εδι με θαπτειν, whom he shall shortly see dead; and he
asks how I would be buried? I have asserted that, after I have drunk the
poison, I should no longer remain with you, but shall depart to certain
felicities of the blessed." Platonis Phaedo, Oper., vol. i, edit.
Bipont., p 260.

[2 Peter 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 1:16</span></span>

Cunningly devised fables - Σεσοφισμενοις μυθοις. I think, with Macknight
and others, from the apostle's using εποπται, eye witnesses, or rather
beholders, in the end of the verse, it is probable that he means those
cunningly devised fables among the heathens, concerning the appearance
of their gods on earth in human form. And to gain the greater credit to
these fables, the priests and statesmen instituted what they called the
mysteries of the gods, in which the fabulous appearance of the gods was
represented in mystic shows. But one particular show none but the fully
initiated were permitted to behold; hence they were entitled εποπται,
beholders. This show was probably some resplendent image of the god,
imitating life, which, by its glory, dazzled the eyes of the beholders,
while their ears were ravished by hymns sung in its praise; to this it
was natural enough for St. Peter to allude, when speaking about the
transfiguration of Christ. Here the indescribably resplendent majesty of
the great God was manifested, as far as it could be, in conjunction with
that human body in which the fullness of the Divinity dwelt. And we,
says the apostle, were εποπται, beholders, της εκεινου μεγαλειοτητος, of
his own majesty. Here was no trick, no feigned show; we saw him in his
glory whom thousands saw before and afterwards; and we have made known
to you the power and coming, παρουσιαν, the appearance and presence, of
our Lord Jesus; and we call you to feel the exceeding greatness of this
power in your conversion, and the glory of this appearance in his
revelation by the power of his Spirit to your souls. These things we
have witnessed, and these things ye have experienced: and therefore we
can confidently say that neither you nor we have followed cunningly
devised fables, but that blessed Gospel which is the power of God to the
salvation of every one that believes.

[2 Peter 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 1:17</span></span>

For he received honor and glory - In his transfiguration our Lord
received from the Father honor in the voice or declaration which said,
This is my Son, the beloved One, in whom I have delighted. And he
received glory, when, penetrated with, and involved in, that excellent
glory, the fashion of his countenance was altered, for his face did
shine as the sun, and his raiment was white and glistening, exceeding
white like snow; which most glorious and preternatural appearance was a
confirmation of the supernatural voice, as the voice was of this
preternatural appearance: and thus his Messiahship was attested in the
most complete and convincing manner.

[2 Peter 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 1:18</span></span>

And this voice - we heard - That is, himself, James, and John heard it,
and saw this glory; for these only were the εποπται, beholders, on the
holy mount. It is worthy of remark that our blessed Lord, who came to
give a new law to mankind, appeared on this holy mount with splendor and
great glory, as God did when he came on the holy mount, Sinai, to give
the old law to Moses. And when the voice came from the excellent glory,
This is my Son, the beloved One, in whom I have delighted; hear him: the
authority of the old law was taken away. Neither Moses nor Elijah, the
law nor the prophets, must tabernacle among men, as teaching the whole
way of salvation, and affording the means of eternal life; these things
they had pointed out, but these things they did not contain; yet the
fulfillment of their types and predictions rendered their declarations
more firm and incontestable. See below.

[2 Peter 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe2 1:19</span></span>

We have also a more sure word of prophecy - Εχομεν βεβαιοτερον τον
προφητικον λογον· We have the prophetic doctrine more firm or more
confirmed; for in this sense the word βεβαιοω is used in several places
in the New Testament. See [Co1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006.md) :
Even as the testimony of Christ εβεβαιωθη, was Confirmed, among you.
[Co2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021.md) : Now he which stablisheth
us, ὁ δε βεβαιων ἡμας, who Confirmeth Us. [Col
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#007.md) : Rooted and built up in him, and
established in the faith, βεβαιουμενοι, Confirmed in the faith. [Heb
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003.md) : How shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation ἡτις εβεβαιωτη, which was Confirmed to us.
[Heb 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016.md) : And an oath, εις
βεβαιωσιν, for Confirmation. This is the literal sense of the passage in
question; and this sense removes that ambiguity from the text which has
given rise to so many different interpretations. Taken according to the
common translation, it seems to say that prophecy is a surer evidence of
Divine revelation than miracles; and so it has been understood. The
meaning of the apostle appears to be this: The law and the prophets have
spoken concerning Jesus Christ, and Isaiah has particularly pointed him
out in these words: Behold my servant whom I uphold, my Chosen in Whom
My Soul Delighteth; I have put my Spirit upon him, and he shall bring
forth judgment to the Gentiles; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and Them That Sit in Darkness out of the
prison house, [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md), [Isa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007.md). Now both at his baptism, [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017.md), and at his transfiguration,
Jesus Christ was declared to be this chosen person, God's only Son, the
beloved One in Whom He Delighted. The voice, therefore, from heaven, and
the miraculous transfiguration of his person, have confirmed the
prophetic doctrine concerning him. And to this doctrine, thus confirmed,
ye do well to take heed; for it is that light that shines in the dark
place - in the Gentile world, as well as among the Jews; giving light to
them that sit in darkness, and bringing the prisoners out of the prison
house: and this ye must continue to do till the day of his second, last,
and most glorious appearing to judge the world comes; and the day star,
φωσφορος, this light-bringer, arise in your hearts - manifest himself to
your eternal consolation. Or perhaps the latter clause of the verse
might be thus understood: The prophecies concerning Jesus, which have
been so signally confirmed to us on the holy mount, have always been as
a light shining in a dark place, from the time of their delivery to the
time in which the bright day of Gospel light and salvation dawned forth,
and the Son of righteousness has arisen in our souls, with healing in
his rays. And to this all who waited for Christ's appearing have taken
heed. The word φωσφορος, phosphorus, generally signified the planet
Venus, when she is the morning star; and thus she is called in most
European nations.

[2 Peter 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 1:20</span></span>

Knowing this first - Considering this as a first principle, that no
prophecy of the Scripture, whether that referred to above, or any other,
is of any private interpretation - proceeds from the prophet's own
knowledge or invention, or was the offspring of calculation or
conjecture. The word επιλυσις signifies also impetus, impulse; and
probably this is the best sense here; not by the mere private impulse of
his own mind.

[2 Peter 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe2 1:21</span></span>

For the prophecy came not in old time - That is, in any former time, by
the will of man - by a man's own searching, conjecture, or calculation;
but holy men of God - persons separated from the world, and devoted to
God's service, spake, moved by the Holy Ghost. So far were they from
inventing these prophetic declarations concerning Christ, or any future
event, that they were φερομενοι, carried away, out of themselves and out
of the whole region, as it were, of human knowledge and conjecture, by
the Holy Ghost, who, without their knowing any thing of the matter,
dictated to them what to speak, and what to write; and so far above
their knowledge were the words of the prophecy, that they did not even
know the intent of those words, but searched what, or what manner of
time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it
testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow. See [Pe1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011.md), [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012.md), and the notes there.

1\. As the writer of this epistle asserts that he was on the holy mount
with Christ when he was transfigured, he must be either Peter, James, or
John, for there was no other person present on that occasion except
Moses and Elijah, in their glorious bodies. The epistle was never
attributed to James nor John; but the uninterrupted current, where its
Divine inspiration was granted, gave it to Peter alone. See the preface.

2\. It is not unfrequent for the writers of the New Testament to draw a
comparison between the Mosaic and Christian dispensations; and the
comparison generally shows that, glorious as the former was, it had no
glory in comparison of the glory that excelleth. St. Peter seems to
touch here on the same point; the Mosaic dispensation, with all the
light of prophecy by which it was illustrated, was only as a lamp
shining in a dark place. There is a propriety and delicacy in this image
that are not generally noticed: a lamp in the dark gives but a very
small portion of light, and only to those who are very near to it; yet
it always gives light enough to make itself visible, even at a great
distance; though it enlightens not the space between it and the
beholder, it is still literally the lamp shining in a dark place. Such
was the Mosaic dispensation; it gave a little light to the Jews, but
shone not to the Gentile world, any farther than to make itself visible.
This is compared with the Gospel under the emblem of daybreak, and the
rising of the sun. When the sun is even eighteen degrees below the
horizon daybreak commences, as the rays of light begin then to diffuse
themselves in our atmosphere, by which they are reflected upon the
earth. By this means a whole hemisphere is enlightened, though but in a
partial degree; yet this increasing every moment, as the sun approaches
the horizon, prepares for the full manifestation of his resplendent orb:
so the ministry of John Baptist, and the initiatory ministry of Christ
himself, prepared the primitive believers for his full manifestation on
the day of pentecost and afterwards. Here the sun rose in his strength,
bringing light, heat, and life to all the inhabitants of the earth. So
far, then, as a lantern carried in a dark night differs from and is
inferior to the beneficial effects of daybreak, and the full light and
heat of a meridian sun; so far was the Mosaic dispensation, in its
beneficial effects, inferior to the Christian dispensation.

3\. Perhaps there is scarcely any point of view in which we can consider
prophecy which is so satisfactory and conclusive as that which is here
stated; that is, far from inventing the subject of their own
predictions, the ancient prophets did not even know the meaning of what
themselves wrote. They were carried beyond themselves by the influence
of the Divine Spirit, and after ages were alone to discover the object
of the prophecy; and the fulfillment was to be the absolute proof that
the prediction was of God, and that it was of no private invention - no
discovery made by human sagacity and wisdom, but by the especial
revelation of the all-wise God. This is sufficiently evident in all the
prophecies which have been already fulfilled, and will be equally so in
those yet to be fulfilled; the events will point out the prophecy, and
the prophecy will be seen to be fulfilled in that event.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 2](pe2002.md)

</div>
