<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](phi003)  [Next](col000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 4:0</span></span>

The apostle exhorts them to stand fast in the Lord, [Phi
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001). And beseeches Euodias and
Syntyche to be of one mind in Divine things, [Phi
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002). And requests his true yokefellow
to help them to a good understanding, [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003). Gives them directions concerning
their temper and frame of mind, [Phi
4:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004). And how to act in all respects
as becomes the purity and excellence of the Gospel, as they had heard
from and seen in him, [Phi 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008), [Phi
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009). Thanks them for their attention
to him in his captivity, in sending him what was necessary for his
support, though he had learned to be contented in all situations in
life, [Phi 4:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010). Mentions
particular cases in which they had ministered to him; promises them,
through the riches of glory in Christ, a supply of all their spiritual
wants; and renders thanks to God, [Phi
4:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015). Salutes all the saints, and
those particularly of the emperor's household, [Phi
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#021), [Phi
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022). And concludes with his usual
apostolical benediction, [Phi 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#023).

[Philippians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">phi 4:1</span></span>

Therefore, my - beloved - Because ye have this armor, and those enemies,
and God for your support, see that ye stand fast in him. This verse most
unquestionably belongs to the preceding chapter.

[Philippians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">phi 4:2</span></span>

I beseech Euodias, and beseech Syntyche - These were two pious women, as
it is generally supposed, who were deaconesses in the Church at
Philippi, and who in some points of doctrine and discipline had
disagreed. He exhorts them to be of the same mind, that is, to compose
their differences; and, if they could not perfectly agree to think and
let think, and to avoid all public opposition, as their dissension would
strengthen the hands of the common enemy, and stumble those who were
weak. But it is more likely that Euodias was a woman, and Syntyche a
man, and probably the husband of Euodias; and that it is Syntyche whom
the apostle calls true yokefellow in the next verse.

[Philippians 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">phi 4:3</span></span>

Help those women which labored with me - Both in the Grecian and Asiatic
countries women were kept much secluded, and is was not likely that even
the apostles had much opportunity of conversing with them; it was
therefore necessary that they should have some experienced Christian
women with them, who could have access to families, and preach Jesus to
the female part of them. The apostle tells us that certain women labored
with him in the Gospel, and were assistants to others also who had
assisted him.

Some think the women here were Euodias and Syntyche; but I rather
incline to the opinion that Syntyche was a male, and Euodias his wife.
Euodias signifies a pleasant scent; Syntyche, fortunate. There have been
a number of conjectures who these persons were, and who is meant by the
true yokefellow; but as there is nothing certain known on the subject,
it is useless to propagate conjecture.

With Clement also - Supposed to be the same who was afterwards bishop of
Rome, and who wrote an epistle to the Corinthians, which is still
extant.

Whose names are in the book of life - Who are genuine Christians; who
are enlisted or enrolled in the armies of the Lord, and have received a
title to eternal glory. The reader is requested to refer to the note on
[Exo 32:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032) (note), and the
concluding observations at the end of that chapter, ([Exo
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#035) (note)) where the writing in and
blotting out of the book of life are particularly considered, and the
difficulties on the subject removed. See also on [Luk
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020) (note).

[Philippians 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">phi 4:4</span></span>

Rejoice in the Lord alway - Be continually happy; but this happiness you
can find only in the Lord. Genuine happiness is spiritual; as it can
only come from God, so it infallibly tends to him. The apostle repeats
the exhortation, to show, not only his earnestness, but also that it was
God's will that it should be so, and that it was their duty as well as
interest.

[Philippians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">phi 4:5</span></span>

Let your moderation be known - The word επιεικες is of very extensive
signification; it means the same as επιεικεια, mildness, patience,
yieldingness, gentleness, clemency, moderation, unwillingness to
litigate or contend; but moderation is expressive enough as a general
term. "Moderation," says Dr. Macknight, "means meekness under
provocation, readiness to forgive injuries, equity in the management of
business, candour in judging of the characters and actions of others,
sweetness of disposition, and the entire government of the passions."

The Lord is at hand - A phrase something similar to the Maranatha of
[Co1 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022) : The Lord is Judge, and is
at hand to punish. Schoettgen supposes, from this verse, taken in
connection with the preceding, that Euodias and Syntyche were of a
quarrelsome disposition; and hence the exhortation and threatening in
the third and fifth verses.

[Philippians 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">phi 4:6</span></span>

Be careful for nothing - Μηδεν μεριμνατε· Be not anxiously solicitous;
do not give place to carking care, let what will occur; for anxiety
cannot chance the state or condition of any thing from bad to good, but
will infallibly injure your own souls.

By prayer and supplication - God alone can help you; he is disposed to
do it, but you must ask by prayer and supplication; without this he has
not promised to help you.

By prayer - solemn application to God from a sense of want.

Supplication - continuance in earnest prayer. With thanksgiving, for
innumerable favors already received; and for dangers, evils, and deaths
turned aside. And let your souls be found in this exercise, or in the
disposition in which this exercise can be performed, at all times, on
all occasions, and in all places.

[Philippians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">phi 4:7</span></span>

And the peace of God - That harmonizing of all passions and appetites
which is produced by the Holy Spirit, and arises from a sense of pardon
and the favor of God;

Shall keep your hearts - Φρουρησει· Shall keep them as in a strong place
or castle. Your hearts - the seat of all your affections and passions,
and minds - your understanding, judgment, and conscience through Christ
Jesus; by whom ye were brought into this state of favor, through whom ye
are preserved in it, and in whom ye possess it; for Christ keeps that
heart in peace in which he dwells and rules. This peace passeth all
understanding; it is of a very different nature from all that can arise
from human occurrences; it is a peace which Christ has purchased, and
which God dispenses; it is felt by all the truly godly, but can be
explained by none; it is communion with the Father, and his Son Jesus
Christ, by the power and influence of the Holy Ghost.

[Philippians 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">phi 4:8</span></span>

Finally, brethren - The object of the apostle is to recommend holiness
and righteousness to them in every point of view; and to show that the
Gospel of Christ requires all its professors to have the mind that was
in Christ, and to walk as he himself also walked. That they were not to
attend to one branch of righteousness or virtue only, but to every thing
by which they might bring honor to God, good to their fellow creatures,
and credit to themselves.

Whatsoever things are true - Ὁσα - αληθη· All that is agreeable to
unchangeable and eternal truth. Whether that which is to be learned from
the nature and state of created things, or that which comes immediately
from God by revelation.

Whatsoever things are honest - Ὁσα σεμνα· Whatever is grave, decent, and
venerable. Whatever becomes you as men, as citizens, and as Christians.

Whatsoever things are just - Ὁσα δικαια· Whatsoever is agreeable to
justice and righteousness. All that ye owe to God, to your neighbor, and
to yourselves.

Whatsoever things are pure - Ὁσα ἁγνα· Whatsoever is chaste. In
reference to the state of the mind, and to the acts of the body.

Whatsoever things are lovely - Ὁσα προσφιλη· Whatsoever is amiable on
its own account and on account of its usefulness to others, whether in
your conduct or conversation.

Whatsoever things are of good report - Ὁσα ευφημα· Whatsoever things the
public agree to acknowledge as useful and profitable to men; such as
charitable institutions of every kind, in which genuine Christians
should ever take the lead.

If there be any virtue - If they be calculated to promote the general
good of mankind, and are thus praiseworthy;

Think on these things - Esteem them highly, recommend them heartily, and
practice them fervently.

Instead of ει τις επαινος, if there be any praise, several eminent MSS.,
as D\*EFG, add επιστημης, of knowledge; and the Vulgate and the Itala
have disciplinae, of discipline; but none of these appear to be an
original reading.

[Philippians 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">phi 4:9</span></span>

Those things, which ye have - learned - From my preaching and writing;

And received - By faith, as a revelation from God;

And heard - From my preaching, and that of those who labored with me;
and heard from me, in my private communications with you; and heard of
me from other Churches;

And seen in me - While living and labouring among you;

Do - Take them for the rule of your faith and practice.

And the God of peace - He who is the author of peace, the lover of
peace, and the maintainer of peace; he who has made peace between heaven
and earth, by the mission and sacrifice of his Son, shall be ever with
you while you believe and act as here recommended.

[Philippians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">phi 4:10</span></span>

But I rejoiced in the Lord - Every good comes from God, either
immediately from his providence or from his grace; therefore the apostle
thanks God for the kindness of the Philippians towards him; for it was
God that gave them the power, and directed their hearts to use it.

Hath flourished again - They had helped him before, [Phi
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025); they had ceased for a time, and
now they began again. This is evidently designed by the apostle, as the
word ανεθαλετε implies, which is a metaphor taken from the reviviscence
of flowers in spring which seemed dead in winter. For the time in which
they were apparently remiss he makes a delicate apology: Ye were
careful, but ye lacked opportunity; or rather ηκαιρεισθε, ye had not
ability, ye wanted the means; as the word sometimes implies.

[Philippians 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">phi 4:11</span></span>

Not that I speak in respect of want - I am quite unconcerned in this
respect; leaving the whole of my support, while bound for the testimony
of Jesus, to the providence of God.

For I have learned - I am so satisfied with the wise providence and
goodness of God, that I know whatever he determines is the best; and
therefore I am perfectly contented that he should govern the world in
that way which seems best to his godly wisdom. How true is the proverb,
A contented mind is a continual feast! What do we get by murmuring and
complaining?

[Philippians 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">phi 4:12</span></span>

I know - how to be abased - I have passed through all these states; I
know how to conduct myself in each, and how to extract good from all.
And he had passed through these things, especially the hardships, so
that he had learned the lesson perfectly, as the word μεμυημαι implies;
he was thoroughly instructed; fully initiated into all the mysteries of
poverty and want, and of the supporting hand of God in the whole. See
here the state to which God permitted his chief apostle to be reduced!
And see how powerfully the grace of Christ supported him under the
whole! How few of those who are called Christian ministers or Christian
men have learned this important lesson! When want or affliction comes,
their complaints are loud and frequent; and they are soon at the end of
their patience.

[Philippians 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">phi 4:13</span></span>

I can do all things - It was not a habit which he had acquired by
frequent exercise, it was a disposition which he had by grace; and he
was enabled to do all by the power of an indwelling Christ. Through Him
who strengtheneth me is the reading of some of the best MSS., versions,
and fathers; the word Χριστῳ, Christ, being omitted.

[Philippians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">phi 4:14</span></span>

Ye have well done - Though I have learned all these important lessons,
and am never miserable in want, yet ye have done well in sending me
relief in the time of affliction.

[Philippians 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">phi 4:15</span></span>

In the beginning of the Gospel - When, having preached to you, I went
forth into Macedonia, I received help from none of the Churches which I
had founded, but from you alone. I received nothing from any others, and
nothing was offered me.

[Philippians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">phi 4:16</span></span>

For even in Thessalonica - While labouring to plant the Church there, he
was supported partly by working with his hands, [Th1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009); [Th2
3:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#007); and partly by the contributions
sent him from Philippi. Even the Thessalonians had contributed little to
his maintenance: this is not spoken to their credit.

[Philippians 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">phi 4:17</span></span>

Not because I desire a gift - I do not speak thus to incite you to send
me a farther gift; I speak this on the general subject, because I wish
you to bear such fruit as shall abound to your account in the day of the
Lord.

[Philippians 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">phi 4:18</span></span>

I have all - Ye have now sent me so much by Epaphroditus, that I abound
in all the necessaries of life.

Having received - the things - Probably a supply of clothes and such
like necessaries, as well as of money.

An odor of a sweet smell - Alluding to the sacrifices offered up under
the law. With what ye have done to me, his servant, God is well pleased.
See [Eph 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002), and the note there.

[Philippians 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">phi 4:19</span></span>

My God shall supply all your need - As you have given to me in my
distress, God will never suffer you to want without raising up help to
you, as he raised you up for help to me.

According to his riches - His fullness is infinite; and through Christ,
whose followers we are, he will dispense every requisite blessing of
providence, grace, and glory, to you.

[Philippians 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">phi 4:20</span></span>

Now unto God and our Father - God is our Father in Christ Jesus; and
such pity as a father hath for his children, such has the Lord for them
that fear him; as a father is concerned for the support and life of his
children, so is God concerned for you. A father may be poor, and unable
to help his most beloved children; God, your Father, is infinite in his
riches of his grace and glory, and out of his abundance we have all
received, and grace for grace. Therefore, to God our Father, be glory
for ever and ever!

[Philippians 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">phi 4:21</span></span>

Salute every saint - Remember to present my affectionate wishes to every
Christian at Philippi.

The brethren which are with me - Those who were fellow laborers with
him, generally supposed to be Aristarchus, Mark, Justus, Epaphras, Luke,
and Demas. See the end of the epistles to the Colossians, ([Col
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017) (note) and to Philemon ([Plm
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#025) (note)).

[Philippians 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">phi 4:22</span></span>

All the saints - All the Christians now at Rome.

They that are of Caesar's household - Nero was at this time emperor of
Rome: a more worthless, cruel, and diabolic wretch never disgraced the
name or form of man; yet in his family there were Christians: but
whether this relates to the members of the imperial family, or to
guards, or courtiers, or to servants, we cannot tell. If even some of
his slaves were converted to Christianity, it would he sufficiently
marvellous. Converts to Christianity in this family there certainly
were; and this shows how powerfully the Divine word had been preached
and spread. That the Empress Poppaea may have been favourably inclined
to Christianity is possible; for Josephus relates of her, Antiq., lib.
xx. cap. 7: Θεοσεβης γαρ ην· She was a worshipper of the true God; it is
not likely, therefore, that she threw any hinderances in the way of her
servants who might wish to embrace the Christian faith. St. Jerome, in
Philemon, states that St. Paul had converted many in Caesar's family; A
Caesare missus in carcerem, notior familiae ejus factus, persecutoris
Christi domum fecit ecclesiam.

"Being by the emperor cast into prison, he became the more known to his
family, and he turned the house of Christ's persecutor into a church."
Some imagine that Seneca, the preceptor of Nero and the poet Lucan, were
converted by St. Paul; and there are still extant, and in a MS. now
before me, letters which profess to have passed between Paul and Seneca;
but they are worthy of neither. They have been printed in some editions
of Seneca's works. See the remarks below.

[Philippians 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">phi 4:23</span></span>

The grace of our Lord - The usual apostolical benediction, which has
often occurred, and been more than once explained. See on [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007) (note), and [Gal
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#018) (note). The word ἡμων, our, is
omitted by many MSS. and several versions, which simply read, The grace
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Be with you all - Instead of παντων, all, Πνευματος, Spirit, is the
reading of ADEFG, several others, with the Coptic, Sahidic, Ethiopic,
Armenian, Vulgate, and Itala; besides several of the Fathers.

There are various subscriptions to this epistle in the different MSS.
and versions. In the common Greek text it stands thus: It was written to
the Philippians from Rome by Epaphroditus. The Epistle to the
Philippians was written from Rome, and sent by Epaphroditus. - Syriac.
To the Philippians. - Aethiopic. The end of the Epistle; it was written
at Rome, and sent by Epaphroditus. - Arabic. To the Philippians by
Timothy and Epaphroditus. - Coptic.

1\. The MSS. generally agree with the versions, and all unite in stating
that this epistle was written and sent from Rome, so that the common
subscription may well stand. Yet there have been some strong objections
made against this, as far as the place is concerned. Some foreign
critics have maintained, that were it to be granted that the apostle was
now a prisoner for the testimony of Christ, yet it does not follow that
he was a prisoner at Rome, for he himself tells us, [Co2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023), that he was in prisons more
abundant; and, consequently, he might be in prison somewhere else: but
they have gone farther, and denied that this epistle was written while
Paul was a prisoner; affirming that he had been already liberated, and
that of this there are several evidences in the epistle itself. J.
Christopher Wolf, in his Curae, has considered all these objections in
detail, and appears to have answered them in a very satisfactory manner.
That St. Paul was now in prison, these words seem clearly to prove, [Phi
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#016) : - The one preach Christ of
contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds. This
strongly argues that he was then suffering imprisonment, and that
certain persons of perverse minds preached the Gospel in such a way as
was calculated to make his bonds still more grievous. And, as he sends
the salutations of saints which were of Caesar's household, it seems
most evident that he was then at Rome; as, had he been a prisoner in any
of the provinces, it is not likely that he would send to Philippi the
greetings of those who lived at Rome.

2\. The cause of this imprisonment has been variously understood.
Theodorus Metochita says it was in consequence of his having converted
Nero's baker, and one of his concubines; at which the emperor, being
enraged, ordered him to be cast into prison: but the authority on which
this rests is scarcely sufficient to render it credible.

3\. Paul is generally allowed to have been twice imprisoned at Rome:
this was, without doubt, the first time of his being there in bonds, as
there is every appearance that he was delivered after this; but his
second imprisonment issued in his martyrdom. Every apostle of God is
immortal till his work is done. Paul became a martyr when God saw that
there was no farther need either for his preaching or his writing; he
had kept and defended the faith, and had finished his course; God took
him then from the evil to come; and crowned him with the glory which his
Redeemer had provided for him, in reference to which he lived, and after
which he had continually aspired.

4\. Reader, be thankful to God, who, in pity to thy weakness, has called
thee to believe and enjoy, and not to suffer for his sake. It is not for
us to covet seasons of martyrdom; we find it difficult to be faithful
even in ordinary trials: yet, as offenses may come, and times of sore
trial and proof may occur, we should be prepared for them; and we should
know that nothing less than Christ in us, the hope of glory, will enable
us to stand in the cloudy and dark day. Let us, therefore, put on the
whole armor of God; and, fighting under the Captain of our salvation,
expect the speedy destruction of every inward foe; and triumph in the
assurance that death, the last enemy, will, in his destructions, shortly
be brought to a perpetual end. Hallelujah! The Lord God Omnipotent
reigneth. Amen and Amen!

Finished correction for the press, Dec. 16th, 1831. - A. C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Introduction](col000)

</div>
