<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philemon Index](plm.md)  
  [Previous](plm000)  [Next](heb000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

Paul's salutation to Philemon, and the Church at his house, [Plm
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md). He extols his faith, love, and
Christian charity, [Plm 1:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#004.md).
Entreats forgiveness for his servant Onesimus, [Plm
1:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#008.md). Urges motives to induce
Philemon to forgive him, [Plm 1:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#015.md).
Promises to repair any wrong he had done to his master, [Plm
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018.md), [Plm
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019.md). Expresses his confidence that
Philemon will comply with his request, [Plm
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#020.md), [Plm
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#021.md). Directs Philemon to prepare him
a lodging, [Plm 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#022.md). Salutations and
apostolical benediction, [Plm 1:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#023.md).

[Philemon 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">plm 1:1</span></span>

Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ - It has already been noted, in the
preface, that Paul was a prisoner at Rome when he wrote this epistle,
and those to the Colossians and Philippians. But some think that the
term prisoner does not sufficiently point out the apostle's state, and
that the original word δεσμιος should be translated bound with a chain:
this is certainly its meaning; and it shows us in some measure his
circumstances - one arm was bound with a chain to the arm of the soldier
to whose custody he had been delivered.

It has also been remarked that Paul does not call himself an apostle
here, because the letter was a letter of friendship, and on private
concerns. But the MSS. are not entirely agreed on this subject. Two MSS.
have δουλος, a servant; the Codex Claromontanus and the Codex
Sangermanensis, both in the Greek and Latin, have αποστολος, apostle;
and Cassiodorus has αποστολος δεσμιος, Paul, an imprisoned apostle of
Jesus Christ. They, however, generally agree in the omission of the word
αποστολος.

Unto Philemon our dearly beloved - There is a peculiarity in the use of
proper names in this epistle which is not found in any other part of St.
Paul's writings. The names to which we refer are Philemon, Apphia,
Archippus, and Onesimus.

Philemon, Φιλημων. Affectionate or beloved, from φιλημα, a kiss; this
led the apostle to say: To Philemon our Dearly Beloved.

[Philemon 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">plm 1:2</span></span>

Apphia. Απφια. Under the word Απφα Suidas says: Αδελφης και αδελφου
ὑπακορισμα· Appha is the affectionate address of a brother or sister; or
the diminutive of a brother and sister, used to express kindness and
affection. Hence the apostle, referring to the meaning of the word,
says: Και Απφιᾳ τῃ αδελφῃ αγαπητῃ· And to Apphia the beloved sister.
Though αδελφῃ, sister, be not in our common text, it is found in
AD\*EFG, several others, the Itala, Vulgate, Slavonic, etc.; and is
undoubtedly genuine.

Archippus, Αρχιππος. The ruler or master of the horse; from αρχων, a
chief, and ἱππος, a horse. Heroes of old were, both among the Greeks and
Trojans, celebrated for their skill in managing and taming the horse,
and employing him in war; this frequently occurs in Homer. The import of
the name of Archippus might suggest this idea to the apostle's mind, and
lead him to say: Archippus our Fellow Soldier.

Suidas mentions a person of this name, who was once victor at the games,
in the ninety-first Olympiad.

There was one of the pupils of Pythagoras of this name; and I introduce
him here for the sake of a quotation from St. Jerome, (Apol. adv.
Ruffin.), relative to the doctrines taught by him and his fellow
disciple, Lysis: Φευκτεον πανταπασι και εκκοπτεον ασθενειαν μεν του
σωματος, απαιδευσιαν δε της ψυχης, ακολασιαν δε της γαστρος, στασιν δε
της πολεως, την δε διαφωνιαν απο της οικιας, και κοινῃ απο παντων το
ακρατες· "By all means and methods these evils are to be shunned and cut
off: effeminacy from the body; Ignorance from the soul; delicacies from
the belly; sedition from the city; discord from the house; and, in
general, intemperance from all things." Vid. Fab. Thes. Erud. Schol.

Onesimus, Ονησιμος. Useful or profitable; from ονημι, to help. The
import of this name led the apostle to play upon the word thus: I
beseech thee for any son Onesimus - which in time past was to thee
Unprofitable, but now Profitable to thee and me.

To the Church in thy house - The congregation of Christians frequently
assembling in Philemon's house; for at this time the Christians had
neither temples, churches, nor chapels. See the note on [Rom
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005.md), and the reference there.

It is very probable that Apphia was the wife of Philemon, and Archippus,
their son, the pastor of the Church at Philemon's house.

[Philemon 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">plm 1:4</span></span>

I thank my God - For all the good he has bestowed upon you, making
mention of thee always in my prayers, that thou mayest hold fast all
that thou hast got, and get all that thou dost farther need.

[Philemon 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">plm 1:5</span></span>

Hearing of thy love and faith - His faith in Christ Jesus, his love to
the saints. Several excellent MSS. and some versions put faith before
love, which makes a more natural reading. There is no figure of speech
which would vindicate our saying faith in the saints; so that, if we do
not allow of the arrangement in the MSS. referred to, we shall be
obliged to have recourse to the transposition, because faith must refer
to Jesus Christ, and love to the saints.

[Philemon 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">plm 1:6</span></span>

That the communication of thy faith - The words ἡ κοινωνια της πιστεως
σου, the fellowship or communication of thy faith, may be understood as
referring to the work of love towards the saints - the poor Christians,
which his faith in Christ enabled him to perform, faith being taken here
for its effects; and indeed the word κοινωνια itself is not unfrequently
used to denote liberality, almsgiving; and this is very properly
remarked by Theophylact here: Κοινωνιαν πιστεως ελεημοσυνην καλει, ὡς
απο πιστεως πολλης γενομενην· He terms almsgiving the communication of
faith, because it is the fruit of much faith."

May become effectual - Dr. Macknight understands these words thus: "That
the many good offices which thou dost to the saints may become effectual
in bringing others to the acknowledgment of every good disposition which
is in you towards Christ Jesus, or towards his members."

Instead of ενεργης, energetic or effectual, the Vulgate and some of the
fathers, as well as several Latin MSS., have read εναργης, evident. This
makes a very good sense, and seems to agree best with the scope of the
place.

Instead of εν ὑμιν, in You, εν ἡμιν in Us, is the reading of all the
best MSS., as well as of several versions and fathers.

[Philemon 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">plm 1:7</span></span>

For we have great joy - This verse does not read harmoniously. The Greek
authorizes the following arrangement: For we have great joy and
consolation in thy love, O brother, because the bowels of the saints are
refreshed by thee. The apostle speaks here of the works of charity in
which Philemon abounded towards poor Christians.

[Philemon 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">plm 1:8</span></span>

Wherefore, though I might be much bold - It would be better to read:
Wherefore, although I have much authority through Christ, to command
thee to do what is proper; yet, on account of my love to thee, I entreat
thee.

The tenderness and delicacy of this epistle, says Dr. Paley, have long
been admired: "Though I might be much bold in Christ to enjoin thee that
which is convenient; yet, for love's sake, I rather beseech thee, being
such a one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Christ Jesus, I
beseech thee for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds."

There is something certainly very melting and persuasive in this and
every part of the epistle. Yet, in my opinion, the character of St. Paul
prevails in it throughout. The warm, affectionate, authoritative teacher
is interceding with an absent friend for a beloved convert. He urges his
suit with an earnestness befitting, perhaps, not so much the occasion as
the ardour and sensibility of his own mind. Here also, as everywhere, he
shows himself conscious of the weight and dignity of his mission; nor
does he suffer Philemon, for a moment, to forget it: "I might be much
bold in Christ, to enjoin thee that which is convenient." He is careful
also to recall, though obliquely, to Philemon's memory, the sacred
obligation under which he had laid him, by bringing him to the knowledge
of Christ: "I do not say to thee, how thou owest to me even thine own
self besides." Without laying aside, therefore, the apostolic character,
our author softens the imperative style of his address, by mixing with
it every sentiment and consideration that could move the heart of his
correspondent. Aged, and in prison, he is content to supplicate and
entreat. Onesimus was rendered dear to him by his conversation and his
services; the child of his affliction, and "ministering unto him in the
bonds of the Gospel." This ought to recommend him, whatever had been his
fault, to Philemon's forgiveness: "Receive him as myself, as my own
bowels." Every thing, however, should be voluntary. St. Paul was
determined that Philemon's compliance should flow from his own bounty;
"Without thy mind would I do nothing, that thy benefit should not be as
it were of necessity, but willingly;" trusting, nevertheless, to his
gratitude and attachment for the performance of all that he requested,
and for more: "Having confidence in thy obedience, I wrote unto thee,
knowing that thou wilt also do more than I say." St. Paul's discourse at
Miletus; his speech before Agrippa; his Epistle to the Romans; that to
the Galatians, [Gal 4:11-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011.md); to the
Philippians, [Phi 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029.md); [Phi
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#002.md); the second to the Corinthians,
[Co2 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001.md); and indeed some part or
other of almost every epistle, exhibit examples of a similar application
to the feelings and affections of the persons whom he addresses. And it
is observable that these pathetic effusions, drawn for the most part
from his own sufferings and situation, usually precede a command, soften
a rebuke, or mitigate the harshness of some disagreeable truth. Horae
Paulinae, p. 334.

[Philemon 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">plm 1:9</span></span>

Paul the aged - If we allow St. Paul to have been about 25 years of age
at the utmost, in the year 31, when he was assisting at the martyrdom of
Stephen, [Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058.md); as this epistle
was written about a.d. 62, he could not have been at this time more than
about 56 years old. This could not constitute him an aged man in our
sense of the term; yet, when the whole length of his life is taken in,
being martyred about four years after this, he may not improperly be
considered an aged or elderly man, though it is generally allowed that
his martyrdom took place in the 66th year of our Lord.

But the word πρεσβυς signifies, not only an old man, but also an
ambassador; because old or elderly men were chosen to fulfill such an
office, because of their experience and solidity; and πρεσβυτης, for
πρεσβευτης, is used in the same sense and for the same reason by the
Septuagint; hence some have thought that we should translate here, Paul
the ambassador. This would agree very well with the scope and even the
design of the place.

[Philemon 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">plm 1:10</span></span>

I beseech thee for my son Onesimus - It is evident from this that
Onesimus was converted by St. Paul while he was prisoner at Rome, and
perhaps not long before he wrote this epistle.

[Philemon 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">plm 1:11</span></span>

Was to thee unprofitable - Alluding to the meaning of Onesimus's name,
as has been already noted; though the apostle uses a different Greek
word to express the same idea.

[Philemon 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">plm 1:12</span></span>

Whom I have sent again - The Christian religion never cancels any civil
relations; a slave, on being converted, and becoming a free man of
Christ, has no right to claim, on that ground, emancipation from the
service of his master. Justice, therefore, required St. Paul to send
back Onesimus to his master, and conscience obliged Onesimus to agree in
the propriety of the measure; but love to the servant induced the
apostle to write this conciliating letter to the master.

[Philemon 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">plm 1:13</span></span>

That in thy stead he might have ministered unto me - As Philemon was one
of Paul's converts, he became thereby his spiritual father, and had a
right to his services when in need. This was a strong argument, not only
to induce Philemon to forgive his servant, but to send him back to the
apostle, that he might minister to him in his master's stead.

[Philemon 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">plm 1:14</span></span>

That thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity - If the apostle
had kept Onesimus in his service, and written to Philemon to forgive him
and permit him to stay, to this it is probable he would have agreed; but
the benefit thus conceded might have lost much of its real worth by the
consideration that, had he been at Colosse, Philemon would not have sent
him to Rome; but, being there and in the apostle's service, he could not
with propriety order him home: thus the benefit to the apostle would
have appeared to have been of necessity. The apostle, therefore, by
sending him back again, gave Philemon the opportunity to do all as if
self-moved to it. This is a very delicate touch.

[Philemon 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">plm 1:15</span></span>

He - departed for a season - This is another most delicate stroke. He
departed thy slave, thy unfaithful slave; he departed for a short time;
but so has the mercy of God operated in his behalf, and the providence
of God in thine, that he now returns, not an unfaithful slave, in whom
thou couldst repose no confidence, but as a brother, a beloved brother
in the Lord, to be in the same heavenly family with thee for ever. Thou
hast, therefore, reason to be thankful to God that he did depart, that
he might be restored to thee again infinitely better than he was when be
left thee. God has permitted his unfaithfulness, and overruled the whole
both to his advantage and thine. The apology for Onesimus is very
similar to that made by Joseph for his brethren, [Gen
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005.md).

[Philemon 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">plm 1:16</span></span>

Not now as a servant? - Do not receive him merely as thy slave, nor
treat him according to that condition; but as a brother - as a genuine
Christian, and particularly dear to me.

Both in the flesh and in the Lord? - There is no reason to believe that
Onesimus was of the kindred of Philemon; and we must take the term
flesh, here, as referring to the right which Philemon had in him. He was
a part of his property and of his family; as a slave, this was his
condition; but he now stood in a twofold relation to Philemon:

1\. According to the flesh, as above explained, he was one of his
family.

2\. In the Lord; he was now also a member of the heavenly family, and of
the Church at Philemon's house. Philemon's interest in him was now
doubled, in consequence of his conversion to Christianity.

[Philemon 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">plm 1:17</span></span>

If thou count me therefore a partner - If thou dost consider me as a
friend; if I have still the place of a friend in thy affection, receive
him as myself; for, as I feel him as my own soul, in receiving him thou
receivest me.

There is a fine model of recommending a friend to the attention of a
great man in the epistle of Horace to Claudius Nero, in behalf of his
friend Septimius, Epistolar. lib. i., Ep. 9, which contains several
strokes not unlike some of those in the Epistle to Philemon. It is
written with much art; but is greatly exceeded by that of St. Paul. As
it is very short I shall insert it: -

Septimius, Claudi, nimirum intelligit unus,

Quanti me facias; nam cum rogat, et prece cogit

Scilicet, ut tibi se laudare, et tradere coner,

Dignum mente domoque legentis honesta

Neronis, Munere cum fungi propioris censet amici;

Quid possim videt, ac novit me valdius ipso.

Multa quidem dixi, cur excusatus abirem:

Sed timui, mea ne finxisse minora putarer,

Dissimulator opis propriae, mihi commodus uni.

Sic ego, majoris fugiens opprobria culpae,

Frontis ad urbanae descendi praemia.

Quod si Depositum laudas, ob amici jussa, pudorem;

Scribe tui gregis hunc, et fortem crede bonumque.

"O Claudius Septimius alone knows what value thou hast for me; for he
asks and earnestly entreats me to recommend him to thee, as a man worthy
of the service and confidence of Nero, who is so correct a judge of
merit. When he imagines that I possess the honor of being one of thy
most intimate friends, he sees and knows me more particularly than I do
myself. I said indeed many things to induce him to excuse me; but I
feared lest I should be thought to dissemble my interest with thee, that
I might reserve it all for my own advantage. Therefore, in order to shun
the reproach of a greater fault, I have assumed all the consequence of a
courtier, and have, at the request of my friend, laid aside becoming
modesty; which if thou canst pardon, receive this man into the list of
thy domestics, and believe him to be a person of probity and worth."

This is not only greatly outdone by St. Paul, but also by a letter of
Pliny to his friend Sabinianus, in behalf of his servant, who, by some
means, had incurred his master's displeasure. See it at the conclusion
of these notes ([Plm 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#025) (note).md).

[Philemon 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">plm 1:18</span></span>

If he hath wronged thee, or oweth thee aught - Had the apostle been
assured that Onesimus had robbed his master, he certainly would not have
spoken in this hypothetical way; he only puts a possible case: If he
have wronged thee, or owe thee aught, place all to my account; I will
discharge all he owes thee.

[Philemon 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">plm 1:19</span></span>

I Paul have written it with mine own hand - It is likely that the whole
of the letter was written by St. Paul himself, which was not his usual
custom. See on [Th2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017) (note.md). But
by thus speaking he bound Philemon to do what he requested, as an act of
common civility, if he could not feel a higher motive from what he had
already urged.

Albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest unto me - I ask thee to do
this thing to oblige me, though I will not say how much thou owest unto
me; even thine own self, as having been the means of thy conversion.

[Philemon 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">plm 1:20</span></span>

Yea, brother - It is even so, that thou art thus indebted to me. Let me
have joy of thee, in forgiving Onesimus, and receiving him into thy
favor. In the words εγε σου οναιμην, which we should translate, let me
have Profit of thee, there is an evident paronomasia, or play on the
name of Onesimus. See on [Plm 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002.md)
(note), [Plm 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#011) (note.md).

Refresh my bowels - Gratify the earnest longing of my soul in this. I
ask neither thy money nor goods; I ask what will enrich, not impoverish,
thee to give.

[Philemon 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">plm 1:21</span></span>

Having confidence in thy obedience - I know that it will please thee
thus to oblige thy friend, and I know that thou wilt do more than I
request, because thou feelest the affection of a son to thy spiritual
father. Some think that the apostle hints to Philemon that he should
manumit Onesimus.

[Philemon 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">plm 1:22</span></span>

But withal prepare me also a lodging - Does not the apostle mention this
as conferring an obligation on Philemon? I will begin to repay thee by
taking up my abode at thy house, as soon as I shall be enlarged from
prison. But some think he wished Philemon to hire him a house, that he
might have a lodging of his own when he returned to Colosse.

For I trust that through your prayers - It is very likely that this
epistle was written a short time before the liberation of the apostle
from his first imprisonment at Rome. See [Act
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030.md), and [Phi
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#024.md); and that he had that liberation
now in full prospect.

[Philemon 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">plm 1:23</span></span>

Epaphras, my fellow prisoner - Epaphras was a Colossian, as we learn
from [Col 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#012.md) : Epaphras, who is one
of you. But there is no account there of his being in prison, though the
not mentioning of it does not necessarily imply that he was not. Some
time or other he had suffered imprisonment for the truth of the Gospel;
and on that account St. Paul might, in a general way, call him his
fellow prisoner.

[Philemon 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">plm 1:24</span></span>

Marcus, Aristarchus, etc. - These were all acquaintances of Philemon,
and probably Colossians; and may be all considered as joining here with
St. Paul in his request for Onesimus. Some think that Marcus was either
the evangelist, or John Mark, the nephew of Barnabas, [Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012.md), [Act
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#025.md). Aristarchus was probably the
same with him mentioned [Act 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029.md);
[Act 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004.md); [Act
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#002.md). See [Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010.md).

Demas - Is supposed to be the same who continued in his attachment to
Paul till his last imprisonment at Rome; after which he left him for
what is supposed to have been the love of the world, but see the note on
[Ti2 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010.md).

Lucas - Is supposed to be Luke the evangelist, and author of the Acts of
the Apostles. On these suppositions little confidence can be placed:
they may be correct; they may be otherwise.

[Philemon 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">plm 1:25</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit - By using the
plural, ὑμων, your, the apostle in effect directs or addresses the
epistle, not only to Philemon, but to all the Church at his house.

Amen - Is wanting as usual in the best MSS.

The subscriptions are also various, as in preceding cases.

Versions:

The Epistle to Philemon was written at Rome, and sent by the hand of
Onesimus. - Syriac.

Through the help of God the epistle is finished. It was written at Rome
by the hand of Onesimus, servant to Philemon. - Arabic.

To the man Philemon. - Aethiopic.

It was written at Rome, and sent by Onesimus. - Coptic.

Vulgate, nothing.

The Epistle to Philemon, Apphia, and Archippus: the end of the Epistle
to Philemon and Apphia, the master and mistress of Onesimus; and to
Archippus, the deacon of the Church at Colosse: it was written from Rome
by Onesimus, a servant. - Philoxesian Syriac.

Manuscripts:

To Philemon. - To Philemon is finished. - To Philemon, written from Rome
by Onesimus - Onesiphorus. - From Paul, by Onesimus, a servant. - From
the presence of Paul and Timothy. - The Epistle of Paul the apostle to
Philemon. - The common Greek text has, To Philemon, written from Rome by
Onesimus, a servant.

As some have thought it strange that a private letter, of a particular
business and friendship, should have got a place in the sacred canon,
others have been industrious to find out the general uses which may be
made of it. The following are those which seem to come most naturally
from the text: -

1\. In a religious point of view, all genuine Christian converts are on
a level; Onesimus, the slave, on his conversion becomes the apostle's
beloved son, and Philemon's brother.

2\. Christianity makes no change in men's civil affairs; even a slave
did not become a freeman by Christian baptism.

3\. No servant should be either taken or retained from his own master,
without the master's consent, [Plm
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013.md), [Plm
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#014.md).

4\. We should do good unto all men, and not be above helping the meanest
slave when we have the opportunity.

5\. Restitution is due where an injury has been done, unless the injured
party freely forgive, [Plm 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#018.md).

6\. We should do all in our power to make up quarrels and differences,
and reconcile those that are at variance.

7\. We should be grateful to our benefactors, and be ready to compensate
one good turn with another.

8\. We should forgive the penitent who have offended us, and rejoice in
the opportunity of being reconciled to them.

9\. Authority is not always to be used; a prudent man who is possessed
of it will rather use a mild and obliging manner, than have recourse to
the authority of his office.

10\. The ministers of the Gospel should learn to know the worth of an
immortal soul, and be as ready to use their talents for the conversion
of slaves and the ignoble as the great and opulent, and prize the
converted slave as highly as the converted lord, showing no sinful
respect of persons.

11\. Christianity properly understood, and its doctrines properly
applied, become the most powerful means of the melioration of men; the
wicked and profligate, when brought under its influence, become useful
members of society. It can transform a worthless slave into a pious,
amiable, and useful man; and make him, not only happier and better in
himself, but also a blessing to the community.

12\. We should never despair of reclaiming the wicked. No man is out of
the reach of God's mercy as long as he breathes. Pretending to say that
such and such cases are hopeless, is only a colouring for our want of
zeal, and a pretense to excuse our slothfulness.

13\. The anxiety which the apostle showed for the welfare of Onesimus,
in return for his affectionate services, could not fail to cherish good
dispositions in the breast of Philemon. We do a man a great kindness
when we even engage him in acts of mercy and benevolence.

14\. From this epistle we learn what sort of man the apostle was in
private life. He has here displayed qualities which are in the highest
estimation among men; a noble spirit arising from a consciousness of his
own dignity, consummate prudence, uncommon generosity, the warmest
friendship, the most skillful address, and the greatest politeness, as
well as purity of manners; qualities which are never found either in the
enthusiast or impostor. See Macknight and Dodd.

There is extant an epistle of Pliny on the very same subject, directed
to his friend Sabinianus in behalf of his manumitted slave who had
offended him, and was consequently cast out of favor. Dr. Doddridge says
that "that epistle, though penned by one who was allowed to excel in the
epistolary style, and though it undoubtedly has many beauties, will be
found by persons of taste much inferior to this animated composition of
the Apostle Paul.

I have already introduced an epistle of Horace on a somewhat similar
subject; but that of Pliny is so exactly parallel, and so truly
excellent, that I am sure its insertion will gratify every intelligent
reader, and I insert it the rather because the works of Pliny are in but
few hands, and his epistles are known to very few except the learned.

C. Plinius Sabiniano suo, S.

Libertus tuus, cui succensere te dixeras, venit ad me, advolatusque
pedibus meis, tanquam tuis, haesit. Flevit multum, multum rogavit,
multum etiam tacuit: in summa, fecit mihi fidem poenitentiae. Vere credo
emendatum, quia deliquisse se sentit. Irasceris scio; et irasceris
merito, id quoque scio: sed tunc praecipua mansuetudinis laus, cum irae
causa justissima est. Amasti hominem; et, spero, amabis: interim
sufficit, ut exorari te sinas. Licebit rursus irasci, si meruerit: quod
exoratus excusatius facies.

Remitte aliquid adolescentiae ipsius; remitte lachrymis; remitte
indulgentiae tuae; ne torseris illum, ne torseris etiam te. Torqueris
enim, cum tam lenis irasceris. Vereor, ne videar non rogare, sed cogere,
si precibus ejus meas junxero. Jungam tamen tanto plenius et effusius,
quanto ipsum acrius severiusque corripui, districte minatus nunquam me
postea rogaturum. Hoc illi, quem terreri oportebat; tibi non idem. Nam
fortasse iterum rogabo, impetrabo iterum: sit modo tale, ut togare me,
ut praestare te deceat. Vale. - Epistolar. Iib. ix., Ep. 21.

"Caius Plinius to Sabinianus his friend, health.

"Thy freed man, with whom thou didst inform me thou wert incensed, came
to me and threw himself at my feet, and grasped them as if they had been
thine. He wept much, earnestly entreated, and yet said more by his
silence. In short, he fully convinced me that he is a penitent. I do
verily believe him reformed, because he feels his guilt. Thou art
incensed against him I know,, and I know that he has justly merited thy
displeasure; but then, clemency has its chief praise when there is the
greatest cause for irritation. Thou didst once love the man, and I hope
thou wilt love him again. In the meantime permit thyself to be entreated
in his behalf. Should he again merit thy displeasure thou wilt have the
stronger excuse for indulging it, shouldst thou pardon him now. Consider
his youth, consider his tears, consider thy own gentleness of
disposition. Do not torment him, do not torment thyself; for, with thy
mild disposition, thou must be tormented if thou suffer thyself to be
angry. I fear, were I to join my prayers to his, that I should rather
seem to compel than to supplicate. Yet I will unite them, and the more
largely and earnestly too, as I have sharply and severely reproved him,
solemnly threatening, should he offend again, never more to intercede
for him. This I said to him, it being necessary that I should alarm him;
but I do not say the same to thee, for probably I may entreat thee
again, and command thee again, should there be a sufficient reason to
induce me to request, and thee to concede. Farewell."

Nothing on the subject can be finer than this; but Paul has the
advantage, because he had Christian motives to urge. If the energetic
Roman had had these, we should have found it difficult to decide between
his Latin and the apostle's Greek. It may be now asked whether St.
Paul's application in behalf of Onesimus was successful? We have no
direct answer to this question, but we may fairly suppose that such
pleading could not be in vain. Philemon was a Christian, and owed too
much to his God and Savior, and too much to the apostle, as the
instrument of his salvation, not to concede a favor which it is
congenial to the very spirit of Christianity to grant. The application
of Horace in behalf of Septimius was successful, and both Claudius Nero
and Augustus took him into their warmest confidence. But this was only a
common case of recommendation, and had no difficulties in the way. But
did the heathen Sabinianus yield to the entreaties of his friend, and
forgive his slave? He did; and we have the record of it in another very
elegant letter, in which Pliny expresses his obligation to his friend
for his prompt attention to his request. I will transcribe it, and give
a translation for the farther satisfaction of the reader.

C. Plinius Sabiniano suo, S.

Bene fecisti quod libertum aliquando tibi carum, reducentibus epistolis
meis, in domum, in animum recepisti. Juvabit hoc te: me certe juvat;
primum quod te talem video, ut in ira regi possis: deinde quod tantum
mihi tribuis, ut vel auctoritati meae pareas, vel precibus indulgeas.
Igitur, et laudo, et gratias ago. Simul in posterum moneo, ut te
erroribus tuorum, etsi non fuerit, qui deprecetur, placabilem praestes.
Vale - Epistolar. lib. ix., Ep. 24.

"Caius Plinius to his friend Sabinianus, health.

"Thou hast done well, that, in compliance with my letter, thou hast
received thy freed man both into thy house and into thy heart. This must
be pleasing to thyself, and it is certainly pleasing to me; first,
because I find thee to be a person capable of being governed in thy
anger; and secondly, because thou showest so much regard for me, as
either to yield this to my authority, or concede it to my entreaties.
Therefore I both praise and return thee thanks. 'At the same time I
admonish thee to be always ready to forgive the errors of thy servants,
although there should be no one to intercede in their behalf. Farewell."

These letters contain such excellent lessons of instruction that it will
be impossible to read them without profit. They are master pieces in
their kind; and no Christian need be ashamed to be indebted to them,
whether in regulating his own conduct in respect to forgiveness of
injuries, or whether in interceding for them who have fallen under the
displeasure of others. Reader, go thou and do likewise.

Finished correcting for a new edition, Dec. 23, 1831.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Introduction](heb000.md)

</div>
