<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro014)  [Next](pro016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 15:0</span></span>

The soft answer. Useful correction. Stability of the righteous. The
contented mind. The slothful man. The fool. The covetous. The impious.
The wicked opposed to the righteous; to the diligent; and to the man who
fears the Lord.

[Proverbs 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 15:1</span></span>

A soft answer - Gentleness will often disarm the most furious, where
positive derangement has not taken place; one angry word will always
beget another, for the disposition of one spirit always begets its own
likeness in another: thus kindness produces kindness, and rage produces
rage. Universal experience confirms this proverb.

[Proverbs 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 15:2</span></span>

Useth knowledge aright - This is very difficult to know: - when to
speak, and when to be silent; what to speak, and what to leave unspoken;
the manner that is best and most suitable to the occasion, the subject,
the circumstances, and the persons. All these are difficulties, often
even to the wisest men. Even wise counsel may be foolishly given.

[Proverbs 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 15:3</span></span>

The eyes of the Lord are in every place - He not only sees all things,
by his omnipresence, but his providence is everywhere. And if the
consideration that his eye is in every place, have a tendency to appal
those whose hearts are not right before him, and who seek for privacy,
that they may commit iniquity; yet the other consideration, that his
providence is everywhere, has a great tendency to encourage the upright,
and all who may be in perilous or distressing circumstances.

[Proverbs 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 15:4</span></span>

A wholesome tongue is a tree of life - Here again is an allusion to the
paradisiacal tree, עץ חיים ets chaiyim, "the tree of lives."

[Proverbs 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 15:8</span></span>

The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination - Even the most sedulous
attendance on the ordinances of God, and pert ormance of the ceremonies
of religion, is an abomination to the Lord, if the heart be not right
with him, and the observance do not flow from a principle of pure
devotion. No religious acts will do in place of holiness to the Lord.

The prayer of the upright is his delight - What a motive to be upright;
and what a motive to the upright to pray! But who is the upright? The
man who is weary of sin, and sincerely desires the salvation of God; as
well as he who has already received a measure of that salvation. Hence
it is said in the next verse, "He loveth him that followeth after
righteousness."

[Proverbs 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 15:11</span></span>

Hell and destruction - שאול ואבדון sheol vaabaddon. Hades, the invisible
world, the place of separate spirits till the resurrection: and Abaddon,
the place of torment; are ever under the eye and control of the Lord.

[Proverbs 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 15:13</span></span>

By sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken - Every kind of sorrow
worketh death, but that which is the offspring of true repentance. This
alone is healthful to the soul. The indulgence of a disposition to
sighing tends to destroy life. Every deep sigh throws off a portion of
the vital energy.

[Proverbs 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 15:16</span></span>

Better is little with the fear of the Lord - Because where the fear of
God is, there are moderation and contentment of spirit.

[Proverbs 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 15:17</span></span>

Better is a dinner of herbs - Great numbers of indigent Hindoos subsist
wholly on herbs, fried in oil, and mixed with their rice.

[Proverbs 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 15:19</span></span>

The way of the slothful man is as a hedge of thorns - Because he is
slothful, he imagines ten thousand difficulties in the way which cannot
be surmounted; but they are all the creatures of his own imagination,
and that imagination is formed by his sloth.

[Proverbs 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 15:22</span></span>

But in the multitude of counsellors - See note on [Pro
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#013) (note). But רב יועצים rob
yoatsim might be translated, chief or master of the council, the prime
minister.

[Proverbs 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 15:24</span></span>

The way of life is above to the wise - There is a treble antithesis
here:

1\. The way of the wise, and that of the fool.

2\. The one is above, the other below.

3\. The one is of life, the other is of death.

[Proverbs 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 15:25</span></span>

The house of the proud - Families of this description are seldom
continued long. The Lord hates pride; and those that will not be humble
he will destroy.

[Proverbs 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 15:27</span></span>

He that is greedy of gain - He who will be rich; troubleth his own house
- he is a torment to himself and his family by his avariciousness and
penury, and a curse to those with whom he deals.

But he that hateth gifts - Whatever is given to pervert judgment.

[Proverbs 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 15:28</span></span>

The heart of the righteous studieth to answer - His tongue never runs
before his wit, he never speaks rashly, and never unadvisedly; because
he studies - ponders, his thoughts and his words.

[Proverbs 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 15:29</span></span>

The Lord is far from the wicked - He is neither near to hear, nor near
to help.

[Proverbs 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 15:30</span></span>

The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart - Nature and art are
continually placing before our view a multitude of the most resplendent
images, each of which is calculated to give pleasure. The man who has a
correct judgment, and an accurate eye, may not only amuse, but instruct
himself endlessly, by the beauties of nature and art.

[Proverbs 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 15:31</span></span>

The ear that heareth the reproof - That receives it gratefully and obeys
it. "Advice is for them that will take it," so says one of our own old
proverbs; and the meaning here is nearly the same.

[Proverbs 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 15:32</span></span>

Despiseth his own soul - That is constructively; for if the instruction
lead to the preservation of life and soul, he that neglects or despises
it throws all as much in the way of danger as if he actually hated
himself.

[Proverbs 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 15:33</span></span>

The fear of the Lord - See note on [Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007). Much is spoken concerning this
fear;

1\. It is the beginning of wisdom.

2\. It is also the beginning of knowledge.

3\. It is the instruction of wisdom. Wisdom derives its most important
lessons from the fear of God. He who fears God much, is well taught.

And before honor is humility - That is, few persons ever arrive at honor
who are not humble; and those who from low life have risen to places of
trust and confidence, have been remarkable for humility. We may rest
assured that the providence of God will never elevate a proud man; such
God beholds afar off. He may get into places of trust and profit, but
God will oust him, and the people will curse him, and curse his memory.
So will it ever be with bad ministers and advisers of the crown.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 16](pro016)

</div>
