<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro005)  [Next](pro007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 6:0</span></span>

Exhortations against becoming surety for others, [Pro
6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001); against idleness, from the
example of the ant, [Pro 6:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006);
description of a worthless person, [Pro
6:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012); seven things hateful to God,
[Pro 6:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016); the benefits of
instruction, [Pro 6:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#020); farther
exhortations against bad women, and especially against adultery, [Pro
6:24-33](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024); what may be expected from
jealousy, [Pro 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#034), [Pro
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#035).

[Proverbs 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 6:1</span></span>

If thou be surety for thy friend - לרעך lereacha, for thy neighbor;
i.e., any person. If thou pledge thyself in behalf of another, thou
takest the burden off him, and placest it on thine own shoulders; and
when he knows he has got one to stand between him and the demands of law
and justice, he will feel little responsibility; his spirit of exertion
will become crippled, and listlessness as to the event will be the
consequence. His own character will suffer little; his property nothing,
for his friend bears all the burden: and perhaps the very person for
whom he bore this burden treats him with neglect; and, lest the
restoration of the pledge should be required, will avoid both the sight
and presence of his friend. Give what thou canst; but, except in extreme
cases, be surety for no man. Striking or shaking hands when the mouth
had once made the promise, was considered as the ratification of the
engagement; and thus the man became ensnared with the words of his
mouth.

[Proverbs 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 6:3</span></span>

Do this - deliver thyself - Continue to press him for whom thou art
become surety, to pay his creditor; give him no rest till he do it, else
thou mayest fully expect to be left to pay the debt.

[Proverbs 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 6:5</span></span>

Deliver thyself as a roe - צבי tsebi, the antelope. If thou art got into
the snare, get out if thou possibly canst; make every struggle and
excertion, as the antelope taken in the net, and the bird taken in the
snare would, in order to get free from thy captivity.

[Proverbs 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 6:6</span></span>

Go to the ant, thou sluggard - נמלה nemalah, the ant, is a remarkable
creature for foresight, industry, and economy. At the proper seasons
they collect their food - not in the summer to lay up for the winter;
for they sleep during the winter, and eat not; and therefore such hoards
would be to them useless; but when the food necessary for them is most
plentiful, then they collect it for their consumption in the proper
seasons. No insect is more laborious, not even the bee itself; and none
is more fondly attached to or more careful of its young, than the ant.
When the young are in their aurelia state, in which they appear like a
small grain of rice, they will bring them out of their nests, and lay
them near their holes, for the benefit of the sun; and on the approach
of rain, carefully remove them, and deposit them in the nest, the hole
or entrance to which they will cover with a piece of thin stone or tile,
to prevent the wet from getting in. It is a fact that they do not lay up
any meat for winter; nor does Solomon, either here or in [Pro
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#025), assert it. He simply says that
they provide their food in summer, and gather it in harvest; these are
the most proper times for a stock to be laid in for their consumption;
not in winter; for no such thing appears in any of their nests, nor do
they need it, as they sleep during that season; but for autumn, during
which they wake and work. Spring, summer, and autumn, they are incessant
in their labor; and their conduct affords a bright example to men.

[Proverbs 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 6:10</span></span>

Yet a little sleep, a little slumber - This, if not the language, is the
feeling of the sluggard. The ant gathers its food in summer and in
harvest, and sleeps in winter when it has no work to do. If the sluggard
would work in the day, and sleep at night, it would be all proper. The
ant yields him a lesson of reproach.

[Proverbs 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 6:11</span></span>

So shall thy poverty come as one that travelleth - That is, with slow,
but surely approaching steps.

Thy want as an armed man - That is, with irresistible fury; and thou art
not prepared to oppose it. The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Arabic add the
following clause to this verse: -

"But if thou wilt be diligent, thy harvest shall be as a fountain; and
poverty shall flee far away from thee."

It is also thus in the Old MS. Bible: If forsothe unslow thou shul ben;
shul comen as a welle thi rip; and nede fer shal fleen fro thee.

[Proverbs 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 6:12</span></span>

A naughty person - אדם בליעל adam beliyal, "Adam good for nothing." When
he lost his innocence. A man apostata; Old MS. Bible.

A wicked man - איש און ish aven. He soon became a general transgressor
after having departed from his God. All his posterity, unless restored
by Divine grace, are men of Belial, and sinners by trade; and most of
them, in one form or other, answer the character here given. They yield
their members instruments of unrighteousness unto sin.

[Proverbs 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 6:13</span></span>

He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth with
his fingers - These things seem to be spoken of debauchees, and the
following quotation from Ovid, Amor. Iib. i., El. iv., ver. 15, shoots
the whole process of the villany spoken of by Solomon:

Cum premit ille torum, vultu comes ipsa modestoIbis, ut accumbas: clam
mihi tange pedem.

Me specta, nutusque meos, vultum que loquacemExcipe furtivas, et refer
ipsa, notas.

Verba superciliis sine voce loquentia dicamVerba leges digitis, verba
notata mero.

Cum tibi succurrit Veneris lascivia nostrae,Purpureas tenero pollice
tange genas, etc., etc.

The whole elegy is in the same strain: it is translated in Garth's Ovid,
but cannot be introduced here.

[Proverbs 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 6:14</span></span>

He deviseth mischief - He plots schemes and plans to bring it to pass.

He soweth discord - Between men and their wives, by seducing the latter
from their fidelity. See the preceding quotation.

[Proverbs 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 6:15</span></span>

Suddenly shall he be broken - Probably alluding to some punishment of
the adulterer, such as being stoned to death. A multitude shall join
together, and so overwhelm him with stones, that he shall have his flesh
and bones broken to pieces, and there shall be no remedy - none to
deliver or pity him.

[Proverbs 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 6:16</span></span>

These six - doth the Lord hate -

1\. A proud look - exalted eyes; those who will not condescend to look
on the rest of mankind.

2\. A lying tongue - he who neither loves nor tells truth.

3\. Hands that shed innocent blood, whether by murder or by battery.

4\. A heart that deviseth wicked imaginations - the heart that
fabricates such, lays the foundation, builds upon it, and completes the
superstructure of iniquity.

5\. Feet that be swift in running to mischief - he who works iniquity
with greediness.

6\. A false witness that speaketh lies - one who, even on his oath
before a court of justice, tells any thing but the truth.

Seven are an abomination unto him - נפשו naphsho, "to his soul." The
seventh is, he that soweth discord among brethren - he who troubles the
peace of a family, of a village, of the state; all who, by lies and
misrepresentations, strive to make men's minds evil-affected towards
their brethren.

[Proverbs 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 6:20</span></span>

Keep thy father's commandment - See on [Pro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008) (note).

[Proverbs 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 6:21</span></span>

Bind them continually upon thine heart - See on [Pro
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003) (note). And see a similar command,
to which this is an allusion, [Deu
6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006) (note).

[Proverbs 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 6:22</span></span>

When thou goest, it shall lead thee - Here the law is personified; and
is represented as a nurse, teacher, and guardian, by night and day. An
upright man never goes but as directed by God's word and led by God's
Spirit.

When thou sleepest - He commends his body and soul to the protection of
his Maker when he lies down and sleeps in peace. And when he awakes in
the morning, the promises and mercies of God are the first things that
present themselves to his recollection.

[Proverbs 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 6:23</span></span>

For the commandment is a lamp - It illuminates our path. It shows us how
we should walk and praise God.

And the law is light - A general light, showing the nature and will of
God, and the interest and duty of Man.

And reproofs of instruction - Or, that instruction which reproves us for
our sins and errors leads us into the way of life.

[Proverbs 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 6:24</span></span>

To keep thee from the evil woman - Solomon had suffered sorely from this
quarter; and hence his repeated cautions and warnings to others. The
strange woman always means one that is not a man's own; and sometimes it
may also imply a foreign harlot, one who is also a stranger to the God
of Israel.

[Proverbs 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 6:25</span></span>

Neither let her take thee with her eye-lids - It is a very general
custom in the East to paint the eye-lids. I have many Asiatic drawings
in which this is expressed. They have a method of polishing the eyes
with a preparation of antimony, so that they appear with an
indescribable lustre; or, as one who mentions the fact from observation,
"Their eyes appear to be swimming in bliss."

[Proverbs 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 6:26</span></span>

By means of a whorish woman - In following lewd women, a man is soon
reduced to poverty and disease. The Septuagint gives this a strange
turn: timh gar pornhv, osh kai enov artou. "For the price or hire of a
whore is about one loaf." So many were they in the land, that they hired
themselves out for a bare subsistence. The Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic,
give the same sense. The old MS. Bible has it thus: The price forsothe
of a strumpet is unneth oon lof: the woman forsothe taketh the precious
liif of a mam. The sense of which is, and probably the sense of the
Hebrew too, While the man hires the whore for a single loaf of bread;
the woman thus hired taketh his precious life. She extracts his energy,
and poisons his constitution. In the first clause אשה זונה ishshah zonah
is plainly a prostitute; but should we render אשת esheth, in the second
clause, an adulteress? I think not. The versions in general join אשת איש
esheth ish, together, which, thus connected, signify no more than the
wife of a man; and out of this we have made adulteress, and Coverdale a
married woman. I do not think that the Old MS. Bible gives a good sense;
and it requires a good deal of paraphrase to extract the common meaning
from the text. Though the following verses seem to countenance the
common interpretation, yet they may contain a complete sense of
themselves; but, taken in either way, the sense is good, though the
construction is a little violent.

[Proverbs 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 6:27</span></span>

Can a man take fire - These were proverbial expressions, the meaning of
which was plain to every capacity.

[Proverbs 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 6:29</span></span>

So he that goeth In to his neighbor's wife - As sure as he who takes
fire into his bosom, or who walks upon live coals, is burnt thereby; so
sure he that seduces his neighbour's wife shall be guilty. That is, he
shall be punished.

[Proverbs 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 6:30</span></span>

Men do not despise a thief if he steal - Every man pities the poor
culprit who was perishing for lack of food, and stole to satisfy his
hunger; yet no law clears him: he is bound to make restitution; in some
cases double, in others quadruple and quintuple; and if he have not
property enough to make restitution, to be sold for a bondsman; [Exo
22:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001); [Lev
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039).

[Proverbs 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 6:32</span></span>

But whoso committeth adultery - The case understood is that of a married
man: he has a wife; and therefore is not in the circumstances of the
poor thief, who stole to appease his hunger, having nothing to eat. In
this alone the opposition between the two cases is found: the thief had
no food, and he stole some; the married man had a wife, and yet went in
to the wife of his neighbor.

Destroyeth his own soul - Sins against his life, for, under the law of
Moses, adultery was punished with death; [Lev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#010); [Deu
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#022).

[Proverbs 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 6:33</span></span>

A wound and dishonor shall he get - Among the Romans, when a man was
caught in the fact, the injured husband took the law into his own hand;
and a large radish was thrust up into the anus of the transgressor,
which not only overwhelmed him with infamy and disgrace, but generally
caused his death.

[Proverbs 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">pro 6:34</span></span>

Jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare - He will
not, when he has detected the adulterer in the fact, wait for the slow
progress of the law: it is then to him the day of vengeance; and in
general, he avenges himself on the spot, as we see above.

[Proverbs 6:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">pro 6:35</span></span>

He will not regard any ransom - This is an injury that admits of no
compensation. No gifts can satisfy a man for the injury his honor has
sustained; and to take a bribe or a ransom, would be setting up chastity
at a price.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 7](pro007)

</div>
