<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro018)  [Next](pro020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 19:0</span></span>

The worth of a poor upright man. Riches preserve friends. False
witnesses. False friends. A king's wrath. The foolish son. The prudent
wife. Slothfulness. Pity for the poor. The fear of the Lord. The
spendthrift son. Obedience to parents.

[Proverbs 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 19:1</span></span>

Better is the poor - The upright poor man is always to be preferred to
the rich or self-sufficient fool.

[Proverbs 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 19:2</span></span>

Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good - Would it not
be plainer, as it is more literal, to say, "Also, to be without
knowledge, is not good for the soul?" The soul was made for God; and to
be without his knowledge, to be unacquainted with him, is not only not
good, but the greatest evil the soul can suffer, for it involves all
other evils. The Chaldee and Syriac have: "He who knows not his own
soul, it is not good to him." "Where no discretion is, there the soul is
not well." - Coverdale.

And he that hasteth with his feet sinneth - And this will be the case
with him who is not Divinely instructed. A child does nothing
cautiously, because it is uninstructed; a savage is also rash and
precipitate, till experience instructs him. A man who has not the
knowledge of God is incautious, rash, headstrong, and precipitate: and
hence he sinneth - he is continually missing the mark, and wounding his
own soul.

[Proverbs 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 19:3</span></span>

The foolishness of man - Most men complain of cross providences, because
they get into straits and difficulties through the perverseness of their
ways; and thus they fret against God; whereas, in every instance, they
are the causes of their own calamities. O how inconsistent is man!

[Proverbs 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 19:4</span></span>

The poor is separated from his neighbor - Because he has the "disease of
all-shunned poverty."

[Proverbs 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 19:7</span></span>

Do hate him - They shun him as they do the person they hate. They
neither hate him positively, nor love him: they disregard him; they will
have nothing to do with him. שנא sana signifies not only to hate, but to
show a less degree of love to one than another. So Jacob loved Rachel,
but hated Leah - showed her less affection than he did to Rachel.

[Proverbs 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 19:10</span></span>

Delight is not seemly for a fool - תענוג taanug, splendid or luxurious
living, rank, equipage, etc. These sit ill on a fool, though he be by
birth a lord.

For a servant to have rule over princes - I pity the king who delivers
himself into the hands of his own ministers. Such a one loses his
character, and cannnot be respected by his subjects, or rather their
subjects. But it is still worse when a person of mean extraction is
raised to the throne, or to any place of power; he is generally cruel
and tyrannical.

[Proverbs 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 19:11</span></span>

It is his glory to pass over a transgression - "No," says what is termed
a man of honor; "he must meet me as a gentleman; I must have his blood,
let God say what he will." O poor, dastardly coward! thou canst not bear
the reproach of poor, flimsy, paltry fellows who ridicule thee, because
thou hast refused to commit murder. Such laws should be put down by law;
and the man that gives a challenge should be hanged, because he intends
to commit murder.

[Proverbs 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 19:12</span></span>

The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion - There is nothing more
dreadful than the roaring of this tyrant of the forest. At the sound of
it all other animals tremble, flee away, and hide themselves. The king
who is above law, and rules without law, and whose will is his own law,
is like the lion. This is strongly descriptive of the character of
Asiatic sovereigns.

[Proverbs 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 19:13</span></span>

The contentions of a wife are a continual dropping - The man who has got
such a wife is like a tenant who has got a cottage with a bad roof
through every part of which the rain either drops or pours. He can
neither sit, stand work, nor sleep, without being exposed to these
droppings. God help the man who is in such a case, with house or wife!

[Proverbs 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 19:14</span></span>

A prudent wife is from the Lord - One who has a good understanding, אשה
משכלת ishshah mascaleth; who avoids complaining, though she may often
have cause for it.

[Proverbs 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 19:15</span></span>

Into a deep sleep - תרדמה tardemah, the same into which Adam was thrown,
before Eve was taken from his side. Sloth renders a man utterly
unconscious of all his interests. Though he has frequently felt hunger,
yet he is regardless that his continual slothfulness must necessarily
plunge him into more sufferings.

[Proverbs 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 19:17</span></span>

Lendeth unto the Lord - O what a word is this! God makes himself debtor
for every thing that is given to the poor! Who would not advance much
upon such credit? God will pay it again. And in no case has he ever
forfeited his word.

[Proverbs 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 19:18</span></span>

Let not thy soul spare for his crying - This is a hard precept for a
parent. Nothing affects the heart of a parent so much as a child's cries
and tears. But it is better that the child may be caused to cry, when
the correction may be healthful to his soul, than that the parent should
cry afterwards, when the child is grown to man's estate, and his evil
habits are sealed for life.

[Proverbs 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 19:19</span></span>

A man of great wrath - He who is of an irritable, fiery disposition,
will necessarily get himself into many broils; and he that is surety for
him once is likely to be called on again and again for the same friendly
office.

[Proverbs 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 19:21</span></span>

There are many devices, etc. - The same sentiment as in [Pro
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001) (note.md), where see the note.

[Proverbs 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 19:24</span></span>

A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom - Is too lazy to feed
himself, If he dip his hand once in the dish, he is too lazy to put it
in a second time. It is a strange case that a man, through his excessive
slothfulness, would rather starve than put himself to the trouble to
eat.

[Proverbs 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 19:26</span></span>

He that wasteth his father - Destroys his substance by riotous or
extravagant living, so as to embitter his latter end by poverty and
affliction; and adds to this wickedness the expulsion of his aged
widowed mother from the paternal house; is a son of shame - a most
shameful man; and a son of reproach - one whose conduct cannot be
sufficiently execrated. Who tormentith the fader, and fleeth the modir,
schenful schal ben, and unblisful - Old MS. Bible. The common reading of
the Vulgate is, et fugat matrem, and expels his mother; but the Old
Bible was taken from a copy that had fugit matrem, shuns his mother,
flees away from her, leaves her to affliction and penury. It is
prostitution of the term to call such, man.

[Proverbs 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 19:27</span></span>

Cease, my son - Hear nothing that would lead thee away from God and his
truth.

[Proverbs 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 19:29</span></span>

Stripes for the back of fools - Profane and wicked men expose themselves
to the punishments denounced against such by just laws. Avoid,
therefore, both their company and their end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 20](pro020.md)

</div>
