<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro019)  [Next](pro021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 20:0</span></span>

Against wine and strong drink. We should avoid contentions. The
sluggard. The righteous man. Weights and measures. Tale-bearers. The
wicked son. The wise king. The glory of young men. The beauty of old
men. The benefit of correction.

[Proverbs 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 20:1</span></span>

Wine is a mocker - It deceives by its fragrance, intoxicates by its
strength, and renders the intoxicated ridiculous.

Strong drink - שכר shechar, any strong fermented liquor, whether of the
vine, date, or palm species.

[Proverbs 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 20:2</span></span>

The fear of a king - Almost the same with [Pro
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012) (note), which see.

[Proverbs 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 20:3</span></span>

It is an honoer for a man - The same sentiment as [Pro
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#011).

[Proverbs 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 20:4</span></span>

The sluggard will not plough - For other parts of this character, see
the preceding chapter, Proverbs 19 (note). It is seldom that there is a
season of very cold weather in Palestine; very cold days sometimes
occur, with wind, rain, and sleet. They begin their ploughing in the
latter end of September, and sow their early wheat by the middle of
October. And this is often the case in England itself. The meaning of
the proverb is: the slothful man, under the pretense of unfavorable
weather, neglects cultivating his land till the proper time is elapsed.

[Proverbs 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 20:5</span></span>

Counsel in the heart of man - Men of the deepest and most comprehensive
minds are rarely apt, unsolicited, to join in any discourse, in which
they might appear even to the greatest advantage; but a man of
understanding will elicit this, by questions framed for the purpose, and
thus pump up the salubrious waters from the deep and capacious well. The
metaphor is fine and expressive.

[Proverbs 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 20:6</span></span>

Most men will proclaim - Many men merciful ben clepid: a feithful man
forsoth, who schal finde? Old MS. Bible.

[Proverbs 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 20:8</span></span>

A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment - Kings should see to the
administration of the laws, as well as of the state transactions, of
their kingdom. In the British constitution there is a court for the
king, called the King's Bench, where he should sit, and where he is
always supposed to be sitting. The eyes - the presence, of the monarch
in such a place, scatter evil - he sees into the case himself, and gives
right judgment, for he can have no self-interest. Corrupt judges, and
falsifying counsellors, cannot stand before him; and the villain is too
deeply struck with the majesty and state of the monarch, to face out
iniquity before him.

[Proverbs 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 20:9</span></span>

Who can say, I have made any heart clean - No man. But thousands can
testify that the blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed them from all
unrighteousness. And he is pure from his sin, who is justified freely
through the redemption that is in Jesus.

[Proverbs 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 20:10</span></span>

Divers weights and divers measures - A peise and a peise; - Old MS.
Bible: from the French pois, weight. Hebrew: "A stone and a stone; an
ephah and an ephah." One the standard, the other below it; one to buy
with, the other to sell by.

[Proverbs 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 20:11</span></span>

Even a child is known by his doings - That is, in general terms, the
effect shows the nature of the cause. "A childe is known by his
conversation," says Coverdale. A child is easily detected when he has
done evil; he immediately begins to excuse and vindicate himself, and
profess his innocence, almost before accusation takes place. Some think
the words should be understood, every child will dissemble; this amounts
nearly to the meaning given above, But probably the principal this
intended by the wise man is, that we may easily learn from the child
what the man will be. In general, they give indications of those trades
and callings for which they are adapted by nature. And, on the whole, we
cannot go by a surer guide in preparing our children for future life,
than by observing their early propensities. The future engineer is seen
in the little handicraftsman of two years old. Many children are crossed
in these early propensities to a particular calling, to their great
prejudice, and the loss of their parents, as they seldom settle at, or
succeed in, the business to which they are tied, and to which nature has
given them no tendency. These infantine predilections to particular
callings, we should consider as indications of Divine Providence, and
its calling of them to that work for which they are peculiarly fitted.

[Proverbs 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 20:12</span></span>

The hearing ear and the seeing eye - Every good we possess comes from
God; and we should neither use our eyes, nor our ears, nor any thing we
possess, but in strict subserviency to his will.

[Proverbs 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 20:13</span></span>

Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty - Sleep, indescribable in its
nature, is an indescribable blessing; but how often is it turned into a
curse! It is like food; a certain measure of it restores and invigorates
exhausted nature; more than that oppresses and destroys life. A lover of
sleep is a paltry, insignificant character.

[Proverbs 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 20:14</span></span>

It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer - How apt are men to decry
the goods they wish to purchase, in order that they may get them at a
cheaper rate; and, when they have made their bargain and carried it off,
boast to others at how much less than its value they have obtained it!
Are such honest men? Is such knavery actionable? Can such be punished
only in another world? St. Augustine tells us a pleasant story on this
subject: A certain mountebank published, in the full theater, that at
the next entertainment he would show to every man present what was in
his heart. The time came, and the concourse was immense; all waited,
with deathlike silence, to hear what he would say to eaeh. He stood up,
and in a single sentence redeemed his pledge: -

Vili vultis Emere, et Caro Vendere.

You all wish to Buy Cheap, and Sell Dear."

He was applauded; for every one felt it to be a description of his own
heart, and was satisfied that all others were similar. "In quo dicto
levissimi scenici omnes tamen conscientias invenerunt suas.' - De
Trinitate, lib. xiii., c. 3; Oper. vol. vii., col. 930.

[Proverbs 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 20:15</span></span>

There is gold - Gold is valuable, silver is valuable, and so are jewels;
but the teachings of sound knowledge are more valuable than all.

[Proverbs 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 20:16</span></span>

Take his garment that is surety for a stranger - I suppose the meaning
to be, If a stranger or unknown person become surety in a case, greater
caution should be used, and such security taken from this stranger as
would prevent him from running away from his engagements.

[Proverbs 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 20:17</span></span>

Bread of deceit is sweet - Property acquired by falsehood, speculation,
etc., without labor, is pleasant to the unprincipled, slothful man; but
there is a curse in it, and the issue will prove it.

[Proverbs 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 20:18</span></span>

With good advice make war, - Perhaps there is not a precept in this
whole book so little regarded as this. Most of the wars that are
undertaken are wars of injustice, ambition, aggrandizement, and caprice,
which can have had no previous good counsel. A minister, who is perhaps
neither a good nor a great man, counsels his king to make war; the
cabinet must be brought into it, and a sufficient number out of the
states of the kingdom gained over to support it. By and by, what was
begun through caprice must be maintained through necessity. Places must
be created, and offices must be filled with needy dependents, whose
interest it may be to protract the war, till they get enough to pay
their debts, and secure independence for life. And for these most
important ends the blood of the country is spilled, and the treasures of
the people exhausted! I have met with a fact precisely of this kind
under the reign of Louis XIV.

[Proverbs 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 20:20</span></span>

Whoso curseth his father - Such persons were put to death under the law;
see [Exo 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017); [Lev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009), and here it is said, Their lamp
shall be put out - they shall have no posterity; God shall cut them off
both root and branch.

[Proverbs 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 20:21</span></span>

An inheritance - gotten hastily - Gotten by speculation; by lucky hits;
not in the fair progressive way of traffic, in which money has its
natural increase. All such inheritances are short-lived; God's blessing
is not in them, because they are not the produce of industry; and they
lead to idleness, pride, fraud and knavery. A speculation in trade is a
pubiic nuisance and curse. How many honest men have been ruined by such!

[Proverbs 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 20:22</span></span>

I will recompense evil - Wait on the Lord; judgment is his, and his
judgments are sure. In the mean time pray for the conversion of your
enemy.

[Proverbs 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 20:24</span></span>

Man's goings are of the Lord - He, by his providence, governs all the
great concerns of the world. Man often traverses these operations; but
he does it to his own damage. An old writer quaintly says: "They who
will carve for themselves shall cut their fingers."

[Proverbs 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 20:25</span></span>

Who devoureth that which is holy - It is a sin to take that which
belongs to God, his worship, or his work, and devote it to one's own
use.

And after vows to make inquiry - That is, if a man be inwardly making a
rash vow, the fitness or unfitness, the necessity, expediency, and
propriety of the thing should be first carefully considered. But how
foolish to make the vow first, and afterwards to inquire whether it was
right in the sight of God to do it! This equally condemns all rash and
inconsiderate conduct. My old MS. Bible translates, Falling is of men
often to vowen to seyntis, and after, the vouw is agen brawen. Is it
possible that Wiclif could have translated this verse thus? as it
strongly countenances vows to and invocations of saints.

[Proverbs 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 20:26</span></span>

Bringeth the wheel over them - He threshes them in his anger, as the
wheel does the grain on the threshing-floor. Every one knows that grain
was separated from its husks, in Palestine, by the feet of the oxen
trampling among the sheaves, or bringing a rough-shod wheel over them.
Asiatic kings often threshed their people, to bring out their property;
but this is not what is intended here.

[Proverbs 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 20:27</span></span>

The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord - God has given to every man
a mind, which he so enlightens by his own Spirit, that the man knows how
to distinguish good from evil; and conscience, which springs from this,
searches the inmost recesses of the soul.

[Proverbs 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 20:28</span></span>

Mercy and truth preserve the king - These are the brightest jewels in
the royal crown; and those kings who are most governed by them have the
stablest government.

[Proverbs 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 20:29</span></span>

The glory of young men is their strength - Scarcely any young man
affects to be wise, learned, etc.; but all delight to show their
strength and to be reputed strong. Agility, one evidence of strength,
their particularly affect; and hence their various trials of strength
and fleetness in public exercises.

And the beauty of old men is the gray head - They no longer affect
strength and agility, but they affect wisdom, experience, prudent
counsels, etc., and are fond of being reputed wise, and of having
respect paid to their understanding and experience.

[Proverbs 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 20:30</span></span>

The blueness of a wound - חברות chabburoth, from חבר chabar, to unite,
to join together. Does it not refer to the cicatrice of a wound when, in
its healing, the two lips are brought topether? By this union the wound
is healed; and by the previous discharge the lace-rated ends of fibres
and blood-vessels are purged away. So stripes, though they hurt for the
time, become the means of correcting and discharging the moral evil of
the inmost soul, the vice of the heart, the easily-besetting sin.

In this chapter, verses fourteen to nineteen, inclusive, are wanting in
the Septuagint and Arabic; and the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth, come in after the twenty-second. It is difficult to account
for these variations, unless they were occasioned by the change of
leaves in MSS.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 21](pro021)

</div>
