<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro026)  [Next](pro028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 27:0</span></span>

To-morrow is uncertain. Self-praise forbidden. Anger and envy. Reproof
from a friend. Want makes us feel the value of a supply. A good
neighbor. Beware of suretyship. Suspicious praise. The quarrelsome
woman. One friend helps another. Man insatiable. The incorrigible fool.
Domestic cares. The profit of flocks for food and raiment.

[Proverbs 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 27:1</span></span>

Boast not thyself of to-morrow - See note on [Jam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013), etc. Do not depend on any future
moment for spiritual good which at present thou needest, and God is
willing to give, and without which, should death surprise thee, thou
must be eternally lost; such as repentance, faith in Christ, the pardon
of sin, the witness of the Holy Spirit, and complete renovation of soul.
Be incessant in thy application to God for these blessings.

My old MS. Bible translates thus: Ne glorie thou into the morewenning.
Here we see the derivation of our word morning; morewenning, from more,
and wen or won, to dwelt, i.e., a continuance of time to live or dwell
in your present habitation. Every man wishes to live longer, and
therefore wishes for to-morrow; and when to-morrow comes, then
to-morrow, and so on.

[Proverbs 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 27:2</span></span>

Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth - We have a similar
proverb, which illustrates this: "Self-praise is no commendation."

[Proverbs 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 27:4</span></span>

Who is able to stand before envy? - The rabbins have a curious story on
this subject, and it has been formed by the moderns into a fable. There
were two persons, one covetous and the other envious, to whom a certain
person promised to grant whatever they should ask; but double to him who
should ask last. The covetous man would not ask first, because he wished
to get the double portion, and the envious man would not make the first
request because he could not bear the thoughts of thus benefiting his
neighbor. However, at last he requested that one of his eyes should be
taken out, in order that his neighbor might lose both.

[Proverbs 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 27:5</span></span>

Open rebuke is better than secret love - Plutarch gives an account of a
man who, aiming a blow at his enemy's life, cut open an imposthume,
which by a salutary discharge saved his life, that was sinking under a
disease for which a remedy could not be found. Partial friendship covers
faults; envy, malice, and revenge, will exhibit, heighten, and even
multiply them. The former conceals us from ourselves; the latter shows
us the worst part of our character. Thus we are taught the necessity of
amendment and correction. In this sense open rebuke is better than
secret love. Yet it is a rough medicine, and none can desire it. But the
genuine open-hearted friend may be intended, who tells you your faults
freely but conceals them from all others; hence the sixth verse:
"Faithful are the wounds of a friend."

[Proverbs 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 27:8</span></span>

Is a bird that wandereth from her nest - Leaving her own brood, places
of retreat, and feeding-ground behind, and going into strange countries,
where she is exposed to every kind of danger. So is the man who leaves
his family connections and country, and goes into strange parts to find
employment, better his circumstances, make a fortune, etc. I have seen
multitudes of such wanderers from their place come to great misery and
wretchedness. God's general advice is, "Do good, and dwell in the land;
and verily thou shalt be fed."

[Proverbs 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 27:9</span></span>

Ointment and perfume - Anointing the head and various parts of the body
with aromatic oil is frequent in the East, and fumigating the beards of
the guests at the conclusion of an entertainment is almost universal; as
is also sprinkling rose-water, and water highly ordoriferous. Two of the
curious vessels which are used for this purpose are now before me; they
hold some quarts each, and are beautifully inlaid with silver in the
form of sprigs, leaves, etc.

[Proverbs 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 27:10</span></span>

Thine own friend - A well and long tried friend is invaluable. Him that
has been a friend to thy family never forget, and never neglect. And, in
the time of adversity, rather apply to such a one, than go to thy
nearest relative, who keeps himself at a distance.

[Proverbs 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 27:12</span></span>

A prudent man foreseeth the evil - The very same as [Pro
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#003).

[Proverbs 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 27:13</span></span>

Take his garment - The same as [Pro
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#016).

[Proverbs 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 27:14</span></span>

He that blesseth his friend - He who makes loud and public protestations
of acknowledgments to his friend for favors received, subjects his
sincerity to suspicion; and remember the Italian proverb elsewhere
quoted: - "He who praises you more than he was wont to do, has either
deceived you, or is about to do it." Extravagant public professions are
little to be regarded.

[Proverbs 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 27:15</span></span>

A continual dropping - See [Pro 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#013).

[Proverbs 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 27:16</span></span>

Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind - You may as well attempt to
repress the blowing of the wind, as the tongue of a scold; and to
conceal this unfortunate propensity of a wife is as impossible as to
hush the storm, and prevent its sound from being heard.

The ointment of his right hand - You can no more conceal such a woman's
conduct, than you can the smell of the aromatic oil with which your hand
has been anointed. The Hebrew is very obscure, and is variously
translated. Coverdale thus: "He that refrayneth her, refrayneth the
wynde; and holdith oyle fast in his honde." That is, he attempts to do
what is impossible to be done.

[Proverbs 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 27:17</span></span>

Iron sharpeneth iron - As hard iron, viz., steel, will bring a knife to
a better edge when it is properly whetted against it: so one friend may
be the means of exciting another to reflect, dive deeply into, and
illustrate a subject, without which whetting or excitement, this had
never taken place. Had Horace seen this proverb in the Septuagint
translation when he wrote to the Pisos?

Ergo fungar vice cotis, acutum

Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secandi.

Hor. Ars. Poet., ver. 304.

"But let me sharpen others, as the hone

Gives edge to razors, though itself have none."

Francis.

[Proverbs 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 27:19</span></span>

As in water face answereth to face - All men's hearts are pretty nearly
alike; water is not more like to water, than one heart is to another.
Or, as a man sees his face perfectly reflected by the water, when
looking into it; so the wise and penetrating man sees generally what is
in the heart of another by considering the general tenor of his words
and actions.

"Surely, if each man saw another's heart

There would be no commerce;All would disperse,And live apart."

Hebert.

[Proverbs 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 27:20</span></span>

Hell and destruction are never full - How hideous must the soul of a
covetous man be, when God compares it to hell and perdition!

The eyes of man are never satisfied - As the grave can never be filled
up with bodies, nor perdition with souls; so the restless desire, the
lust of power, riches, and splendor, is never satisfied. Out of this
ever unsatisfied desire spring all the changing fashions, the varied
amusements, and the endless modes of getting money, prevalent in every
age, and in every country.

[Proverbs 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 27:21</span></span>

As the fining pot for silver - As silver and gold are tried by the art
of the refiner, so is a man's heart by the praise he receives. If he
feel it not, he deserves it; if he be puffed up by it, he is worthless.

[Proverbs 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 27:22</span></span>

Though thou shouldest bray a fool - Leaving all other conjectures, of
which commentators are full, I would propose, that this is a metaphor
taken from pounding metallic ores in very large mortars, such as are
still common in the East, in order that, when subjected to the action of
the fire, the metal may be the more easily separated from the ore.
However you may try, by precept or example, or both, to instruct a
stupid man, your labor is lost; his foolishness cannot be separated from
him. You may purge metals of all their dross; but you cannot purge the
fool of his folly.

[Proverbs 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 27:23</span></span>

The state of thy flocks - The directions to the end of the chapter refer
chiefly to pastoral and agricultural affairs. Do not trust thy flocks to
the shepherd merely; number them thyself; look into their condition; see
how they are tended; and when, and with what, and in what proportion,
they are fed.

[Proverbs 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 27:24</span></span>

For riches are not for ever - All other kinds of property are very
transitory. Money and the highest civil honors are but for a short
season. Flocks and herds, properly attended to, may be multiplied and
continued from generation to generation. The crown itself is not
naturally so permanent.

[Proverbs 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 27:25</span></span>

The hay appeareth - Take care that this be timeously mown, carefully
dried and safely ricked or housed. And when the tender grass and the
proper herbs appear in the mountains in the spring, then send forth the
lambs, the young of the flock, that they may get suitable pasturage,
without too much impoverishing the home fields; for by the sale of the
lambs and goats, the price of the field is paid - all the landlord's
demands are discharged. Either a certain number of lambs, goats, and
other cattle, was given to the landlord; or so much money as so many
lambs, etc., were then worth.

[Proverbs 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 27:26</span></span>

The lambs are for thy clothing - So many fleeces are given in some
places as rent to the landlord.

[Proverbs 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 27:27</span></span>

Goats' milk enough for thy food - ללחמך lelachmecha, "to thy bread;" for
they ate the bread and supped the milk to assist mastication, and help
deglutition. And it seems that bread, with goats' milk, was the general
article of food for the master and his family; and for the servant maids
who assisted in the household work, and performed the operations
required in the dairy.

The reader who wishes to see these maxims detailed and illustrated at
large, may consult the writers De Re Rustica, where he will find much
curious information.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 28](pro028)

</div>
