<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro010)  [Next](pro012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 11:0</span></span>

A parallel of the advantages of the righteous and wise, opposed to the
miseries of the wicked and the foolish. True and false riches.

[Proverbs 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 11:1</span></span>

A false balance is abomination - This refers to the balance itself
deceitfully constructed, so that it is sooner turned at one end than at
the other. This is occasioned by one end of the beam being longer than
the other.

But a just weight - אבן שלמה eben shelemah, the perfect stone probably
because weights were first made of stone; see the law, [Deu
25:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013) (note).

[Proverbs 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 11:2</span></span>

When pride cometh - The proud man thinks much more of himself than any
other can do; and, expecting to be treated according to his own supposed
worth, which treatment he seldom meets with, he is repeatedly mortified,
ashamed, confounded, and rendered indignant.

With the lowly - צנועים tsenuim, ταπεινων, the humble, the modest, as
opposed to the proud, referred to in the first clause. The humble man
looks for nothing but justice; has the meanest opinion of himself;
expects nothing in the way of commendation or praise; and can never be
disappointed but in receiving praise, which he neither expects nor
desires.

[Proverbs 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 11:4</span></span>

Riches profit not in the day of wrath - Among men they can do all
things; but they cannot purchase the remission of sins, nor turn aside
the wrath of God when that is poured out upon the opulent transgressor.

[Proverbs 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 11:7</span></span>

When a wicked man dieth - Hope is a great blessing to man in his present
state of trial and suffering; because it leads him to expect a favorable
termination of his ills. But hope was not made for the wicked; and yet
they are the very persons that most abound in it! They hope to be saved,
and get at last to the kingdom of God; though they have their face
towards perdition, and refuse to turn. But their hope goes no farther
than the grave. There the wicked man's expectation is cut off, and his
hope perishes. But to the saint, the penitent, and the cross-bearers in
general, what a treasure is hope! What a balm through life!

[Proverbs 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 11:8</span></span>

The wicked cometh in his stead - Often God makes this distinction; in
public calamities and in sudden accidents he rescues the righteous, and
leaves the wicked, who has filled up the measure of his iniquities, to
be seized by the hand of death. Justice, then, does its own work; for
mercy has been rejected.

[Proverbs 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 11:9</span></span>

A hypocrite with his mouth - חנף chaneph might be better translated
infidel than hypocrite. The latter is one that pretends to religion;
that uses it for secular purposes. The former is one who disbelieves
Divine revelation, and accordingly is polluted, and lives in pollution.
This is properly the force of the original word. Such persons deal in
calumny and lies, and often thus destroy the character of their
neighbor. Besides, they are very zealous in propagating their own
infidel notions; and thus, by this means, destroy their neighbor; but
the experimental knowledge which the just have of God and his salvation
prevents them from being ensnared.

[Proverbs 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 11:10</span></span>

When it goeth well - An upright, pious, sensible man is a great blessing
to the neighborhood where he resides, by his example, his advice, and
his prayers. The considerate prize him on these accounts, and rejoice in
his prosperity. But when the wicked perish, who has been a general curse
by the contagion of his example and conversation, there is not only no
regret expressed for his decease, but a general joy because God has
removed him.

[Proverbs 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 11:12</span></span>

He that is void of wisdom - A foolish man is generally abundant in his
censures; he dwells on the defects of his neighbor, and is sure to bring
them into the most prominent view. But a man of understanding - a
prudent, sensible man, hides those defects wherever he can, and puts the
most charitable construction on those which he cannot conceal.

[Proverbs 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 11:13</span></span>

A talebearer - הולך רכיל holech rachil, the walking busybody, the trader
in scandal.

Revealeth secrets - Whatever was confided to him he is sure to publish
abroad. The word means a hawker, or travelling chapman. Such are always
great newsmongers; and will tell even their own secrets, rather than
have nothing to say.

[Proverbs 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 11:15</span></span>

He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it - He shall find evil
upon evil in it. See on [Pro 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)
(note).

[Proverbs 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 11:16</span></span>

A gracious woman retaineth honor - Instead of this clause, the
Septuagint have, Γυνη ευχαριστος εγειρει ανδρι δοζαν, "A gracious woman
raiseth up honor to the man;" Θρονος δε ατιμιας γυνη μισουσα δικαια,
"But she that hateth righteous things is a throne of dishonor." A good
wife is an honor to her husband; and a bad wife is her husband's
reproach: if this be so, how careful should a man be whom he marries!

[Proverbs 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 11:17</span></span>

The merciful man doeth good to his own soul - Every gracious disposition
is increased while a man is exercised in showing mercy. No man can show
an act of disinterested mercy without benefiting his own soul, by
improving his moral feeling.

But he that is cruel troubleth his own flesh - We seldom see a peevish,
fretful, vindictive man either in good health, or good plight of body. I
have often heard it observed of such, "He frets his flesh off his
bones."

[Proverbs 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 11:18</span></span>

Worketh a deceitful work - An unstable work; nothing is durable that he
does, except his crimes.

[Proverbs 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 11:19</span></span>

Righteousness tendeth to life - True godliness promotes health, and is
the best means of lengthening out life; but wicked men live not out half
their days.

[Proverbs 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 11:21</span></span>

Though hand join in hand - Let them confederate as they please, to
support each other, justice will take care that they escape not
punishment. The Hindoos sometimes ratify an engagement by one person
laying his right hand on the hand of another - Ward.

[Proverbs 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 11:22</span></span>

A jewel of gold in a swine's snout - That is, beauty in a woman
destitute of good breeding and modest carriage, is as becoming as a gold
ring on the snout of a swine. Coverdale translates thus: "A fayre woman
without discrete maners, is like a ringe of golde in a swyne's snoute."
In Asiatic countries the nose jewel is very common: to this the text
alludes.

[Proverbs 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 11:24</span></span>

There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth - The bountiful man, who
gives to the poor, never turning away his face from any one in distress,
the Lord blesses his property and the bread is multiplied in his hand.
To the same purpose the following verse.

[Proverbs 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 11:25</span></span>

The liberal soul shall be made fat - He who gives to the distressed, in
the true spirit of charity, shall get a hundred fold from God's mercy.
How wonderful is the Lord! He gives the property, gives the heart to use
it aright, and recompenses the man for the deed though all the fruit was
found from himself!

He that watereth - A man who distributes in the right spirit gets more
good himself than the poor man does who receives the bounty. Thus it is
more blessed to give than to receive.

[Proverbs 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 11:26</span></span>

He that withholdeth corn - Who refuses to sell because he hopes for a
dearth, and then he can make his own price.

The people shall curse him - Yes, and God shall curse him also; and if
he do not return and repent, he will get God's curse, and the curse of
the poor, which will be a canker in his money during time, and in his
soul throughout eternity.

[Proverbs 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 11:29</span></span>

Shalt inherit the wind - He who dissipates his property by riotous
living, shall be as unsatisfied as he who attempts to feed upon air.

[Proverbs 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 11:30</span></span>

The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life - עץ חיים ets chaiyim, "the
tree of lives." It is like that tree which grew in the paradise of God;
increasing the bodily and mental vigor of those who ate of it.

He that winneth souls is wise - Wisdom seeks to reclaim the wanderers;
and he who is influenced by wisdom will do the same.

[Proverbs 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 11:31</span></span>

Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, etc. - The
Septuagint, Syrian, and Arabic read this verse as follows: "And if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear?" And this St, Peter quotes literatim, [Pe1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018) (note), where see the note.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 12](pro012)

</div>
