<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro009)  [Next](pro011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 10:0</span></span>

It is impossible to give summaries of such chapters as these, where
almost every verse contains a separate subject. Our common version not
being able to exhibit the contents as usual, simply says, "From this
chapter to the five and twentieth are sundry observations upon moral
virtues, and their opposite vices." In general the wise man states in
this chapter the difference between the wise and the foolish, the
righteous and the wicked, the diligent and the idle. He speaks also of
love and hatred, of the good and the evil tongue, or of the slanderer
and the peace-maker.

[Proverbs 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 10:1</span></span>

The proverbs of Solomon - Some ancient MSS. of the Vulgate have
Proverbiorum liber secundus, "The second book of the Proverbs." The
preceding nine chapters can only be considered as an introduction, if
indeed they may be said to make even a part, of the proverbs of Solomon,
which appear to commence only at the tenth chapter.

A wise son maketh a glad father - The parallels in this and several of
the succeeding chapters are those which Bishop Lowth calls the
antithetic; when two lines correspond with each other by an opposition
of terms and sentiments; when the second is contrasted with the first;
sometimes in expression, sometimes in sense only. Accordingly the
degrees of antithesis are various; from an exact contraposition of word
to word, through a whole sentence, down to a general disparity, with
something of a contrariety in the two propositions, as: -

A wise son rejoiceth in his father.

But a foolish son is the grief of his mother.

Where every word has its opposite; for the terms father and mother are,
as the logicians say, relatively opposite.

[Proverbs 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 10:2</span></span>

Treasures of wickedness - Property gained by wicked means.

Delivered from death - Treasures gained by robbery often bring their
possessors to an untimely death; but those gained by righteous dealing
bring with them no such consequences.

[Proverbs 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 10:3</span></span>

But he casteth away the substance of the wicked - But instead of רשעים
reshaim, the wicked, בוגדים bogedim, hypocrites, or perfidious persons,
is the reading of twelve or fourteen of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS.,
and some editions; but it is not acknowledged by any of the ancient
versions.

The righteous have God for their feeder; and because of his infinite
bounty, they can never famish for want of the bread of life. On the
contrary, the wicked are often, in the course of his providence,
deprived of the property of which they make a bad use.

[Proverbs 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 10:4</span></span>

He becometh poor - God has ordered, in the course of his providence,
that he who will not work shall not eat. And he always blesses the work
of the industrious man.

[Proverbs 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 10:5</span></span>

He that gathereth in summer - All the work of the field should be done
in the season suitable to it. If summer and harvest be neglected, in
vain does a man expect the fruits of autumn.

[Proverbs 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 10:6</span></span>

Violence covereth the mouth of the wicked - As blessings shall be on the
head of the just, so the violence of the wicked shall cover their face
with shame and confusion. Their own violent dealings shall be visited
upon them. The mouth forsoth of unpitious men wickidnesse covereth. -
Old MS. Bible. "The forehead of the ungodly is past shame, and
presumptuous." - Coverdale.

[Proverbs 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 10:7</span></span>

The memory of the just is blessed - Or, is a blessing.

But the name of the wicked shall rot - This is another antithesis; but
there are only two antithetic terms, for memory and name are synonymous
- Lowth. The very name of the wicked is as offensive as putrid carrion.

[Proverbs 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 10:8</span></span>

A prating fool shall fall - This clause is repeated in the tenth verse.
The wise man will receive the commandment: but the shallow blabbing fool
shall be cast down. See [Pro 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#010).

[Proverbs 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 10:9</span></span>

He that walketh uprightly - The upright man is always safe; he has not
two characters to support; he goes straight forward, and is never afraid
of detection, because he has never been influenced by hypocrisy or
deceit.

[Proverbs 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 10:10</span></span>

He that winketh with the eye - Instead of the latter clause, on which
see [Pro 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#008), the Septuagint has, ὁ
δε ελεγχων μετα παῥρησιας ειρηνοποιει· "but he that reproveth with
freedom, maketh peace." This is also the reading of the Syriac and
Arabic. A faithful open reproving of sin is more likely to promote the
peace of society than the passing it by slightly, or taking no notice of
it; for if the wicked turn to God at the reproof, the law of peace will
soon be established in his heart, and the law of kindness will flow from
his tongue.

[Proverbs 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 10:11</span></span>

The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life - מקור חיים mekor
chaiyim, is the vein of lives; an allusion to the great aorta, which
conveys the blood from the heart to every art of the body. The latter
clause of this verse is the same with that of [Pro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#006).

[Proverbs 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 10:12</span></span>

Hatred stirreth up strifes - It seeks for occasions to provoke enmity.
It delights in broils. On the contrary, love conciliates; removes
aggravations; puts the best construction on every thing; and pours
water, not oil, upon the flame.

[Proverbs 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 10:13</span></span>

A rod is for the back of him - He that can learn, and will not learn,
should be made to learn. The rod is a most powerful instrument of
knowledge. Judiciously applied, there is a lesson of profound wisdom in
every twig.

[Proverbs 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 10:14</span></span>

Wise men lay up knowledge - They keep secret every thing that has a
tendency to disturb domestic or public peace; but the foolish man blabs
all out, and produces much mischief. Think much, speak little, and
always think before you speak. This will promote your own peace and that
of your neighbor.

[Proverbs 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 10:15</span></span>

The rich man's wealth is his strong city - Behold a mystery in
providence; there is not a rich man on earth but becomes such by means
of the poor! Property comes from the labor of the poor, and the king
himself is served of the field. How unjust, diabolically so, is it to
despise or oppress those by whose labor all property is acquired!

The destruction of the poor is their poverty - A man in abject poverty
never arises out of this pit. They have no nucleus about which property
may aggregate. The poet spoke well: -

Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat

Res angusta domi.

"They rarely emerge from poverty, whose exertions are cramped by want at
home."

[Proverbs 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 10:16</span></span>

The labor of the righteous - The good man labors that he may be able to
support life; this is his first object: and then to have something to
divide with the poor; this is his next object.

The fruit of the wicked to sin - This man lives to eat and drink, and
his property he spends in riot and excess. God's blessings are cursed to
him.

[Proverbs 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 10:17</span></span>

He is in the way of life - The truly religious man accumulates knowledge
that he may the better know how to live to God, and do most good among
men.

[Proverbs 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 10:18</span></span>

He that hideth - This is a common case. How many, when full of
resentment, and deadly hatred, meditating revenge and cruelty, and
sometimes even murder, have pretended that they thought nothing of the
injury they had sustained; had passed by the insult, etc.! Thus lying
lips covered the malevolence of a wicked heart.

[Proverbs 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 10:19</span></span>

In the multitude of words - It is impossible to speak much, and yet
speak nothing but truth; and injure no man's character in the mean
while.

[Proverbs 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 10:20</span></span>

The heart of the wicked is little worth - כמעט kimat, is like little or
nothing; or is like dross, while the tongue of the just is like silver.
A sinner's heart is worth nothing, and is good for nothing; and yet
because it is his most hidden part, he vaunts of its honesty, goodness,
etc.! Yes, yes; it is very honest and good, only the devil is in it!
that is all.

[Proverbs 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 10:22</span></span>

The blessing of the Lord, it maketh rich - Whatever we receive in the
way of providence, has God's blessing in it, and will do us good. Cares,
troubles, and difficulties come with all property not acquired in this
way; but God's blessing gives simple enjoyment, and levies no tax upon
the comfort.

[Proverbs 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 10:23</span></span>

It is a sport to a fool to do mischief - What a millstone weight of
iniquity hangs about the necks of most of the jesters. facetious and
witty people! "How many lies do they tell in jest, to go to the devil in
earnest!"

[Proverbs 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 10:24</span></span>

The fear of the wicked - The wicked is full of fears and alarms; and all
that he has dreaded and more than he has dreaded, shall come upon him.
The righteous is always desiring more of the salvation of God, and God
will exceed even his utmost desires.

[Proverbs 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 10:25</span></span>

As the whirlwind passeth - As tornadoes that sweep every thing away
before them; so shall the wrath of God sweep away the wicked; it shall
leave him neither branch nor root. But the righteous, being built on the
eternal foundation, יסוד עולם yesod olam, shall never be shaken.

[Proverbs 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 10:26</span></span>

As vinegar to the teeth - The acid softening and dissolving the alkali
of the bone, so as to impair their texture, and render them incapable of
masticating; and as smoke affects the eyes, irritating their tender
vessels, so as to give pain and prevent distinct vision; so the
sluggard, the lounging, thriftless messenger, who never returns in time
with the desired answer.

[Proverbs 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 10:28</span></span>

The expectation of the wicked shall perish - A wicked man is always
imposing on himself by the hope of God's mercy and final happiness; and
he continues hoping, till he dies without receiving that mercy which
alone would entitle him to that glory.

[Proverbs 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 10:29</span></span>

The way of the Lord is strength - In the path of obedience the upright
man ever finds his strength renewed; the more he labors the stronger he
grows. The same sentiment as that in [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031).

[Proverbs 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 10:30</span></span>

The righteous shall never be removed - Because he is built on the
eternal foundation. See on [Pro 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#025)
(note).

[Proverbs 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 10:31</span></span>

The froward tongue shall be cut out - This probably alludes to the
punishment of cutting out the tongue for blasphemy, treasonable
speeches, profane swearing, or such like. The tunge of schrewis schal
perishen. - Old MS. Bible. Were the tongue of every shrew or scold to be
extracted, we should soon have much less noise in the world.

[Proverbs 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 10:32</span></span>

The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable - And what they
believe to be most pleasing and most profitable, that they speak, but
the wicked man knows as well what is perverse, and that he speaketh
forth. As the love of God is not in his heart, so the law of kindness is
not on his lips.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 11](pro011)

</div>
