<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro023)  [Next](pro025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 24:0</span></span>

Do not be envious. Of the house wisely built. Counsel necessary in war.
Save life when thou canst. Of honey and the honey-comb. Of the just that
falleth seven times. We should not rejoice at the misfortune of others.
Ruin of the wicked. Fear God and the king. Prepare thy work. The field
of the sluggard, and the vineyard of the foolish, described.

[Proverbs 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 24:3</span></span>

Through wisdom is a house blinded - That is, a family; household
affairs. See the notes on [Pro 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001.md)
(note), etc.

[Proverbs 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 24:5</span></span>

A wise man is strong - His wisdom enables him to construct a great
variety of machines, by which, under his own influence, he can do the
labor of a hundred or even a thousand men. But in all cases wisdom gives
power and influence; and he who is wise to salvation can overcome even
Satan himself. The Septuagint has: "The wise is better than the strong;
and the man who has prudence, than a stout husbandman."

[Proverbs 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 24:6</span></span>

By wise counsel thou shalt make thy war - See note on [Pro
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#018.md).

[Proverbs 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 24:7</span></span>

A fool - openeth not his mouth in the gate - Is not put into public
offices of trust and responsibility.

[Proverbs 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 24:9</span></span>

The thought of foolishness is sin - זמת אולת חטאת zimmath ivveleth
chattath. "The device of folly is transgression;" or, "an evil purpose
is sinful;" or, perhaps more literally, "the device of the foolish is
sin." It has been variously understood by the versions.

"The cunning: of the fool is sin."

\- Targum.

"The imprudent man (or fool, αφρων) shall die in sins."

\- Septuagint.

So the Arabic.

The thinkynge of the fool is synne

\- Old MS. Bible.

Fool is here taken for a wicked man, who is not only evil in his
actions, but every thought of his heart is evil, and that continually. A
simple thought about foolishness, or about sin itself, is not sinful; it
is the purpose or device, the harbouring evil thoughts, and devising how
to sin, that is criminal.

[Proverbs 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 24:10</span></span>

If thou faint - If thou give way to discouragement and despair in the
day of adversity - time of trial or temptation.

Thy strength is small - צר כחכה tsar cochachah, thy strength is
contracted. So the old MS. Bible excellently: Gif sliden thou dispeire,
in the dai of anguyfs, schal be made litil thy strengthe. In times of
trial we should endeavor to be doubly courageous; when a man loses his
courage, his strength avails him nothing.

[Proverbs 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 24:11</span></span>

If thou forbear to deliver - If thou seest the innocent taken by the
hand of lawless power or superstitious zeal, and they are about to be
put to death, thou shouldst rise up in their behalf, boldly plead for
them, testify to their innocence when thou knowest it; and thus thou
wilt not be guilty of blood; which thou wouldst be, if, through any
pretense, thou shouldst neglect to save the life of a man unjustly
condemned.

[Proverbs 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 24:13</span></span>

And the honey-comb - I have often had occasion to remark how much finer
the flavour of honey is in the honey-comb than it is after it has been
expressed from it, and exposed to the action of the air. But it has been
asserted that the honey-comb is never eaten; it must be by those who
have no acquaintance with the apiary. I have seen the comb with its
contained honey eaten frequently, and of it I have repeatedly partaken.
And that our Lord ate it, is evident from [Luk
24:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#042.md). Nor can any man who has not
eaten it in this way feel the full force of the allusions to the
honey-comb and its sweetness in several parts of the sacred writings.
See [Sa1 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#027.md); [Psa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010.md); [Pro
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md); [Pro
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#024.md); [Pro
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#007.md); [Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011.md); [Sol
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md); and the place before us.

[Proverbs 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 24:14</span></span>

So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul - True religion,
experimental godliness, shall be to thy soul as the honey-comb is to thy
mouth.

Then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall not be cut off -
This is precisely the same with that in [Pro
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#018) (note.md), where see the note. The
word אחרית acharith, we translate in the former place an end, and here
we translate it a reward; but there is no place I believe in the sacred
writings in which it has any such acceptation; nor can such a meaning be
deduced from the root אחר achar, which always refers to behind, after,
extremity, latter part, time, etc., but never carries the idea of
recompense, compensation, or such like; nor has one of the versions
understood it so. There is another state or life, and thy expectation of
happiness in a future world shall not be cut off. In this sense the
versions all understood it. I will take them as they lie before me.

"Which (wisdom) when thou shalt have found, thou shalt have hope in thy
last days; and thy hope shall not perish." - Vulgate.

"And if thou find it, thou shalt have a good death; and hope shall not
forsake thee." - Septuagint.

"Which, if thou have found, thy latter days shall be better than the
former; and thy hope shall not be consumed." - Chaldee.

"There shall be an end, and thy hope shall not be cut off." - Syriac.

"For, if thou shalt find her, (wisdom), thy death shall be glorious, and
thy hope will not fail thee." - Arabic.

Whiche whan thou fyndist schalt han in the last thingis, hope: and thin
hope schal not perischen - Old MS. Bible.

"And there is Good Hope; yee that hope shal not be in vayne." -
Coverdale.

This rendering is indefinite, which is not the usual custom of the
translator.

[Proverbs 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 24:15</span></span>

The dwelling of the righteous - צדיק tsaddik, the man who is walking
unblameably in all the testimonies of God; who is rendering to every man
his due.

[Proverbs 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 24:16</span></span>

For a just man - צדיק tsaddik, the righteous, the same person mentioned
above.

Falleth seven times - Gets very often into distresses through his
resting place being spoiled by the wicked man, the robber, the spoiler
of the desert, lying in wait for this purpose, [Pro
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#015.md).

And riseth up again - Though God permit the hand of violence sometimes
to spoil his tent, temptations to assail his mind, and afflictions to
press down his body, he constantly emerges; and every time he passes
through the furnace, he comes out brighter and more refined.

But the wicked shall fall into mischief - And there they shall lie;
having no strong arm to uphold them. Yet,

[Proverbs 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 24:17</span></span>

Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, (into this mischief), and let not
thine heart be glad when he stumbleth - When he meets with any thing
that injures him; for God will not have thee to avenge thyself, or feel
any disposition contrary to love; for if thou do, the Lord will be
angry, and may turn away his wrath from him, and pour it out on thee.

This I believe to be the true sense of these verses: but we must return
to the sixteenth, as that has been most sinfully misrepresented.

For a just man falleth seven times - That is, say many, "the most
righteous man in the world sins seven times a day on an average."
Solomon does not say so: -

1\. There is not a word about sin in the text.

2\. The word day is not in the Hebrew text, nor in any of the versions.

3\. The word יפול yippol, from נפל naphal, to fall, is never applied to
sin.

4\. When set in opposition to the words riseth up, it merely applies to
affliction or calamity. See [Mic 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008.md);
[Amo 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004.md); [Jer
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#027.md); and [Psa
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019.md), [Psa
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#020.md). "The righteous falls into
trouble." See above.

Mr. Holden has a very judicious note on this passage: "Injure not a
righteous man; for, though he frequently falls into distress, yet, by
the superintending care of Providence, 'he riseth up again,' is
delivered from his distress, while the wicked are overwhelmed with their
misfortunes. That this is the meaning is plain from the preceding and
following verses: yet some expound it by the just man often relapsing
into sin, and recovering from it; nay, it has even been adduced to prove
the doctrine of the final perseverance of the elect. But נפל is never
used for falling into sin, but into distress and affliction - as [Pro
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#005.md), [Pro
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014.md); [Pro
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#017.md); [Pro
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#020.md); [Pro
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027.md); [Pro
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#010.md), [Pro
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#014.md), [Pro
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#018.md)."

[Proverbs 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 24:18</span></span>

And he turn away his wrath from him - Wrath is here taken for the effect
of wrath, punishment; and the meaning must be as paraphrased above -
lest he take the punishment from him, and inflict it upon thee. And in
this way Coverdale understood it: "Lest the Lorde be angry, and turn his
wrath from him unto thee." Or we may understand it thus: Lest the Lord
inflict on thee a similar punishment; for if thou get into his spirit,
rejoicing in the calamities of another, thou deservest punishment.

[Proverbs 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 24:20</span></span>

For there shall be no reboard to the evil man - אחרית acharith. There
shall not be the future state of blessedness to the wicked. See the note
on [Pro 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#014) (note.md). His candle shall
be put out; his prosperity shall finally cease, or he shall have no
posterity. Some have thought that this text intimates the annihilation
of sinners; but it refers not to being, but to the state or condition of
that being. The wicked shall be; but they shall not be Happy.

[Proverbs 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 24:21</span></span>

My son, fear thou the Lord and the king - Pay to each the homage due: to
the Lord, Divine honor and adoration; to the king, civil respect, civil
honor, and political obedience.

Meddle not with them that are given to change - עם שונים אל תתערב im
shonim al titharab: "And with the changelings mingle not thyself." The
innovators; those who are always for making experiments on modes of
government, forms of religion, etc. The most dangerous spirit that can
infect the human mind.

[Proverbs 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 24:22</span></span>

The ruin of them both? - Of them who do not fear the Lord; and of them
that do not reverence the King.

[Proverbs 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 24:23</span></span>

These things also belong to the wise - גם אלה לחכמים gam elleh
lachachamim, "These also to wise." This appears to be a new section; and
perhaps, what follows belongs to another collection. Probably fragments
of sayings collected by wise men from the Proverbs of Solomon.

It is not good to have respect - Judgment and justice should never be
perverted.

[Proverbs 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 24:26</span></span>

Kiss his lips - Shall treat him with affection and respect.

[Proverbs 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 24:27</span></span>

Prepare thy work without - Do nothing without a plan. In winter prepare
seed, implements, tackle, geers, etc., for seed-time and harvest.

[Proverbs 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 24:28</span></span>

Be not a witness - Do not be forward to offer thyself to bear testimony
against a neighbor, in a matter which may prejudice him, where the
essential claims of justice do not require such interference; and
especially do not do this in a spirit of revenge, because he has injured
thee before.

[Proverbs 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 24:30</span></span>

I went by the field of the slothful - This is a most instructive
parable; is exemplified every day in a variety of forms; and is
powerfully descriptive of the state of many a blackslider and trifler in
religion. Calmet has an excellent note on this passage. I shall give the
substance of it.

Solomon often recommends diligence and economy to his disciples. In
those primitive times when agriculture was honorable, no man was
respected who neglected to cultivate his grounds, who sunk into poverty,
contracted debt, or engaged in ruinous securities. With great propriety,
a principal part of wisdom was considered by them as consisting in the
knowledge of properly conducting one's domestic affairs, and duly
cultivating the inheritances derived from their ancestors. Moses had
made a law to prevent the rich from utterly depressing the poor, by
obliging them to return their farms to them on the Sabbatic year, and to
remit all debts at the year of jubilee.

In the civil state of the Hebrews, we never see those enormous and
suddenly raised fortunes, which never subsist but in the ruin of
numberless families. One of the principal solicitudes of this legislator
was to produce, as far as possible in a monarchical state, an equality
of property and condition. The ancient Romans held agriculture in the
same estimation, and highly respected those who had applied themselves
to it with success. When they spoke in praise of a man, they considered
themselves as giving no mean commendation when they called him a good
husbandman, an excellent laborer. From such men they formed their most
valiant generals and intrepid soldiers. Cato De Re Rustica, cap. 1. The
property which is acquired by these means is most innocent, most solid,
and exposes its possessor less to envy than property acquired in any
other way. See Cicero De Officiis, lib. 1. In Britain the merchant is
all in all; and yet the waves of the sea are not more uncertain, nor
more tumultuous, than the property acquired in this way, or than the
agitated life of the speculative merchant.

But let us look more particularly into this very instructive parable: -

I. The owner is described.

1\. He was איש עצל ish atsel, the loitering, sluggish, slothful man.

2\. He was אדם חסר לב adam chasar leb, a man that wanted heart;
destitute of courage, alacrity, and decision of mind.

II\. His circumstances. This man had,

1\. שדה sadeh, a sowed field, arable ground. This was the character of
his estate. It was meadow and corn land.

2\. He had כרם kerem, a vineyard, what we would call perhaps garden and
orchard, where he might employ his skill to great advantage in raising
various kinds of fruits and culinary herbs for the support of his
family.

III\. The state of this heritage:

1\. "It was grown over with thorns." It had been long neglected, so that
even brambles were permitted to grow in the fields:

2\. "Nettles had covered the face thereof." It was not weeded, and all
kinds of rubbish had been suffered to multiply:

3\. "The stone wall was broken down." This belonged to the vineyard: it
was neither pruned nor digged; and the fence, for want of timely
repairs, had all fallen into ruins, [Pro
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#031.md).

IV\. The effect all this had on the attentive observer.

1\. I saw it, אחזה אנכי echezeh anochi, I fixed my attention on it. I
found it was no mere report. It is a fact. I myself was an eyewitness of
it.

2\. I considered it well, אשית לבי ashith libbi, I put my heart on it.
All my feelings were interested.

3\. I looked upon it, רעיתי raithi, I took an intellectual view of it.
And

4\. Thus I received instruction, לקחתי מוסר lakachti musar, I received a
very important lesson from it: but the owner paid no attention to it. He
alone was uninstructed; for he "slumbered, slept, and kept his hands in
his bosom." [Pro 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#033.md). "Hugged
himself in his sloth and carelessness."

V. The consequences of this conduct.

1\. Poverty described as coming like a traveler, making sure steps every
hour coming nearer and nearer to the door.

2\. Want, מחסר machsor, total destitution; want of all the necessaries,
conveniences, and comforts of life; and this is described as coming like
an armed man כאיש מגן keish magen, as a man with a shield, who comes to
destroy this unprofitable servant: or it may refer to a man coming with
what we call an execution into the house, armed with the law, to take
even his bed from the slumberer.

From this literal solution any minister of God may make a profitable
discourse.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 25](pro025.md)

</div>
