<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro011)  [Next](pro013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 12:0</span></span>

Of the benefit of instruction, and the cultivation of piety. The
virtuous woman. The different lot of the just and unjust. The humane
man. The industrious man. The fool and the wise man. The uncharitable.
The excellence of the righteous. The slothful is in want. Righteousness
leads to life, etc.

[Proverbs 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 12:1</span></span>

Whoso loveth instruction - מוסר musar, discipline or correction, loves
knowledge; for correction is the way to knowledge.

But he that hateth reproof is brutish - בער baar, he is a bear; and
expects no more benefit from correction than the ox does from the goad.

[Proverbs 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 12:2</span></span>

A good man obtaineth favor - First, it is God who makes him good; for
every child of Adam is bad till the grace of God changes his heart.
Secondly, while he walks in the path of obedience he increases in
goodness, and consequently in the favor of the Lord.

[Proverbs 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 12:3</span></span>

A man shall not be established by wickedness - Evil is always variable:
it has no fixed principle, except the root that is in the human heart;
and even that is ever assuming new forms. Nothing is permanent but
goodness; and that is unchangeable, because it comes from God. The
produce of goodness is permanent, because it has God's blessing in it:
the fruit of wickedness, or the property procured by wickedness, is
transitory, because it has God's curse in it. The righteous has his root
in God; and therefore he shall not be moved.

[Proverbs 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 12:4</span></span>

A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband - אשת חיל esheth chayil, a
strong woman. Our word virtue (virtus) is derived from vir, a man; and
as man is the noblest of God's creatures, virtue expresses what is
becoming to man; what is noble, courageous, and dignified: and as vir, a
man, comes from vis, power or strength; so it implies what is strong and
vigorous in principle: and as in uncivilized life strength and courage
were considered the very highest, because apparently the most necessary,
of all virtues; hence the term itself might have become the denomination
of all excellent moral qualities; and is now applied to whatever
constitutes the system of morality and moral duties. In some parts of
the world, however, where arts and sciences have made little progress,
strength is one of the first qualifications of a wife, where the labors
of the field are appointed to them. It is not an uncommon sight in
different parts of Africa, to see the wives (queens) of the kings and
chiefs going out in the morning to the plantations, with their mattock
in their hand, and their youngest child on their back; and when arrived
at the ground, lay the young prince or princess upon the earth, which
when weary of lying on one side, will roll itself on the other, and thus
continue during the course of the day, without uttering a single
whimper, except at the intervals in which its mother gives it suck; she
being employed all the while in such labor as we in Europe generally
assign to our horses. In these cases, the strong wife is the highest
acquisition; and is a crown to her husband, though he be king of Bonny
or Calabar. It is certain that in ancient times the women in Judea did
some of the severest work in the fields, such as drawing water from the
wells, and watering the flocks, etc. On this account, I think, the words
may be taken literally; and especially when we add another
consideration, that a woman healthy, and of good muscular powers, is the
most likely to produce and properly rear up a healthy offspring; and
children of this kind are a crown to their parents.

Is as rottenness in his bones - Does not this refer to a woman irregular
in her manners, who by her incontinence not only maketh her husband
ashamed, but contracts and communicates such diseases as bring
rottenness into the bones? I think so. And I think this was the view
taken of the text by Coverdale, who translates thus: "A stedfast woman
is a crowne unto her hussbonde: but she that behaveth herself unhonestly
is a corruption in his bones."

[Proverbs 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 12:7</span></span>

The wicked are overthrown - Seldom does God give such a long life or
numerous offspring.

But the house of the righteous shall stand - God blesses their progeny,
and their families continue long in the earth; whereas the wicked seldom
have many generations in a direct line. This is God's mercy, that the
entail of iniquity may be in some sort cut off, so that the same vices
may not be strengthened by successive generations. For generally the bad
root produces not only a bad plant, but one worse than itself.

[Proverbs 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 12:9</span></span>

He that is despised, and hath a servant - I believe the Vulgate gives
the true sense of this verse: Melior est pauper, et sufficiens sibi;
quam gloriosus, et indigens pane.

"Better is the poor man who provides for himself, than the proud who is
destitute of bread." The versions in general agree in this sense. This
needs no comment. There are some who, through pride of birth, etc.,
would rather starve, than put their hands to menial labor. Though they
may be lords, how much to be preferred is the simple peasant, who
supports himself and family by the drudgery of life!

[Proverbs 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 12:10</span></span>

A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast - One principal
characteristic of a holy man is mercy: cruelty is unknown to him; and
his benevolence extends to the meanest of the brute creation. Pity rules
the heart of a pious man; he can do nothing that is cruel. He considers
what is best for the comfort, ease health, and life of the beast that
serves him, and he knows that God himself careth for oxen: and one of
the ten commandments provides a seventh part of time to be allotted for
the rest of laboring beasts as well as for man.

I once in my travels met with the Hebrew of this clause on the sign
board of a public inn: יודע צדיק נפש בהמתו yodea tsaddik nephesh
behemto. "A righteous man considereth the life of his beast;" which,
being very appropriate, reminded me that I should feed my horse.

The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel - אחזרי achzari, are violent,
without mercy, ruthless. The wicked, influenced by Satan, can show no
other disposition than what is in their master. If they appear at any
time merciful, it is a cloak which they use to cover purposes of
cruelty. To accomplish its end, iniquity will assume any garb, speak
mercifully, extol benevolence, sometimes even give to the poor! But,
timeo Danaos, et dona ferentes. The cry of fire at midnight, provided it
be in another's dwelling, is more congenial to their souls than the; cry
of mercy. Look at the human fiends, "out-heroding Herod," in horse
races, bruising matches, and cock fights, and in wars for the extension
of territory, and the purposes of ambition. The hell is yet undescribed,
that is suited to such monsters in cruelty.

[Proverbs 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 12:11</span></span>

He that tilleth his land - God's blessing will be in the labor of the
honest agriculturist.

But he that followeth vain persons - He who, while he should be
cultivating his ground, preparing for a future crop, or reaping his
harvest, associates with fowlers, coursers of hares, hunters of foxes,
or those engaged in any champaign amusements, is void of understanding;
and I have known several such come to beggary.

To this verse the Septuagint add the following clause: 'ov estin en
oinwn diatribaiv, en toiv eautou ocurwmasi kataleiqei atimian. "He who
is a boon companion in banquets, shall leave dishonor in his own
fortresses." This has been copied by the Vulgate and the Arabic. That is
The man who frequents the ale-house enriches that, while he impoverishes
his own habitation.

[Proverbs 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 12:12</span></span>

The wicked desireth the net of evil men - They applaud their ways, and
are careful to imitate them in their wiles.

[Proverbs 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 12:13</span></span>

The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips - A man who deals
in lies and false oaths will sooner or later be found out to his own
ruin. There is another proverb as true as this: A liar had need of a
good memory; for as the truth is not in him, he says and unsays, and
often contradicts himself.

[Proverbs 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 12:16</span></span>

A fool's wrath is presently known - We have a proverb very like this,
and it will serve for illustration: -

A fool's bolt is soon shot.

A weak-minded man has no self-government; he is easily angered, and
generally speaks whatever comes first to his mind.

[Proverbs 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 12:18</span></span>

There is that speaketh - Instead of בוטה boteh, blabbing out,
blustering, several MSS. have בוטח boteach, Trusting: and instead of
כמדקרות kemadkeroth, As the piercings, seven MSS., with the
Complutensian Polyglot, have במדקרות bemadkeroth, In the piercings.
"There is that trusteth in the piercings of a sword: but the tongue of
the wise is health." But I suppose the former to be the true reading.

[Proverbs 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 12:19</span></span>

A lying tongue is but for a moment - Truth stands for ever; because its
foundation is indestructible: but falsehood may soon be detected; and,
though it gain credit for a while, it had that credit because it was
supposed to be truth.

[Proverbs 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 12:21</span></span>

There shall no evil happen to the just - No, for all things work
together for good to them that love God. Whatever occurs to a righteous
man God turns to his advantage. But, on the other hand, the wicked are
filled with mischief: they are hurt, grieved, and wounded, by every
occurrence; and nothing turns to their profit.

[Proverbs 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 12:23</span></span>

A prudent man concealeth knowledge - "If a fool hold his peace he may
pass for a wise man." I have known men of some learning, so intent on
immediately informing a company how well cultivated their minds were,
that they have passed either for insignificant pedants or stupid asses.

[Proverbs 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 12:24</span></span>

The hand of the diligent shall bear rule - And why? because by his own
industry he is independent; and every such person is respected wherever
found.

[Proverbs 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 12:25</span></span>

Heaviness in the heart of a man maketh it stoop - Sorrow of heart,
hopeless love, or a sense of God's displeasure - these prostrate the
man, and he becomes a child before them.

But a good word maketh it glad - A single good or favorable word will
remove despondency; and that word, "Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee," will instantly remove despair.

[Proverbs 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 12:26</span></span>

The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor - That is, if the
neighbor be a wicked man. The spirit of the proverb lies here: The Poor
righteous man is more excellent than his sinful neighbor, though
affluent and noble. The Syriac has it, "The righteous deviseth good to
his neighbor." A late commentator has translated it, "The righteous
explore their pastures." How מרעהו can be translated Their pastures I
know not; but none of the versions understood it in this way. The
Vulgate is rather singular: Qui negligit damnum propter amicum, justus
est. "He who neglects or sustains a loss for the sake of his friend, is
a just man." The Septuagint is insufferable: "The well-instructed
righteous man shall be his own friend." One would hope these translators
meant not exclusively; he should love his neighbor as himself.

[Proverbs 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 12:27</span></span>

The slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting - Because he
is a slothful man, he does not hunt for prey; therefore gets none, and
cannot roast, that he may eat. There is some obscurity in the original
on which the versions cast little light. Coverdale translates the whole
verse thus: "A discreatfull man schal fynde no vauntage: but he that is
content with what he hath, is more worth than golde." My old MS. Bible:
The gylful man schal not fynd wynnynge: and the substance of a man schal
ben the pris of gold.

By translating hymr remiyah the deceitful, instead of the slothful man,
which appears to be the genuine meaning of the word, we may obtain a
good sense, as the Vulgate has done: "The deceitful man shall not find
gain; but the substance of a (just) man shall be the price of gold." But
our common version, allowing hymr remiyah to be translated fraudulent,
which is its proper meaning, gives the best sense: "The fraudulent man
roasteth not that which he took in hunting," the justice of God
snatching from his mouth what he had acquired unrighteously.

But the substance of a diligent man - One who by honest industry
acquires all his property - is precious, because it has the blessing of
God in it.

[Proverbs 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 12:28</span></span>

In the way of righteousness is life - חיים chaiyim, lives; life
temporal, and life eternal.

And in the pathway thereof there is no death - Not only do the general
precepts and promises of God lead to life eternal, and promote life
temporal; but every duty, every act of faith, patience of hope, and
labor of love, though requiring much self-abasement, self-denial, and
often an extension of corporal strength, all lead to life. For in every
case, in every particular, "the path of duty is the way of safety." The
latter clause is only a repetition of the sense of the former.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 13](pro013.md)

</div>
