<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro022)  [Next](pro024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 23:0</span></span>

Sobriety in eating and drinking, especially at the tables of the great.
Have no fellowship with the covetous. Remove not the ancient landmark.
Children should receive due correction. Avoid the company of
wine-bibbers. Obedience to parents. Avoid lewd connections. The effect
of an unfeeling conscience.

[Proverbs 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 23:1</span></span>

When thou sittest to eat with a ruler - When invited to the table of thy
betters, eat moderately. Do not appear as if half starved at home. Eat
not of delicacies to which thou art not accustomed; they are deceitful
meat; they please, but they do not profit. They are pleasant to the
sight, the taste, and the smell; but they are injurious to health. These
are prudential cautions; and should be carefully observed by all who
would avoid the conduct of a clown, and desire to pass for a well-bred
man.

[Proverbs 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 23:2</span></span>

Put a knife to thy throat - Repress thy appetite, and do not be
incontinent of speech. Eat, drink, and converse, under a check.

[Proverbs 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 23:4</span></span>

Labour not to be rich - Let not this be thy object. Labour to provide
things honest in the sight of God and all men; and if thou get wealth,
do not forget the poor, else God's curse will be a canker even in thy
gold.

Cease from thine own wisdom - בינתך binathecha, thy own understanding or
prudence. The world says, "Get rich if thou canst, and how thou canst."
Rem, si possis, recte; si non, quocunque modo rem; "Get a fortune
honestly if thou canst; but if not, get one at all events." This is the
devil's counsel, and well it is followed; but Solomon says, and God
says, "Cease from thine own counsel." Thou hast an immortal soul, and
shalt shortly appear before God. Lay up treasure for heaven, and be rich
towards God.

[Proverbs 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 23:6</span></span>

Of him that hath an evil eye - Never eat with a covetous or stingy man;
if he entertains you at his own expense, he grudges every morsel you put
in your mouth. This is well marked by the wise man in the next verse:
"Eat and drink, saith he: but his heart is not with thee."

[Proverbs 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 23:8</span></span>

The morsel which thou hast eaten - On reflection thou wilt even blame
thyself for having accepted his invitation.

[Proverbs 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 23:10</span></span>

Remove not the old landmark - See [Pro
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#028) (note).

Enter not into the fields of the fatherless - Take nothing that belongs
to an orphan. The heaviest curse of God will fall upon them that do so.

[Proverbs 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 23:11</span></span>

For their redeemer is mighty - גאלם goalam, their kinsman. The word
means the person who has a right, being next in blood, to redeem a field
or estate, alienated from the family, to avenge the blood of a murdered
relative, by slaying the murderer; and to take to wife a brother's
widow, who had died childless, in order to preserve the family. The
strength here mentioned refers to the justness of his claim, the extent
of his influence, and the powerful abettors of such a cause. But in
reference to the orphans here mentioned, they having no kinsman, God
takes up, vindicates, and avenges their cause.

[Proverbs 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 23:14</span></span>

Thou shalt beat him with the rod - A proper correction of children was a
favourite point of discipline with Solomon. We have already seen how
forcibly he speaks on this subject. See the notes on the places referred
to in [Co1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005) (note).

[Proverbs 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 23:18</span></span>

Surely there is an end - יש אחרית yesh acharith, there is another life;
"and thy expectation" of the enjoyment of a blessed immortality "shall
not be cut off." The Old MS. Bible reads thus: For thou schalt hab hop
in the last: and thin abiiding schal not ben taken awei. "For the ende
is not yet come; and thy patient abydinge shal not be in vayne." -
Coverdale.

[Proverbs 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 23:20</span></span>

Be not among winebibbers - There is much of this chapter spent in giving
directions concerning eating, drinking, and entertainments in general.

1\. he pupil is directed relative to the manner in which he is to
conduct himself in his visits to the tables of the rich and great.

2\. Relative to the covetous and his intercourse with them. And

3\. To public entertainnlents, where there were generally riot and
debauch.

The reasons, says Calmet, which induced the wise man to give these
directions were,

1\. The useless expense.

2\. The loss of time.

3\. The danger from bad company. And

4\. The danger of contracting irregular habits, and of being induced to
lead a voluptuous and effeminate life.

[Proverbs 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 23:22</span></span>

Despise not thy mother when she is old - A very necessary caution, as
very old women are generally helpless, useless, and burdensome: yet
these circumstances do not at all lessen the child's duty. And this duty
is strengthened by the Divine command here given.

[Proverbs 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 23:23</span></span>

Buy the truth - Acquire the knowledge of God at all events; and in order
to do this, too much pains, industry, and labor cannot be expended.

And sell it not - When once acquired, let no consideration deprive thee
of it. Cleave to and guard it, even at the risk of thy life. Coverdale
translates: "Labour for to get the treuth; sell not awaye wissdome."

[Proverbs 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 23:26</span></span>

My son, give me thine heart - This is the speech of God to every human
soul; give thy affections to God, so as to love him with all thy heart,
soul, mind, and strength.

And let thine eyes observe my ways - Be obedient to me in all things. My
son, thou believest that I Am, and that I Am the Fountain of all good.
Give me thy heart; it is I alone who can make thee happy. Observe my
ways - follow me; do what is right in my sight. This exhortation
contains three words: Believe, Love, Obey! This is the sum of God's
counsels to every child of man.

[Proverbs 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 23:27</span></span>

For a whore is a deep ditch - See on [Pro
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#014) (note).

[Proverbs 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 23:28</span></span>

Increaseth the transgressors among men - More iniquity springs from this
one source of evil, than from any other cause in the whole system of
sin. Women and strong drink cause many millions to transgress.

[Proverbs 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 23:29</span></span>

Who hath wo? - I believe Solomon refers here to the natural effects of
drunkenness. And perhaps אוי oi, which we translate wo, and אבוי aboi,
which we translate sorrow, are mere natural sounds or vociferations that
take place among drunken men, either from illness, or the nauseating
effects of too much liquor. As to contentions among such, babblings on a
variety of subjects, which they neither understand nor are fit to
discuss; wounds, got by falling out about nothing; and red eyes,
bloodshotten with excess of drink, or black and blue eyes with fighting;
- these are such common and general effects of these compotations, as
naturally to follow from them. So that they who tarry long at wine, and
use mixed wine to make it more inebriating, (see [Pro
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#002)), are the very persons who are
most distinguished by the circumstances enumerated above. I need
scarcely add, that by wine and mixed wine all inebriating liquors are to
be understood.

[Proverbs 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 23:31</span></span>

Look not thou upon the wine - Let neither the color, the odour, the
sparkling, etc., of the wine, when poured out, induce thee to drink of
it. However good and pure it may be, it will to thee be a snare, because
thou art addicted to it, and hast no self-command.

[Proverbs 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 23:33</span></span>

Thine eyes shall behold strange women - Evil concupiscence is
inseparable from drunkenness. Mr. Herbert shows these effects well: -

He that is drunken may his mother kill,Big with his sister: he hath lost
the reins;

Is outlawed by himself. All kinds of illDid, with his liquor, slide into
his veins.

The drunkard forfeits man; and doth divestAll worldly right, save what
he hath by beast.

Herbert's Poems - The Church Porch.

[Proverbs 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">pro 23:34</span></span>

Lieth down in the midst of the sea - He is utterly regardless of life;
which is expressed very forcibly by one in a state of intoxication
ascending the shrouds, clasping the mast-head, and there falling asleep;
whence, in a few moments, he must either fall down upon the deck and be
dashed to pieces, or fall into the sea and be drowned. Reader, if thou
be a man given to this appetite, put a knife to thy throat.

[Proverbs 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">pro 23:35</span></span>

They have stricken me - Though beat and abused, full of pain, and
exhibiting a frightful figure; yet so drunk was he, as to be insensible
who had struck him: still, after all this abuse and disgrace, he
purposes to embrace the next opportunity of repeating his excesses! Sin
makes a man contemptible in life, miserable in death, and wretched to
all eternity. Is it not strange, then, that men should Love it?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 24](pro024)

</div>
