<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro016)  [Next](pro018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 17:0</span></span>

Contentment. The wise servant. The Lord tries the heart. Children a
crown to their parents. We should hide our neighbour's faults. The poor
should not be despised. Litigations and quarrels to be avoided. Wealth
is useless to a fool. The good friend. A fool may pass for a wise man
when he holds his peace.

[Proverbs 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 17:1</span></span>

Better is a dry morsel - Peace and contentment, and especially domestic
peace, are beyond all other blessings.

A house full of sacrifices - A Hindoo priest, who officiates at a
festival, sometimes receives so many offeringss that his house is filled
with them, so that many of them are damaged before they can be used -
Ward.

[Proverbs 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 17:3</span></span>

The fining pot is for silver - When silver is mixed, or suspected to be
mixed, with base metal, it must be subjected to such a test as the cupel
to purify it. And gold also must be purified by the action of the fire.
So God tries hearts. He sends afflictions which penetrate the soul, and
give a man to see his state, so that he may apply to the spirit of
judgment and the spirit of burning, to destroy what cannot stand the
fire, to separate and burn up all the dross.

[Proverbs 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 17:4</span></span>

A wicked doer giveth heed - An evil heart is disposed and ever ready to
receive evil; and liars delight in lies.

[Proverbs 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 17:5</span></span>

He that is glad at calamity - He who is pleased to hear of the
misfortune of another will, in the course of God's just government, have
his own multiplied.

[Proverbs 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 17:7</span></span>

Excellent speech becometh not a fool - This proverb is suitable to those
who affect, in public speaking, fine language, which neither comports
with their ordinary conversation, nor with their education. Often fine
words are injudiciously brought in, and are as unbecoming and irrelevant
as a cart wheel among clockwork.

[Proverbs 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 17:8</span></span>

A gift is as a precious stone - It both enriches and ornaments. In the
latter clause there is an evident allusion to cut stones. Whithersoever
you turn them, they reflect the light, are brilliant and beautiful.

[Proverbs 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 17:10</span></span>

A reproof entereth more - Though the rod, judiciously applied, is a
great instrument of knowledge, yet it is of no use where incurable
dulness or want of intellect, prevails. Besides, there are generous
dispositions on which counsel will work more than stripes.

[Proverbs 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 17:12</span></span>

Let a bear robbed of her whelps - At which times such animals are
peculiarly fierce. See the note on [Sa2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#008).

[Proverbs 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 17:13</span></span>

Whoso rewardeth evil for good - Here is a most awful warning. As many
persons are guilty of the sin of ingratitude, and of paying kindness
with unkindness, and good with evil, it is no wonder we find so much
wretchedness among men; for God's word cannot fail; evil shall not
depart from the houses and families of such persons.

[Proverbs 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 17:14</span></span>

The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water - As soon as
the smallest breach is made in the dike or dam, the water begins to
press from all parts towards the breach; the resistance becomes too
great to be successfully opposed, so that dikes and all are speedily
swept away. Such is the beginning of contentions, quarrels, lawsuits,
etc.

Leave off contention, before it be meddled with - As you see what an
altercation must lead to, therefore do not begin it. Before it be
mingled together, התגלע hithgalla, before the spirits of the contending
parties come into conflict - are joined together in battle, and begin to
deal out mutual reflections and reproaches. When you see that the
dispute is likely to take this turn, leave it off immediately.

[Proverbs 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 17:17</span></span>

A friend loveth at all times - Equally in adversity as in prosperity.
And a brother, according to the ties and interests of consanguinity, is
born to support and comfort a brother in distress.

[Proverbs 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 17:18</span></span>

Striketh hands - Striking each other's hands, or shaking hands, was
anciently the form in concluding a contract. See notes on [Pro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001).

[Proverbs 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 17:19</span></span>

He that exalteth his gate - In different parts of Palestine they are
obliged to have the doors of their courts and houses very low, not more
than three feet high, to prevent the Arabs, who scarcely ever leave the
backs of their horses, from riding into the courts and houses, and
spoiling their goods. He, then, who, through pride and ostentation, made
a high gate, exposed himself to destruction; and is said here to seek
it, because he must know that this would be a necessary consequence of
exalting his gate. But although the above is a fact, yet possibly gate
is here taken for the mouth; and the exalting of the gate may mean proud
boasting and arrogant speaking, such as has a tendency to kindle and
maintain strife. And this interpretation seems to agree better with the
scope of the context than the above.

[Proverbs 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 17:22</span></span>

A merry heart doeth good like a medicine - Instead of גהה gehah, a
medicine, it appears that the Chaldee and Syriac had read in their
copies גוה gevah, the body, as they translate in this way. This makes
the apposition here more complete: "A merry heart doeth good to the
body; but a broken spirit drieth the bones." Nothing has such a direct
tendency to ruin health and waste out life as grief, anxiety,
fretfulness, bad tempers, etc. All these work death.

[Proverbs 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 17:23</span></span>

A gift out of the bosom - Out of his purse; as in their bosoms, above
their girdles, the Asiatics carry their purses. I have often observed
this.

[Proverbs 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 17:24</span></span>

Are in the ends of the earth - Wisdom is within the sight and reach at
every man: but he whose desires are scattered abroad, who is always
aiming at impossible things, or is of an unsteady disposition, is not
likely to find it.

[Proverbs 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 17:26</span></span>

Nor to strike princes for equity - To fall out with the ruler of the
people, and to take off his head under pretense of his not being a just
or equitable governor, is unjust. To kill a king on the ground of
justice is a most dreadful omen to any land. Where was it ever done,
that it promoted the public prosperity? No experiment of this kind has
ever yet succeeded, howsoever worthless the king might be.

[Proverbs 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 17:28</span></span>

Even a fool - He is counted wise as to that particular. He may know that
he cannot speak well, and he has sense enough to keep from speaking. He
is, as to that particular, a wise fool.

A man may be golden-mouthed and silver-tongued in eloquence; but to know
when and where to speak and to be silent, is better than diamonds. But
who that thinks he can speak well can refrain from speaking? His tongue
has no rest.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 18](pro018)

</div>
