<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro027)  [Next](pro029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 28:0</span></span>

The timidity of the wicked. Quick succession in the government of a
country is a punishment to the land. Of the poor who oppress the poor.
The upright poor man is preferable to the wicked rich man. The
unprofitable conduct of the usurer. The prosperity of the righteous a
cause of rejoicing. He is blessed who fears always. A wicked ruler a
curse. The murderer generally execrated. The faithful man. The corrupt
judge. The foolishness of trusting in one's own heart. The charitable
man. When the wicked are elevated, it is a public evil.

[Proverbs 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 28:1</span></span>

The wicked flee - Every wicked man, however bold he may appear, is full
of dreary apprehensions relative to both worlds. But the righteous has
true courage, being conscious of his own innocence, and the approbation
of his God. The unpitious fleeith - Old MS. Bible. This word is often
used for impious, wicked, ungodly; hence it appears that our word pity
anciently meant piety or godliness.

[Proverbs 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 28:2</span></span>

Many are the princes - Nations, as nations, cannot be judged in a future
world; therefore, God judges them here. And where the people are very
wicked, and the constitution very bad, the succession of princes is
frequent - they are generally taken off by an untimely death. Where the
people know that the constitution is in their favor, they seldom disturb
the prince, as they consider him the guardian of their privileges.

But by a man of understanding - Whether he be a king, or the king's
prime minister, the prosperity of the state is advanced by his counsels.

[Proverbs 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 28:3</span></span>

A poor man that oppresseth the poor - Our Lord illustrates this proverb
most beautifully, by the parable of the two debtors, [Mat
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#023). One owed ten thousand talents,
was insolvent, begged for time, was forgiven. A fellow servant owed this
one a hundred pence: he was insolvent; but prayed his fellow servant to
give him a little time, and he would pay it all. He would not, took him
by the throat, and cast him into prison till he should pay that debt.
Here the poor oppressed the poor; and what was the consequence? The
oppressing poor was delivered to the tormentors; and the forgiven debt
charged to his amount, because he showed no mercy. The comparatively
poor are often shockingly uncharitable and unfeeling towards the real
poor.

Like a sweeping rain - These are frequent in the East; and sometimes
carry flocks, crops, and houses, away with them.

[Proverbs 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 28:4</span></span>

They that forsake the law - He that transgresses says, in fact, that it
is right to transgress; and thus other wicked persons are encouraged.

[Proverbs 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 28:5</span></span>

They that seek the Lord understand all things - They are wise unto
salvation; they "have the unction from the Holy One, and they know all
things," [Jo1 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020), every thing that
is essentially needful for them to know, in reference to both worlds.

[Proverbs 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 28:8</span></span>

He that by usury - increaseth his substance - By taking unlawful
interest for his money; lending to a man in great distress, money, for
the use of which he requires an exorbitant sum. O that the names of all
those unfeeling, hard-hearted, consummate villains in the nation, who
thus take advantage of their neighbour's necessities to enrich
themselves, were published at every market cross; and then the
delinquents all sent to their brother savages in New Zealand. It would
be a happy riddance to the country.

[Proverbs 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 28:9</span></span>

He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law - Many suppose, if
they do not know their duty, they shall not be accountable for their
transgressions; and therefore avoid every thing that is calculated to
enlighten them. They will not read the Bible, lest they should know the
will of Good; and they will not attend Divine ordinances for the same
reason. But this pretense will avail them nothing; as he that might have
known his master's will, but would not, shall be treated as he shall be
who did know it, and disobeyed it. Even the prayers of such a person as
this are reputed sin before God.

[Proverbs 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 28:10</span></span>

Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray - He who strives to pervert one
really converted to God, in order that he may pour contempt on religion,
shall fall into that hell to which he has endeavored to lead the other.

[Proverbs 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 28:12</span></span>

When righteous men do rejoice - When true religion is no longer
persecuted, and the word of God duly esteemed, there is great glory; for
the word of the Lord has then free course, runs, and is glorified: but
when the wicked rise - when they are elevated to places of trust, and
put at the head of civil affairs, then the righteous man is obliged to
hide himself; the word of the Lord becomes scarce, and there is no open
vision. The first was the case in this country, in the days of Edward
VI.; the second in the days of his successor, Mary I: Popery, cruelty,
and knavery, under her, nearly destroyed the Church and the State in
these islands.

[Proverbs 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 28:13</span></span>

He that covereth his sins - Here is a general direction relative to
conversion.

1\. If the sinner do not acknowledge his sins; if he cover and excuse
them, and refuse to come to the light of God's word and Spirit, lest his
deeds should be reproved, he shall find no salvation. God will never
admit a sinful, unhumbled soul, into his kingdom.

2\. But if he confess his sin, with a penitent and broken heart, and, by
forsaking every evil way, give this proof that he feels his own sore,
and the plague of his heart, then he shall have mercy. Here is a
doctrine of vital importance to the salvation of the soul, which the
weakest may understand.

[Proverbs 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 28:14</span></span>

Happy is the man that feareth alway - That ever carries about with him
that reverential and filial fear of God, which will lead him to avoid
sin, and labor to do that which is lawful and right in the sight of God
his Savior.

[Proverbs 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 28:16</span></span>

The prince that wanteth understanding - A weak prince will generally
have wicked ministers, for his weakness prevents him from making a
proper choice; and he is apt to prefer them who flatter him, and
minister most to his pleasures. The quantum of the king's intellect may
be always appreciated by the mildness or oppressiveness of his
government. He who plunges his people into expensive wars, to support
which they are burdened with taxes, is a prince without understanding.
He does not know his own interest, and does not regard that of his
people. But these things, though general truths, apply more particularly
to those despotic governments which prevail in Asiatic countries.

[Proverbs 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 28:17</span></span>

That doeth violence to the blood - He who either slays the innocent, or
procures his destruction, may flee to hide himself: but let none give
him protection. The law demands his life, because he is a murderer; and
let none deprive justice of its claim. Murder is the most horrid crime
in the sight of God and man; it scarcely ever goes unpunished, and is
universally execrated.

[Proverbs 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 28:18</span></span>

Shall fall at once - Shall fall without resource, altogether.

[Proverbs 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 28:19</span></span>

He that tilleth his land - See [Pro
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#011).

[Proverbs 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 28:20</span></span>

He that maketh haste to be rich - See [Pro
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#011); [Pro
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#021).

[Proverbs 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 28:24</span></span>

Whoso robbeth his father - The father's property is as much his own, in
reference to the child, as that of the merest stronger. He who robs his
parents is worse than a common robber; to the act of dishonesty and
rapine he adds ingratitude, cruelty, and disobedience. Such a person is
the compatriot of a destroyer; he may be considered as a murderer.

[Proverbs 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 28:25</span></span>

Shall be made fat - Shall be prosperous.

[Proverbs 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 28:26</span></span>

He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool - For his heart, which is
deceitful and desperately wicked, will infallibly deceive him.

[Proverbs 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 28:27</span></span>

Be that giveth unto the poor - See the notes on [Deu
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#007) (note), Detueronomy [Deu
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#017) (note), [Deu
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009) (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 29](pro029)

</div>
