<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro004)  [Next](pro006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 5:0</span></span>

Farther exhortations to acquire wisdom, [Pro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#001.md), [Pro
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#002.md). The character of a loose woman,
and the ruinous consequences of attachment to such, [Pro
5:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md). Exhortations to chastity and
moderation, [Pro 5:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015.md). The
miserable end of the wicked, [Pro
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022.md), [Pro
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#023.md).

[Proverbs 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 5:1</span></span>

Attend unto my wisdom - Take the following lessons from my own
experience.

[Proverbs 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 5:3</span></span>

The lips of a strange woman - One that is not thy own, whether Jewess or
heathen.

Drop as a honey-comb - She uses the most deceitful, flattering, and
alluring speeches: as the droppings of the honey out of the comb are the
sweetest of all.

[Proverbs 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 5:4</span></span>

Bitter as wormwood - כלענה Kelanah, like the detestable herb wormwood,
or something analogous to it: something as excessive in its bitterness,
as honey is in its sweetness.

[Proverbs 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 5:5</span></span>

Her feet go down to death - She first, like a serpent, infuses her
poison, by which the whole constitution of her paramour is infected,
which soon or late brings on death.

Her steps take hold on hell - First, the death of the body; and then the
damnation of the soul. These are the tendencies of connections with such
women.

[Proverbs 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 5:6</span></span>

Lest thou shouldest ponder - To prevent thee from reflecting on thy
present conduct, and its consequences, her ways are moveable - she
continually varies her allurements.

Thou canst not know them - It is impossible to conceive all her tricks
and wiles: to learn these in all their varieties, is a part of the
science first taught in that infernal trade.

[Proverbs 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 5:7</span></span>

Hear me - O ye children - בנים banim, sons, young men in general: for
these are the most likely to be deceived and led astray.

[Proverbs 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 5:8</span></span>

Come not nigh the door of her house - Where there are generally such
exhibitions as have a natural tendency to excite impure thoughts, and
irregular passions.

[Proverbs 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 5:9</span></span>

Lest thou give thine honor - The character of a debauchee is universally
detested: by this, even those of noble blood lose their honor and
respect.

Thy years unto the cruel - Though all the blandishments of love dwell on
the tongue, and the excess of fondness appear in the whole demeanor of
the harlot and the prostitute; yet cruelty has its throne in their
hearts; and they will rob and murder (when it appears to answer their
ends) those who give their strength, their wealth, and their years to
them. The unfaithful wife has often murdered her own husband for the
sake of her paramour, and has given him over to justice in order to save
herself. Murders have often taken place in brothels, as well as
robberies; for the vice of prostitution is one of the parents of
cruelty.

[Proverbs 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 5:11</span></span>

When thy flesh and thy body are consumed - The word שאר shear, which we
render body, signifies properly the remains, residue, or remnant of a
thing: and is applied here to denote the breathing carcass, putrid with
the concomitant disease of debauchery: a public reproach which the
justice of God entails on this species of iniquity. The mourning here
spoken of is of the most excessive kind: the word נהם naham is often
applied to the growling of a lion, and the hoarse incessant murmuring of
the sea. In the line of my duty, I have been often called to attend the
death-bed of such persons, where groans and shrieks were incessant
through the jaculating pains in their bones and flesh. Whoever has
witnessed a closing scene like this will at once perceive with what
force and propriety the wise man speaks. And How have I hated
instruction, and despised the voice of my teachers! is the unavailing
cry in that terrific time. Reader, whosoever thou art, lay these things
to heart. Do not enter into their sin: once entered, thy return is
nearly hopeless.

[Proverbs 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 5:14</span></span>

I was almost in all evil - This vice, like a whirlpool, sweeps all
others into its vortex.

In the midst of the congregation and assembly - In the mydel of the
Curche and of the Synagoge - Old MS. Bible. Such persons, however sacred
the place, carry about with them eyes full of adultery, which cannot
cease from sin.

[Proverbs 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 5:15</span></span>

Drink waters out of thine own cistern - Be satisfied with thy own wife;
and let the wife see that she reverence her husband; and not tempt him
by inattention or unkindness to seek elsewhere what he has a right to
expect, but cannot find, at home.

[Proverbs 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 5:16</span></span>

Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad - Let thy children lawfully
begotten be numerous.

[Proverbs 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 5:17</span></span>

Let them be only thine own - The off-spring of a legitimate connection;
a bastard brood, however numerous, is no credit to any man.

[Proverbs 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 5:18</span></span>

Let thy fountain be blessed - יהי מקורך ברוך yehi mekorecha baruch. Sit
vena tua benedicta. Thy vein; that which carries off streams from the
fountain of animal life, in order to disperse them abroad, and through
the streets. How delicate and correct is the allusion here! But
anatomical allusions must not be pressed into detail in a commentary on
Scripture.

[Proverbs 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 5:19</span></span>

The loving hind and pleasant roe - By אילת aiyeleth, the deer; by יעלה
yaalah, the ibex or mountain goat, may be meant.

Let her breasts satisfy thee - As the infant is satisfied with the
breasts of its mother; so shouldst thou be with the wife of thy youth.

[Proverbs 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 5:21</span></span>

For the ways of a man - Whether they are public or private, God sees all
the steps thou takest in life.

[Proverbs 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 5:22</span></span>

He shall be holden with the cords of his sins - Most people who follow
unlawful pleasures, think they can give them up whenever they please;
but sin repeated becomes customary; custom soon engenders habit; and
habit in the end assumes the form of necessity; the man becomes bound
with his own cords, and so is led captive by the devil at his will.

[Proverbs 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 5:23</span></span>

He shall die without instruction - This is most likely, and it is a
general case; but even these may repent and live.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 6](pro006.md)

</div>
