<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro017)  [Next](pro019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 18:0</span></span>

The man who separates himself and seeks wisdom. The fool and the wicked
man. Deep wisdom. Contention of fools. The talebearer and the slothful.
The name of the Lord. Pride and presumption because of riches. Hastiness
of spirit. The wounded spirit. The influence of gifts. The lot. The
offended brother. The influence of the tongue. A wife a good from God.
The true friend.

[Proverbs 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 18:1</span></span>

Through desire a man, having separated himself - The original is
difficult and obscure. The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Arabic, read as
follows: "He who wishes to break with his friend, and seeks occasions or
pretenses shall at all times be worthy of blame."

My old MS. Bible translates, Occasioun seeketh that wil go awei fro a
freend: at al tyme he schal ben wariable.

Coverdale thus: "Who so hath pleasure to sowe discorde, piketh a quarrel
in every thinge."

Bible by Barker, 1615: "Fro the desire thereof he will separate himself
to seeke it, and occupie himself in all wisdome." Which has in the
margin the following note: "He that loveth wisdom will separate himself
from all impediments, and give himself wholly to seek it."

The Hebrew: לתאוה יבקש נפרד בכל תושיה יתגלע lethaavah yebakkesh niphrad,
bechol tushiyah yithgalla. The nearest translation to the words is
perhaps the following: "He who is separated shall seek the desired
thing, (i.e., the object of his desire), and shall intermeddle (mingle
himself) with all realities or all essential knowledge." He finds that
he can make little progress in the investigation of Divine and natural
things, if he have much to do with secular or trifliing matters: he
therefore separates himself as well from unprofitable pursuits as from
frivolous company, and then enters into the spirit of his pursuit; is
not satisfied with superficial observances, but examines the substance
and essence, as far as possible, of those things which have been the
objects of his desire. This appears to me the best meaning: the reader
may judge for himself.

[Proverbs 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 18:2</span></span>

But that his heart may discover itself - It is a fact that most vain and
foolish people are never satisfied in company, but in showing their own
nonsense and emptiness. But this verse may be understood as confirming
the view already given of the preceding, and may be translated thus:
"But a fool doth not delight in understanding, though it should even
manifest itself:" so I understand כי אם בהתגלות ki im behithgalloth. The
separated person seeks understanding in every hidden thing, and feels
his toil well repaid when he finds it, even after the most painful and
expensive search: the other regards it not, though its secret springs
should be laid open to him without toil or expense.

[Proverbs 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 18:3</span></span>

When the wicked cometh, etc. - would it not be better to read this verse
thus? "When the wicked cometh contempt cometh; and with ignominy cometh
reproach." A wicked man is despised even by the wicked. He who falls
under ignominy falls under reproach.

[Proverbs 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 18:4</span></span>

The words of a man's mouth - That is, the wise sayings of a wise man are
like deep waters; howsoever much you pump or draw off, you do not appear
to lessen them.

The well-spring of wisdom - Where there is a sound understanding, and a
deep, well-informed mind, its wisdom and its counsels are an incessant
stream, מקור חכמה mekor chochmah, "the vein of wisdom," ever throwing
out its healthy streams: but מקור חיים mekor chaiyim, "the vein of
Lives," is the reading of eight of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., and
is countenanced by the Septuagint, πηγη ζωης, "the fountain of life."
And so the Arabic. This is the more likely to be the true reading,
because the figure of the heart propelling the blood through the great
aorta, to send it to all parts of the animal system, is a favourite with
Solomon, as it was with his father, David. See the note on [Psa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009.md); [Pro
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#011.md), etc.

[Proverbs 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 18:5</span></span>

To accept the person of the wicked - We must not, in judicial cases, pay
any attention to a man's riches, influence, friends, offices, etc., but
judge the case according to its own merits. But when the wicked rich man
opposes and oppresses the poor righteous, then all those things should
be utterly forgotten.

[Proverbs 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 18:8</span></span>

The words of a tale-bearer - דברי נרגן dibrey nirgan, "the words of the
whisperer," the busy-body, the busy, meddling croaker. Verba bilinguis,
"the words of the double-tongued." - Vulgate. The wordes of the twisel
tunge - Old MS. Bible. "The words of a slanderer." - Coverdale.

The words of a deceiver, the fair-spoken, deeply-malicious man, though
they appear soft and gracious, are wounds deeply injurious.

The original word is כמתלהמים kemithlahamim; they are as soft or simple,
or undesigning. But Schultens gives another meaning. He observes that
lahamah in Arabic signifies to "swallow down quickly or greedily." Such
words are like dainties, eagerly swallowed, because inviting to the
taste; like gingerbread, apparently gilded over, though with Dutch leaf,
which is a preparation of copper; or sweetmeats powdered over with red
candied seeds, which are thus formed by red lead; both deeply ruinous to
the tender bowels of the poor little innocents, but, because of their
sweetness and inviting color, greedily swallowed down. This makes a good
reading, and agrees with the latter clause of the verse, "they go down
into the innermost parts of the belly."

[Proverbs 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 18:9</span></span>

He also that is slothful - A slothful man neglects his work, and the
materials go to ruin: the master, he destroys the materials. They are
both destroyers.

[Proverbs 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 18:10</span></span>

The name of the Lord is a strong tower - The name of the Lord may be
taken for the Lord himself; he is a strong tower, a refuge, and place of
complete safety, to all that trust in him. What a strong fortress is to
the besieged, the like is God to his persecuted, tempted, afflicted
followers.

[Proverbs 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 18:11</span></span>

The rich man's wealth - See [Pro
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#015.md).

[Proverbs 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 18:12</span></span>

Before destruction - See on [Pro 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#002.md)
(note); [Pro 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018) (note.md).

[Proverbs 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 18:13</span></span>

He that answereth a matter - This is a common case; before a man can
tell out his story, another will begin his. Before a man has made his
response, the other wishes to confute piecemeal, though he has had his
own speech already. This is foolishness to them. They are ill-bred.
There are many also that give judgment before they hear the whole of the
cause, and express an opinion before they hear the state of the case.
How absurd, stupid, and foolish!

[Proverbs 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 18:14</span></span>

The spirit of a man will sustain - A man sustains the ills of his body,
and the trials of life, by the strength and energy of his mind. But if
the mind be scoundrel, if this be cast down, if slow-consuming care and
grief have shot the dagger into the soul, what can then sustain the man?
Nothing but the unseen God. Therefore, let the afflicted pray. A man's
own spirit has, in general, sufficient fortitude to bear up under the
unavoidable trials of life; but when the conscience is wounded by sin,
and the soul is dying by iniquity, who can lift him up? God alone; for
salvation is of the Lord.

[Proverbs 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 18:16</span></span>

A man's gift maketh room for him - It is, and ever has been, a base and
degrading practice in Asiatic countries, to bring a gift or present to
the great man into whose presence you come. Without this there is no
audience, no favor, no justice. This arose from the circumstance that
men must not approach the altar of God without an offering.

Potentates, wishing to be considered as petty gods, demanded a similar
homage: -

Munera, crede mihi, capiunt hominesquedeosque;

Placatur donis Jupiter ipse suis.

Ovid

"Believe me, gifts prevail much with both gods and men: even Jupiter
himself is pleased with his own offerings."

[Proverbs 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 18:17</span></span>

He that is first in his own cause - Any man may, in the first instance,
make out a fair tale, because he has the choice of circumstances and
arguments. But when the neighbor cometh and searcheth him, he examines
all, dissects all, swears and cross-questions every witness, and brings
out truth and fact.

[Proverbs 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 18:18</span></span>

The lot causeth contentions to cease - See note on [Pro
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033.md).

[Proverbs 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 18:19</span></span>

A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city - Almost all
the versions agree in the following reading: "A brother assisted by a
brother, is like a fortified city; and their decisions are like the bars
of a city." Coverdale is both plain and terse: "The unitie of brethren
is stronger then a castell, and they that holde together are like the
barre of a palace." The fable of the dying father, his sons, and the
bundle of faggots, illustrates this proverb. Unity among brethren makes
them invincible; small things grow great by concord. If we take the
words according to the common version, we see them express what, alas!
we know to be too generally true: that when brothers fall out, it is
with extreme difficulty that they can be reconciled. And fraternal
enmities are generally strong and inveterate.

[Proverbs 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 18:20</span></span>

With the fruit of his mouth - Our own words frequently shape our good or
evil fortune in life.

[Proverbs 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 18:21</span></span>

Death and life are in the power of the tongue - This may apply to all
men. Many have lost their lives by their tongue, and some have saved
their lives by it: but it applies most forcibly to public pleaders; on
many of their tongues hangs life or death.

[Proverbs 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 18:22</span></span>

Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing - Marriage, with all its
troubles and embarrassments, is a blessing from God; and there are few
cases where a wife of any sort is not better than none, because celibacy
is an evil; for God himself hath said, "It is not good for man to be
alone." None of the versions, except the Chaldee, are pleased with the
naked simplicity of the Hebrew text, hence they all add good: "He that
findeth a Good wife findeth a good thing;" and most people, who have not
deeply considered the subject, think the assertion, without this
qualification, is absurd. Some copies of the Targum, and apparently one
of Kennicott's MSS., have the addition טובה tobah, good; but this would
be an authority too slender to justify changing the Hebrew text; yet
Houbigant, Kennicott, and other able critics argue for it. The
Septuagint is not satisfied without an addition: "But he who puts away a
good wife, puts away a good thing: and he that retains an adulteress, is
a fool and wicked." In this addition the Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic,
agree with the Septuagint. The Hebrew text as it stands, teaches a
general doctrine by a simple but general proposition: "He that findeth a
wife findeth a good thing." So St. Paul: "Marriage is honorable in all."
Had the world been left, in this respect, to the unbridled propensities
of man, in what a horrible state would society have been - if indeed
society could have existed, or civilization have taken place - if
marriage had not obtained among men! As to good wives and bad wives,
they are relatively so, in general; and most of them that have been bad
afterwards, have been good at first; and we well know the best things
may deteriorate, and the world generally allows that where there are
matrimonial contentions, there are faults on both sides.

[Proverbs 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 18:24</span></span>

A man that hath friends must show himself friendly - Love begets love;
and love requires love as its recompense. If a man do not maintain a
friendly carriage, he cannot expect to retain his friends. Friendship is
a good plant; but it requires cultivation to make it grow.

There is a kind of factitious friendship in the world, that, to show
one's self friendly in it, is very expensive, and in every way utterly
unprofitable: it is maintained by expensive parties. feasts, etc., where
the table groans with dainties, and where the conversation is either
jejune and insipid, or calumnious; backbiting, talebearing, and scandal,
being the general topics of the different squads in company.

There is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother - In many cases
the genuine friend has shown more attachment, and rendered greater
benefits, than the natural brother. Some apply this to God; others to
Christ; but the text has no such meaning.

But critics and commentators are not agreed on the translation of this
verse. The original is condensed and obscure. אוש רעים להתרועע ish reim
lehithroea, or lehithroeang, as some would read, who translate: A man of
friends may ring again; i.e., he may boast and mightily exult: but there
is a friend, אהב oheb, a lover, that sticketh closer, דבק dabek, is
glued or cemented, מאח meach, beyond, or more than, a brother. The
former will continue during prosperity, but the latter continues closely
united to his friend, even in the most disastrous circumstances.

Hence that maxim of Cicero, so often repeated, and so well known: -

Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur.

"In doubtful times the genuine friend is known."

A late commentator has translated the verse thus: -

The man that hath many friends is ready to be ruined:

But there is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.

Holden.

"A frende that delyteth in love, doth a man more frendship, and sticketh
faster unto him, than a brother." Coverdale.

"A man that hath friends ought to show himself friendly for a friend is
nearer than a brother." Barker's Bible, 1615.

"A man amyable to felowschip, more a freend schal ben thanne a brother."
- Old MS. Bible. The two last verses in this chapter, and the two first
of the next, are wanting in the Septuagint and Arabic.

These are the principal varieties; out of them the reader may choose. I
have already given my opinion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 19](pro019.md)

</div>
