<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa062)  [Next](psa064.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 63:0</span></span>

David's soul thirsts after God, while absent from the sanctuary, and
longs to be restored to the Divine ordinances, [Psa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md), [Psa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002.md). He expresses strong confidence
in the Most High, and praises him for his goodness, [Psa
63:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003.md); shows the misery of those who
do not seek God, [Psa 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009.md), [Psa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#010.md); and his own safety as king of
the people, [Psa 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011.md).

The title of this Psalm is, A Psalm of David when he was in the
wilderness of Judea; but instead of Judea, the Vulgate, Septuagint,
Ethiopic, Arabic, several of the ancient Latin Psalters, and several of
the Latin fathers, read Idumea, or Edom; still there is no evidence that
David had ever taken refuge in the deserts of Idumea. The Hebrew text is
that which should be preferred; and all the MSS. are in its favor. The
Syriac has, "Of David, when he said to the king of Moab, My father and
mother fled to thee from the face of Saul; and I also take refuge with
thee." It is most probable that the Psalm was written when David took
refuge in the forest of Hareth, in the wilderness of Ziph, when he fled
from the court of Achish. But Calmet understands it as a prayer by the
captives in Babylon.

[Psalms 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 63:1</span></span>

O God, thou art my God - He who can say so, and feels what he says, need
not fear the face of any adversary. He has God, and all sufficiency in
him.

Early will I seek thee - From the dawn of day. De luce, from the light,
Vulgate; as soon as day breaks; and often before this, for his eyes
prevented the night-watches; and he longed and watched for God more than
they who watched for the morning. The old Psalter says, God my God, til
the fram light I wake; and paraphrases thus: God of all, thurgh myght;
thu is my God, thurgh lufe and devocion; speciali till the I wak. Fra
light, that is, fra thy tym that the light of thi grace be in me, that
excites fra night of sine. And makes me wak till the in delite of luf,
and swetnes in saul. Thai wak till God, that setes all thar thoght on
God, and for getns the werld. Thai slep till God, that settis thair hert
on ani creatur - I wak till the, and that gars me thirst in saule and
body.

What first lays hold of the heart in the morning is likely to occupy the
place all the day. First impressions are the most durable, because there
is not a multitude of ideas to drive them out, or prevent them from
being deeply fixed in the moral feeling.

In a dry and thirsty land - בארץ beerets, In a land: but several MSS.
have כארץ keerets, As a dry and thirsty land, etc.

[Psalms 63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 63:2</span></span>

To see thy power and thy glory - in the sanctuary - In his public
ordinances God had often showed his power in the judgments he executed,
in the terror he impressed, and in awakening the sinful; and his glory
in delivering the tempted, succouring the distressed, and diffusing
peace and pardon through the hearts of his followers. God shows his
power and glory in his ordinances; therefore public worship should never
be neglected. We must see God, says the old Psalter, that he may see us.
In his temple he dispenses his choicest blessings.

[Psalms 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 63:3</span></span>

Thy loving-kindness is better than life - This is the language of every
regenerate soul. But O how few prefer the approbation of God to the
blessings of life, or even to life itself in any circumstances! But the
psalmist says, Thy loving-kindness, חסדך chasdecha, thy effusive mercy,
is better מחיים mechaiyim, than Lives: it is better than, or good
beyond, countless ages of human existence.

My lips shall praise thee - Men praise, or speak well, of power, glory,
honor, riches, worldly prospects and pleasures; but the truly religious
speak well of God, in whom they find infinitely more satisfaction and
happiness than worldly men can find in the possession of all earthly
good.

[Psalms 63:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 63:4</span></span>

I will lift up my hands in thy name - I will take God for my portion. I
will dedicate myself to him, and will take him to witness that I am
upright in what I profess and do. Pious Jews, in every place of their
dispersion, in all their prayers, praises, contracts, etc., stretched
out their hands towards Jerusalem, where the true God had his temple,
and where he manifested his presence.

[Psalms 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 63:5</span></span>

My soul shall be satisfied - I shall have, in the true worshipping of
thee, as complete a sensation of spiritual sufficiency and happiness, so
that no desire shall be left unsatisfied, as any man can have who enjoys
health of body, and a fullness of all the necessaries, conveniences, and
comforts of life.

[Psalms 63:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 63:6</span></span>

When I remember thee upon my bed - I will lie down in thy fear and love;
that I may sleep soundly under thy protection, and awake with a sense of
thy presence and approbation; and when I awake in the night watches, or
be awakened by them, I will spend the waking moments in meditation upon
thee.

[Psalms 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 63:7</span></span>

Therefore in the shadow of thy wings - I will get into the very secret
of thy presence, into the holy of holies, to the mercy-seat, over which
the cherubs extend their wings. If the psalmist does not allude to the
overshadowing of the mercy-seat by the extended wings of the cherubim,
he may have in view, as a metaphor, the young of fowls, seeking shelter,
protection, and warmth under the wings of their mothers. See the same
metaphor, [Psa 61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004) (note.md). When a
bird of prey appears, the chickens will, by natural instinct, run under
the wings of their mothers for protection.

The old Psalter translates, And in hiling of thi wenges I sall joy. The
paraphrase is curious. "Thou art my helper, in perels; and I can joy in
gode dedes in thi hiling, (covering), for I am thi bride, (bird), and if
thou hil (cover) me noght, the glede (kite) will rawis me, (carry me
away.")

[Psalms 63:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 63:8</span></span>

My soul followeth hard after thee - דבקה נפשי אחריך dabekah naphshi
achareycha, "My soul cleaves (or) is glued after thee." This phrase not
only shows the diligence of the pursuit, and the nearness of the
attainment, but also the fast hold he had got of the mercy of his God.

[Psalms 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 63:9</span></span>

Lower parts of the earth - They are appointed, in the just judgment of
God, to destruction; they shall be slain and buried in the earth, and
shall be seen no more. Some understand the passage as referring to the
punishment of hell; which many supposed to be in the center of the
earth.

So the old Psalter, - Thai sall entir in till lagher pine of hell.
Lahher or laigher, lower, undermost.

[Psalms 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 63:10</span></span>

They shall fall by the sword - They shall be poured out by the hand of
the sword, Hebrews That is, their life's blood shall be shed either in
war, or by the hand of justice.

They shall be a portion for foxes - They shall be left unburied, and the
jackals shall feed upon their dead bodies. Or, being all cut off by
utter destruction, their Inheritance shall be left for the wild beasts.
That which was their portion shall shortly be the portion of the wild
beasts of the forest. If he here refers to the destruction of the
Babylonians, the prediction has been literally fulfilled. Where ancient
Babylon stood, as far as it can be ascertained, is now the hold of
dangerous reptiles and ferocious beasts. The jackal, or chokal, is a
very ravenous beast, and fond of human flesh. It devours dead bodies,
steals infants out of the lap of their mothers, devours alive the sick
who are left by the side of the Ganges, and even in the streets of
Calcutta has been known to eat persons who were in a state of
intoxication. Ward's Customs.

[Psalms 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 63:11</span></span>

But the king shall rejoice - David shall come to the kingdom according
to the promise of God. Or, if it refer to the captivity, the blood royal
shall be preserved in and by Zerubbabel till the Messiah come, who shall
be David's spiritual successor in the kingdom for ever.

That sweareth by him - It was customary to swear by the life of the
king. The Egyptians swore by the life of Pharaoh; and Joseph conforms to
this custom, as may be seen in the book of Genesis, [Gen
42:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#015.md), [Gen
42:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#016.md). See also [Sa1
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#026.md) : [Sa1
17:55](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#055.md), and Judith 11:7. But here it
may refer to God. He is The King, and swearing by his name signifies
binding themselves by his authority, acknowledging his supremacy, and
devoting themselves to his glory and service alone.

The Chaldee has: "And the King shall rejoice במימר אלהא bemeymar Eloha,
in the Word of God;" or, in the Word God; Meymar, Word, being taken here
substantially, as in many other places, by the Targumist.

The mouth of them that speak lies - The mouth of those who acknowledge
lying vanities, that worship false gods, shall be stopped. All false
religions shall be destroyed by the prevalence of the truth. For he,
Christ, shall reign till all his enemies are put under his feet. "Thy
kingdom come, and hell's o'erpower: and to thy scepter all subdue." Amen
and Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 64](psa064.md)

</div>
