<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa002)  [Next](psa004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 3:0</span></span>

David complains, in great distress, of the number of his enemies, and
the reproaches they cast on him, as one forsaken of God, [Psa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001.md), [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md); is confident, notwithstanding,
that God will be his protector, [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003.md); mentions his prayers and
supplications, and how God heard him, [Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004.md), [Psa
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005.md); derides the impotent malice of
has adversaries, and foretells their destruction, [Psa
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006.md), [Psa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007.md); and ascribes salvation to God,
[Psa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008.md).

This is said to be A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son -
See the account, [Sa2 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#001) (note.md),
etc. And David is supposed to have composed it when obliged to leave
Jerusalem, passing by the mount of Olives, weeping, with his clothes
rent, and with dust upon his head. This Psalm is suitable enough to
these circumstances; and they mutually cast light on each other. If the
inscription be correct, this Psalm is a proof that the Psalms are not
placed in any chronological order.

The word Psalm, מזמור mizmor, comes from זמר zamar, to cut, whether that
means to cut into syllables, for the purpose of its being adapted to
musical tones, or whether its being cut on wood, etc., for the direction
of the singers; what we would call a Psalm in score. This last opinion,
however, seems too technical.

[Psalms 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 3:1</span></span>

Lord, how are they increased that trouble me? - We are told that the
hearts of all Israel went after Absalom, [Sa2
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#013.md); and David is astonished to find
such a sudden and general revolt. Not only the common people, but his
counsellors also, and many of his chief captains. How publicly does God
take vengeance for the sins which David committed so privately! In the
horrible rebellion of Absalom we see the adultery of Bath-sheba, and the
murder of Uriah. Now the words of Nathan begin to be fulfilled: "The
sword shall not depart from thy house."

[Psalms 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 3:2</span></span>

No help for him in God - These were some of the reproaches of his
enemies, Shimei and others: "He is now down, and he shall never be able
to rise. God alone can save him from these his enemies; but God has
visibly east him off." These reproaches deeply affected his heart; and
he mentions them with that note which so frequently occurs in the
Psalms, and which occurs here for the first time, סלה selah. Much has
been said on the meaning of this word; and we have nothing but
conjecture to guide us. The Septuagint always translate it by Διαψαλμα
diapsalma, "a pause in the Psalm." The Chaldee sometimes translates it
by לעלמין lealmin, "for ever." The rest of the versions leave it
unnoticed. It either comes from סל sal, to raise or elevate, and may
denote a particular elevation in the voices of the performers, which is
very observable in the Jewish singing to the present day; or it may come
from סלה salah, to strew or spread out, intimating that the subject to
which the word is attached should be spread out, meditated on, and
attentively considered by the reader. Fenwick, Parkhurst, and Dodd,
contend for this meaning; and think "it confirmed by [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016.md), where the word higgaion is put
before selah at the end of the verse." Now higgaion certainly signifies
meditation, or a fit subject for meditation; and so shows selah to be
really a nota bene, attend to or mind this.

[Psalms 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 3:3</span></span>

Thou, O Lord art a shield - As a shield covers and defends the body from
the strokes of an adversary, so wilt thou cover and defend me from them
that rise up against me.

The lifter up of mine head - Thou wilt restore me to the state from
which my enemies have cast me down. This is the meaning of the phrase;
and this he speaks prophetically. He was satisfied that the deliverance
would take place, hence his confidence in prayer; so that we find him,
with comparative unconcern, laying himself down in his bed, expecting
the sure protection of the Almighty.

[Psalms 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 3:4</span></span>

I cried unto the Lord with my voice - He was exposed to much danger, and
therefore he had need of fervor.

He heard me - Notwithstanding my enemies said, and my friends feared,
that there was no help for me in my God; yet he heard me out of his holy
hill. Selah: mark this, and take encouragement from it. God never
forsakes those who trust in him. He never shuts out the prayer of the
distressed.

[Psalms 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 3:5</span></span>

I laid me down and slept - He who knows that he has God for his
Protector may go quietly and confidently to his bed, not fearing the
violence of the fire, the edge of the sword, the designs of wicked men,
nor the influence of malevolent spirits.

I awaked - Though humanly speaking there was reason to fear I should
have been murdered in my bed, as my most confidential servants had been
corrupted by my rebellious son; yet God, my shield, protected me. I both
slept and awaked; and my life is still whole in me.

[Psalms 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 3:6</span></span>

I Will not be afraid of ten thousands - Strength and numbers are nothing
against the omnipotence of God. He who has made God his refuge certainly
has no cause to fear.

[Psalms 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 3:7</span></span>

Arise, O Lord - Though he knew that God had undertaken his defense, yet
he knew that his continued protection depended on his continual prayer
and faith. God never ceases to help as long as we pray. When our hands
hang down, and we restrain prayer before him, we may then justly fear
that our enemies will prevail.

Those blast smitten - That is, Thou wilt smite. He speaks in full
confidence of God's interference; and knows as surely that he shall have
the victory, as if he had it already. Breaking the jaws and the teeth
are expressions which imply, confounding and destroying an adversary;
treating him with extreme contempt; using him like a dog, etc.

[Psalms 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 3:8</span></span>

Salvation belongeth unto the Lord - It is God alone who saves. He is the
fountain whence help and salvation come; and to him alone the praise of
all saved souls is due. His blessing is upon his people. Those who are
saved from the power and the guilt of sin are his people. His mercy
saved them; and it is by his blessing being continually upon them, that
they continue to be saved. David adds his selah here also: mark this!

1\. Salvation comes from God.

2\. Salvation is continued by God.

These are great truths; mark them!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 4](psa004.md)

</div>
