<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa031)  [Next](psa033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 32:0</span></span>

True blessedness consists in remission of sin, and purification of the
heart, [Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001.md), [Psa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002.md). What the psalmist felt in
seeking these blessings, [Psa 32:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003.md).
How they should be sought, [Psa 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006.md),
[Psa 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#007.md). The necessity of humility
and teachableness, [Psa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008.md), [Psa
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009.md). The misery of the wicked, [Psa
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010.md). The blessedness of the
righteous, [Psa 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011.md).

The title of this Psalm is significant, לדוד משכיל ledavid maskil, A
Psalm of David, giving instruction, an instructive Psalm; so called by
way of eminence, because it is calculated to give the highest
instruction relative to the guilt of sin, and the blessedness of pardon
and holiness or justification and sanctification. It is supposed to have
been composed after David's transgression with Bath-sheba, and
subsequently to his obtaining pardon. The Syriac entitles it, "A Psalm
of David concerning the sin of Adam, who dared and transgressed; and a
prophecy concerning Christ, because through him we are to be delivered
from hell." The Arabic says, "David spoke this Psalm prophetically
concerning the redemption." The Vulgate, Septuagint, and Ethiopic, are
the same in meaning as the Hebrew.

[Psalms 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 32:1</span></span>

Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven - In this and the
following verse four evils are mentioned:

1\. Transgression, פשע peshwa.

2\. Sin, חטאה chataah.

3\. Iniquity, עון avon.

4\. Guile, רמיה remiyah.

The first signifies the passing over a boundary, doing what is
prohibited. The second signifies the missing of a mark, not doing what
was commanded; but is often taken to express sinfulness, or sin in the
future, producing transgression in the life. The third signifies what is
turned out of its proper course or situation; any thing morally
distorted or perverted. Iniquity, what is contrary to equity or justice.
The fourth signifies fraud, deceit, guile, etc. To remove these evils,
three acts are mentioned: forgiving, covering, and not imputing.

1\. Transgression, פשע pesha, must be forgiven, נשוי nesui, borne away,
i.e., by a vicarious sacrifice; for bearing sin, or bearing away sin,
always implies this.

2\. Sin, חטאה chataah, must be covered, כסוי kesui, hidden from the
sight. It is odious and abominable, and must be put out of sight.

3\. Iniquity, עון anon, which is perverse or distorted, must not be
imputed, לא יחשב lo yachshob, must not be reckoned to his account.

4\. Guile, רמיה remiyah, must be annihilated from the soul: In whose
spirit there is no Guile. The man whose transgression is forgiven; whose
sin is hidden, God having cast it as a millstone into the depths of the
sea; whose iniquity and perversion is not reckoned to his account; and
whose guile, the deceitful and desperately wicked heart, is annihilated,
being emptied of sin and filled with righteousness, is necessarily a
happy man.

The old Psalter translates these two verses thus: Blissid qwas wikednes
es for gyven, and qwas synnes is hyled (covered). Blisful man til qwam
Lord retted (reckoneth) noght Syn: ne na treson es in his gast (spirit).
In vain does any man look for or expect happiness while the power of sin
remains, its guilt unpardoned, and its impurity not purged away. To the
person who has got such blessings, we may say as the psalmist said, אשרי
ashrey, O the blessedness of that man, whose transgression is forgiven!
etc.

St. Paul quotes this passage, [Rom
4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006) (note.md), to illustrate the
doctrine of justification by faith; where see the notes.

[Psalms 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 32:3</span></span>

When I kept silence - Before I humbled myself, and confessed my sin, my
soul was under the deepest horror. "I roared all the day long;" and felt
the hand of God heavy upon my soul.

[Psalms 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 32:5</span></span>

I acknowledged my sin - When this confession was made thoroughly and
sincerely, and I ceased to cover and extenuate my offense, then thou
didst forgive the iniquity of my sin. I felt the hardness of heart: I
felt the deep distress of soul; I felt power to confess and abhor my
sin; I felt confidence in the mercy of the Lord; and I felt the
forgiveness of the iniquity of my sin.

Selah - This is all true; I know it; I felt it; I feel it.

[Psalms 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 32:6</span></span>

For this shall every one that is godly - Because thou art merciful;
because thou hast shown mercy to all who have truly turned to thee, and
believed in thee; every one who fears thee, and hears of this, shall
pray unto thee in an acceptable time, when thou mayest be found; in the
time of finding. When the heart is softened and the conscience alarmed,
that is a time of finding. God is ever ready; men are not so. Who can
pray with a hard heart and a dark mind? While you feel relentings, pray.

Surely in the floods - In violent trials, afflictions, and temptations;
when the rains descend, the winds blow, and the floods beat against that
godly man who prays and trusts in God; "they shall not come nigh him,"
so as to weaken his confidence or destroy his soul. His house is founded
on a rock.

[Psalms 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 32:7</span></span>

Thou art my hiding place - An allusion, probably, to the city of refuge:
"Thou shalt preserve me from trouble." The avenger of blood shall not be
able to overtake me. And being encompassed with an impregnable wall, I
shall feel myself encompassed with songs of deliverance - I shall know
that I am safe.

[Psalms 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 32:8</span></span>

I will instruct thee - These are probably the Lord's words to David.
Seeing thou art now sensible of the mercy thou hast received from me,
and art purposing to live to my glory, I will give thee all the
assistance requisite. I will become thy Instructor, "and will teach
thee," in all occurrences, "the way thou shouldst go." I will keep mine
eyes upon thee, and thou shalt keep thine upon me: as I go, thou must
follow me; and I will continually watch for thy good.

[Psalms 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 32:9</span></span>

Be ye not as the horse or as the mule - They will only act by force and
constraint; be not like them; give a willing service to your Maker.
"They have no understanding;" you have a rational soul, made to be
guided and influenced by reason. The service of your God is a reasonable
service; act, therefore, as a rational being. The horse and the mule are
turned with difficulty; they must be constrained with bit and bridle. Do
not be like them; do not oblige your Maker to have continual recourse to
afflictions, trials, and severe dispensations of providence, to keep you
in the way, or to recover you after you have gone out of it.

[Psalms 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 32:10</span></span>

Many sorrows shall be to the wicked - Every wicked man is a miserable
man. God has wedded sin and misery as strongly as he has holiness and
happiness. God hath joined them together; none can put them asunder.

But he that trusteth in the Lord - Such a person is both safe and happy.

[Psalms 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 32:11</span></span>

Be glad - and rejoice - Let every righteous soul rejoice and glory, but
let it be in the Lord. Man was made for happiness, but his happiness
must be founded on holiness: and holiness, as it comes from God, must be
retained by continual union with him. Probably this verse belongs to the
next Psalm, and was originally its first verse.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 33](psa033.md)

</div>
