<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa033)  [Next](psa035.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 34:0</span></span>

David praises God, and exhorts others to do the same, [Psa
34:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md); shows how he sought the Lord,
and how he was found of him, [Psa
34:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004.md). All are exhorted to taste and
see the goodness of God; with the assurance of support and comfort, [Psa
34:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007.md). He shows the way to attain
happiness and long life, [Psa
34:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011.md); the privileges of the
righteous, and of all who sincerely seek God, [Psa
34:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#017.md).

The title states that this is "A Psalm of David, when he changed his
behavior before Abimelech; who drove him away, and he departed." The
history of this transaction may be found in [Sa1
21:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001) (note.md), on which chapter see
the notes. But Abimelech is not the person there mentioned; it was
Achish, king of Gath, called here Abimelech, because that was a common
name of the Philistine kings. Neither MS. nor version reads Achish in
this place; and all the versions agree in the title as it stands in our
version, except the Syriac, which states it to be "A Psalm of David,
when he went to the house of the Lord, that he might give the
first-fruits to the priests."

Of the occasion of this Psalm, as stated here, I have given my opinion
in the notes on [Sa1 21:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001.md), to which
I have nothing to add. On the whole I prefer the view taken of it by the
Septuagint, which intimates that "David fell into an epileptic fit; that
he frothed at the mouth, fell against the doorposts, and gave such
unequivocal evidences of being subject to epileptic fits, and during the
time his intellect became so much impaired, that Achish Abimelech
dismissed him from his court." This saves the character of David; and if
it cannot be vindicated in this way, then let it fall under reproach as
to this thing; for hypocrisy, deceit, and falsehood, can never be right
in the sight of God, whatever men may ingeniously say to excuse them.

This is the second of the acrostic or alphabetical Psalms, each verse
beginning with a consecutive letter of the Hebrew alphabet. But in this
Psalm some derangement has taken place. The verse which begins with ו
vau, and which should come in between the fifth and sixth, is totally
wanting; and the twenty-second verse is entirely out of the series; it
is, however, my opinion that this verse (the twenty-second) which now
begins with פ phe, פודה podeh, redeemeth, was originally written ופודה
vepodeh or with פדה padah, as more than a hundred of Dr. Kennicott's
MSS. read it, thus making ופדה vepodah, "and will redeem" and this reads
admirably in the above connection. I shall here place the verses at one
view, and the reader shall judge for himself:

[Psa 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005.md) "They looked unto him, and
were enlightened: and their faces were not ashamed."

[Psa 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#022.md) "And the Lord will redeem
the soul of his servants, and none of them that trust in him shall be
desolate."

[Psa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006.md) "This poor man cried, and
the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles."

[Psa 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007.md) "The angel of the Lord
encampeth round about them that fear him, and delivereth them." Thus we
find the connection complete, with the above emendation.

[Psalms 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 34:1</span></span>

I will bless the Lord at all times - He has laid me under endless
obligation to him, and I will praise him while I have a being.

[Psalms 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 34:2</span></span>

My soul shall make her boast - Shall set itself to praise the Lord -
shall consider this its chief work.

The humble - ענוים anavim, the afflicted, such as David had been.

[Psalms 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 34:3</span></span>

Magnify the Lord with me - גדלו ליהוה gaddelu lavhovah, "make greatness
to Jehovah;" show his greatness; and let "us exalt his name," let us
show how high and glorious it is.

[Psalms 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 34:4</span></span>

I sought the Lord - This is the reason and cause of his gratitude. I
sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me out of all my fears.
This answers to the history; for when David heard what the servants of
Achish said concerning him, "he laid up the words in his heart, and was
greatly afraid," [Sa1 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#013.md). To save
him, God caused the epileptic fit to seize him; and, in consequence, he
was dismissed by Achish, as one whose defection from his master, and
union with the Philistines, could be of no use, and thus David's life
and honor were preserved. The reader will see that I proceed on the
ground laid down by the Septuagint. See before, [Psa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001) (note.md).

[Psalms 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 34:5</span></span>

They looked unto him - Instead of הביטו hibbitu, they looked, several of
Dr. Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. have הביטו habbitu, with the point
pathach, "Look ye."

And their faces were not ashamed - Some MSS., and the Complutensian
Polyglot, make this clause the beginning of a new verse and as it begins
with a vau, ופניהם upheneyhem, "and their faces," they make it supply
the place of the verse which appears to be lost; but see what is said in
the introduction before the first verse.

[Psalms 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 34:6</span></span>

This poor man cried - זה עני zeh ani, "This afflicted man," David.

[Psalms 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 34:7</span></span>

The angel of the Lord encampeth round - I should rather consider this
angel in the light of a watchman going round his circuit, and having for
the objects of his especial care such as fear the Lord.

[Psalms 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 34:8</span></span>

O taste and see that the Lord is good - Apply to him by faith and
prayer; plead his promises, he will fulfill them; and you shall know in
consequence, that the Lord is good. God has put it in the power of every
man to know whether the religion of the Bible be true or false. The
promises relative to enjoyments in this life are the grand tests of
Divine revelation. These must be fulfilled to all them who with deep
repentance and true faith turn unto the Lord, if the revelation which
contains them be of God. Let any man in this spirit approach his Maker,
and plead the promises that are suited to his case, and he will soon
know whether the doctrine be of God. He shall taste, and then see, that
the Lord is good, and that the man is blessed who trusts in him. This is
what is called experimental religion; the living, operative knowledge
that a true believer has that he is passed from death unto life; that
his sins are forgiven him for Christ's sake, the Spirit himself bearing
witness with his spirit that he is a child of God. And, as long as he is
faithful, he carries about with him the testimony of the Holy Ghost; and
he knows that he is of God, by the Spirit which God has given him.

[Psalms 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 34:9</span></span>

There is no want to them that fear him - He who truly fears God loves
him; and he who loves God obeys him, and to him who fears, loves, and
obeys God, there can be no want of things essential to his happiness,
whether spiritual or temporal, for this life or for that which is to
come. This verse is wanting in the Syriac.

[Psalms 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 34:10</span></span>

The young lions do lack - Instead of כפירים kephirim, the young lions,
one of Kennicott's MSS. has כבירים cabbirim, "powerful men." The
Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, Syriac, Arabic, and Anglo-Saxon have the
same reading. Houbigant approves of this; and indeed the sense and
connection seem to require it. My old Psalter reads: - The Ryche had
nede; and thai hungerd: but sekand Lard sal noght be lessed of alle
gode. That es, says the paraphrase, with outen lessyng thai sal have
God; that es alle gode; for in God is al gode.

[Psalms 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 34:11</span></span>

Come, ye children - All ye that are of an humble, teachable spirit.

I will teach you the fear of the Lord - I shall introduce the
translation and paraphrase from my old Psalter; and the rather because I
believe there is a reference to that very improper and unholy method of
teaching youth the system of heathen mythology before they are taught
one sound lesson of true divinity, till at last their minds are imbued
with heathenism, and the vicious conduct of gods, goddesses, and heroes,
here very properly called tyrants, becomes the model of their own; and
they are as heathenish without as they are heathenish within.

Trans. Cummes sones heres me: bred of Lard I sal gou lere.

Par - Cummes with trauth and luf: sones, qwam I gette in haly lere:
heres me. With eres of hert. I sal lere you, noght the fabyls of poetes;
na the storys of tyrauntz; bot the dred of oure Larde, that wyl bryng
thou til the felaghschippe of aungels; and thar in is lyfe." I need not
paraphrase this paraphrase, as it is plain enough.

[Psalms 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 34:12</span></span>

What man is he that desireth life - He who wishes to live long and to
live happily, let him act according to the following directions. For a
comment upon this and the four ensuing verses, see the notes on [Pe1
3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010) (note.md).

[Psalms 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 34:17</span></span>

The righteous cry - There is no word in the present Hebrew text for
righteous; but all the versions preserve it. I suppose it was lost
through its similitude to the word צעקו tsaaku, they cry צעקו צדיקים
tsaaku tsaddikim, the righteous cry.

[Psalms 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 34:18</span></span>

A broken heart - נשברי לב nishberey Web, the heart broken to shivers.

A contrite spirit - דכאי רוח dakkeey ruach, "the beaten-out spirit." In
both words the hammer is necessarily implied; in breaking to pieces the
ore first, and then plating out the metal when it has been separated
from the ore. This will call to the reader's remembrance [Jer
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029.md) : "Is not my word like as a
fire, saith the Lord? And like a hammer that breaketh the rock in
pieces?" The breaking to shivers, and beating out, are metaphorical
expressions: so are the hammer and the rock. What the large hammer
struck on a rock by a powerful hand would do, so does the word of the
Lord when struck on the sinner's heart by the power of the Holy Spirit.
The broken heart, and the contrite spirit, are two essential
characteristics of true repentance.

[Psalms 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 34:19</span></span>

Many are the afflictions of the righteous - No commander would do
justice to a brave and skillful soldier, by refusing him opporbunities
to put his skill and bravery to proof by combating with the adversary;
or by preventing him from taking the post of danger when necessity
required it. The righteous are God's soldiers. He suffers them to be
tried, and sometimes to enter into the hottest of the battle and in
their victory the power and influence of the grace of God is shown, as
well as their faithfulness.

Delivereth him out of them all - He may well combat heartily, who knows
that if he fight in the Lord, he shall necessarily be the conqueror.

[Psalms 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 34:20</span></span>

He keepeth all his bones - He takes care of his life; and if he have
scars, they are honorable ones.

[Psalms 34:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 34:21</span></span>

Evil shall slay the wicked - The very thing in which they delight shall
become their bane and their ruin.

They that hate the righteous - All persecutors of God's people shall be
followed by the chilling blast of God's displeasure in this world; and
if they repent not, shall perish everlastingly.

[Psalms 34:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 34:22</span></span>

The Lord redeemeth - Both the life and soul of God's followers are ever
in danger but God is continually redeeming both.

Shall be desolate - Literally, shall be guilty. They shall be preserved
from sin, and neither forfeit life nor soul. This verse probably should
come in after the fifth. See the introduction to this Psalm.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 35](psa035.md)

</div>
