<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa047)  [Next](psa049.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 48:0</span></span>

The ornaments and the privileges of the Church, [Psa
48:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md). The duty of God's people, [Psa
48:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009.md).

The title: A Song and Psalm for the sons of Korah. To which the Vulgate,
Septuagint, Aethiopia, and Arabic add, for the second day of the week;
for which I believe it would be difficult to find a meaning. It is
evidently of the same complexion with the two preceding, and refers to
the Jews returned from captivity; and perhaps was sung at the dedication
of the second temple, in order to return thanks to the Lord for the
restoration of their political state, and the reestablishment of their
worship.

[Psalms 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 48:1</span></span>

Great is the Lord - This verse should be joined to the last verse of the
preceding Psalm, as it is a continuation of the same subject; and indeed
in some of Kennicott's MSS. it is written as a part of the foregoing.
That concluded with He is greatly exalted; this begins with Great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised; i.e., He should be praised according to
his greatness; no common praise is suited to the nature and dignity of
the Supreme God.

In the city of our God - That is, in the temple; or in Jerusalem, where
the temple was situated.

The mountain of his holiness - Mount Moriah, on which the temple was
built. The ancient city of Jerusalem, which David took from the
Jebusites, was on the south of Mount Zion, on which the temple was
built, though it might be said to be more properly on Mount Moriah,
which is one of the hills of which Mount Zion is composed. The temple
therefore was to the north of the city, as the psalmist here states,
[Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md) : "Beautiful for situation,
the joy of the whole earth, is Mount Zion, on the sides of the north,
the city of the great King." But some think that it is the city that is
said to be on the north, and Reland contends that the temple was on the
south of the city.

[Psalms 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 48:2</span></span>

The joy of the whole earth - Commentators have been greatly puzzled to
show in what sense Zion, or the temple, could be said to be the joy of
the whole earth. If we take the earth here for the habitable globe,
there is no sense in which it ever was the joy of the whole earth; but
If we take כל הארץ col haarets, as signifying the whole of this land,
(and it has no other meaning), the assertion is plain and easy to be
understood, for the temple was considered the ornament and glory of the
whole land of Judea.

[Psalms 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 48:3</span></span>

God is known in her palaces for a refuge - All those who worship there
in spirit and truth, find God for their refuge. But the words may be
understood: God is known for the defense of her palaces; and with this
view of the subject agree the three following verses.

[Psalms 48:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 48:4</span></span>

For, lo, the kings were assembled - Many of the neighboring potentates,
at different times, envied the prosperity of the Jewish nation, and
coveted the riches of the temple; but they had no power against it till
the cup of Jewish transgression was full. In vain did they assemble -
confederate, and invade the land. Saw it - reconnoitered the place;
marvelled at its excellence and strength, for they were troubled -
struck with fear; hasted away for fear of destruction, for fear took
hold on them as pains seize on a woman to travail. Those who came to
destroy were glad to make their own escape.

[Psalms 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 48:7</span></span>

Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish - Calmet thinks this may refer to
the discomfiture of Cambyses, who came to destroy the land of Judea.
"This is apparently," says he, "the same tempest which struck dismay
into the land-forces of Cambyses, and wrecked his fleet which was on the
coasts of the Mediterranean sea, opposite to his army near the port of
Acco, or the Ptolemais; for Cambyses had his quarters at Ecbatana, at
the foot of Mount Carmel; and his army was encamped in the valley of
Jezreel." Ships of Tarshish he conjectures to have been large stout
vessels, capable of making the voyage of Tarsus, in Cilicia.

[Psalms 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 48:8</span></span>

As we have heard, so have we seen - Our fathers have declared what
mighty works thou didst in their time; and we have seen the same. God
has often interposed and afforded us a most miraculous defense. So it
was when they were invaded by the Assyrians, Syrians, Egyptians,
Babylonians, Persians and the Greeks under Alexander.

The city of the Lord of hosts - His hosts defended the city, and it was
known to be the City of the great King.

God will establish it for ever - This must refer to the true temple, the
Christian Church, of which the Jewish Church was a type. The type
perished, but the antitype remained, and will remain till time shall be
no more.

Selah - So be it; and so it will be for evermore.

[Psalms 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 48:9</span></span>

We have thought of thy loving-kindness - We went to thy temple to
worship thee; we meditated on thy goodness; we waited for a display of
it; and the panic that in the first instance struck us, was transferred
to our enemies; and fear took hold upon them, they marvelled, were
troubled, and hasted away.

[Psalms 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 48:10</span></span>

According to thy name - As far as thou art known, so far art thou
praised; and where thou art known, thou wilt have praise to the end of
the earth. And why? "Thy right hand is full of righteousness." Thou art
continually dispensing thy blessings to the children of men.

[Psalms 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 48:11</span></span>

Let Mount Zion rejoice - The temple is restored in majesty, which was
threatened with total destruction; it is again repaired.

Let the daughters of Judah be glad - That thou hast turned her
captivity, and poured out thy judgments upon her oppressors.

[Psalms 48:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 48:12</span></span>

Walk about Zion - Consider the beauty and magnificence of the temple,
count the towers by which it is fortified.

[Psalms 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 48:13</span></span>

Mark ye well her bulwarks - See the redoubts by which she is defended.

Consider her palaces - See her courts, chambers, altars, etc., etc.;
make an exact register of the whole, that ye may have to tell to your
children how Jerusalem was built in troublesome times; how God restored
you; and how he put it into the hearts of the heathen to assist to
build, beautify, and adorn the temple of our God.

[Psalms 48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 48:14</span></span>

For this God - Who did all these wonderful things: -

Is our God - He is our portion, and he has taken us for his people.

He will be our guide - Through all the snares and difficulties of life:
-

Even unto death - He will never leave us; and we, by his grace, will
never abandon him. He is just such a God as we need; infinite in mercy,
goodness, and truth. He is our Father, and we are the sons and daughters
of God Almighty. Even unto and in death, he will be our portion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 49](psa049.md)

</div>
