<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa028)  [Next](psa030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 29:0</span></span>

The psalmist calls upon the great and mighty to give thanks unto God,
and to worship him in the beauty of holiness, on account of a tempest
that had taken place, [Psa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001), [Psa
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002). He shouts the wonders produced
by a thunderstorm, which he calls the voice of God, [Psa
29:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003). Speaks of the majesty of God,
[Psa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010); and points out the good he
will do to his people, [Psa 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#011).

In the Hebrew, this is called A Psalm for David. The Vulgate says, "A
Psalm of David, when the tabernacle was completed." The Septuagint says:
"A Psalm of David, at the going out or exodus of the tabernacle." The
Arabic states it to be "A prophecy concerning the incarnation; and
concerning the ark and the tent." [Num
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#012). The Syriac, "A Psalm of David,
concerning oblation." The Psalm was probably written to commemorate the
abundant rain which fell in the days of David, after the heavens had
been shut up for three years; [Sa2
21:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001).

[Psalms 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 29:1</span></span>

O ye mighty - בני אלים beney elim, "sons of the strong ones," or "sons
of rams." The Chaldee has, "Ye hosts of angels, sons of God." The
Vulgate has, "Offer to the Lord, ye sons of God; offer to the Lord the
sons of rams;" in this rendering agree the Septuagint, Ethiopic Arabic,
and Anglo-Saxon. The old Psalter has, Bringes til Lord ye goddes sonnes;
brynges til Lord sonnes of wether: which it paraphrases thus: that es,
yourself, sonnes of apostles, that war leders of goddes folk; qwam ye
study to folow.

Glory and strength - Ascribe all excellence and might to him.

The whole Psalm is employed in describing the effects produced by a
thunder-storm which had lately taken place.

[Psalms 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 29:2</span></span>

The glory due unto his name - Rather, the glory of his name. His name is
Mercy; his nature is love. Ascribe mercy, love, power, and wisdom to
him. All these are implied in the name Jehovah.

In the beauty of holiness - בהדרת קדש behadrath kodesh, "the beautiful
garments of holiness." Let the priests and Levites put on their best and
cleanest apparel; and let the whole service be conducted in such a way
as to be no dishonor to the Divine Majesty. The Vulgate and others read,
In the palace of his holiness. Let all go to the temple, and return
thanks to God for their preservation during this dreadful storm. See on
[Psa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009) (note).

[Psalms 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 29:3</span></span>

The voice of the Lord - Thunder, so called, [Exo
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023), [Exo
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#028), [Exo
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029); [Job
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#004); [Psa
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013); [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030). On this subject see the note on
[Job 37:4](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#004), where there is a particular
description of the nature and generation of thunder; and of the
lightning, clap, rain, and other phenomena which accompany it.

Upon many waters - The clouds, which Moses calls the waters which are
above the firmament.

[Psalms 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 29:4</span></span>

Is powerful - There is no agent in universal nature so powerful as the
electric fluid. It destroys life, tears castles and towers to pieces,
rends the strongest oaks, and cleaves the most solid rocks: universal
animate nature is awed and terrified by it. To several of these effects
the psalmist here refers; and for the illustration of the whole I must
refer to the above notes on Job.

Full of majesty - No sound in nature is so tremendous and majestic as
that of thunder; it is the most fit to represent the voice of God.

[Psalms 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 29:5</span></span>

Breaketh the cedars - Very tall trees attract the lightning from the
clouds, by which they are often torn to pieces. Woods and forests give
dreadful proof of this after a thunderstorm.

[Psalms 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 29:7</span></span>

Divideth the flames of fire - The forked zigzag lightning is the cause
of thunder; and in a thunder-storm these liahtnings are variously
dispersed, smiting houses, towers, trees, men, and cattle, in different
places.

[Psalms 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 29:8</span></span>

The wilderness of Kadesh - This was on the frontiers of Idumea and
Paran. There may be a reference to some terrible thunder-storm and
earthquake which had occurred in that place.

[Psalms 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 29:9</span></span>

Maketh the hinds to calve - Strikes terror through all the tribes of
animals; which sometimes occasions those which are pregnant to cast
their young. This, I believe, to be the whole that is meant by the text.
I meddle not with the fables which have been published on this subject
both by ancients and moderns.

Discovereth the forests - Makes them sometimes evident in the darliest
night, by the sudden flash; and often by setting them on fire.

And in his temple - Does this refer to the effect which a dreadful
thunder-storm often produces? Multitudes run to places of worship as
asylums in order to find safety, and pray to God. See on [Psa
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002) (note).

[Psalms 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 29:10</span></span>

The Lord sitteth upon the flood - יהוה למבול ישב Jehovah lammabbul
yasheb, "Jehovah sat upon the deluge." It was Jehovah that commanded
those waters to be upon the earth. He directed the storm; and is here
represented, after all the confusion and tempest, as sitting on the
floods, appeasing the fury of the jarring elements; and reducing all
things, by his governing influence, to regularity and order.

Sitteth king for ever - He governs universal nature; whatsoever he wills
he does, in the heavens above, in the earth beneath, and in all deep
places. Every phenomenon is under his government and control. There is
something very like this in Virgil's description of Neptune appeasing
the storm raised by Juno for the destruction of the fleet of Aeneas. See
at the end of this Psalm.

[Psalms 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 29:11</span></span>

The Lord will give strength - Prosperity in our secular affairs; success
in our enterprises; and his blessing upon our fields and cattle.

The Lord will bless his people with peace - Give them victory over their
enemies, and cause the nations to be at peace with them; so that they
shall enjoy uninterrupted prosperity. The plentiful rain which God has
now sent is a foretaste of his future blessings and abundant mercies.

In the note on [Psa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010) I have
referred to the following description taken from Virgil. Did he borrow
some of the chief ideas in it from the 29th Psalm? The reader will
observe several coincidences.

Interea magno misceri murmure pontum,

Emissamque hyemem sensit Neptunus, et imis

Stagna refusa vadis: graviter commotus, et alto

Prospiciens, summa placidum caput extulit unda.

Disjectam Aeneae toto videt aequore classem,

Fluctibus oppressos Troas, coelique ruina.

Eurum ad se zephyrumque vocat: dehinc talia fatur

Sic ait: et dicto citius tumida aequora placat,

Collectasque fugat nubes, solemque reducit.

Cymothoe simul, et Triton adnixus acuto

Detrudunt naves scopulo; levat ipse tridenti;

Et vastas aperit syrtes, et temperat aequor,

Atque rotis summas levibus perlabitur undas.

Sic cunctus pelagi cecidit fragor, aequora postquam

Prospiciens genitor, caeloque invectus aperto,

Flectit equos, curruque volans dat lora secundo.

Aen. lib. i., ver. 124.

"Mean time, imperial Neptune heard the sound

Of raging billows breaking on the ground.

Displeased, and fearing for his watery reign,

He rears his awful head above the main,

Serene in majesty; then rolled his eyes

Around the space of earth, of seas, and skies.

He saw the Trojan fleet dispersed, distressed,

By stormy winds and wintry heaven oppressed.

He summoned Eurus and the Western Blast,

And first an angry glance on both he cast;

Then thus rebuked.

He spoke; and while he spoke, he soothed the sea,

Dispelled the darkness, and restored the day.

Cymothoe, Triton, and the sea-green train

Of beauteous nymphs, and daughters of the main,

Clear from the rocks the vessels with their hands;

The god himself with ready trident stands,

And opes the deep, and spreads the moving sands;

Then heaves them off the shoals: where'er he guides

His finny coursers, and in triumph rides,

The waves unruffle, and the sea subsides.

So when the father of the flood appears,

And o'er the seas his sovereign trident rears,

Their fury fails: he skims the liquid plains

High on his chariot; and with loosened reins,

Majestic moves along, and awful peace maintains.

Dryden.

Our God, Jehovah, sitteth upon the flood: yea, Jehovah sitteth King for
ever.

The heathen god is drawn by his sea-horse, and assisted in his work by
subaltern deities: Jehovah sits on the flood an everlasting Governor,
ruling all things by his will, maintaining order, and dispensing
strength and peace to his people. The description of the Roman poet is
fine; that of the Hebrew poet, majestic and sublime.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 30](psa030)

</div>
