<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa016)  [Next](psa018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 17:0</span></span>

David implores the succor of God against his enemies; and professes his
integrity and determination to live to God's glory, [Psa
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001.md). He prays for support, and
expresses strong confidence in God, [Psa
17:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#005.md); describes the malice and
cruelty of his enemies, and prays against them, [Psa
17:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010.md); receives a strong persuasion
of support and final victory, [Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015.md).

The title is, A prayer of David; in which there is nothing that requires
explanation. David was most probably the author of this Psalm; and it
appears to have been written about the time in which Saul had carried
his persecution against him to the highest pitch. See [Sa1
27:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001.md) : The Arabic calls it "A
prayer of a perfect man, of Christ himself, or of any one redeemed by
him." Dr. Delaney, in his life of David, supposes that this poem was
written just after parting with Jonathan, when David went into exile.

[Psalms 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 17:1</span></span>

Hear the right - Attend to the justice of my cause, יהוה צדק Yehovah
tsedek, righteous Jehovah. "O righteous Jehovah, attend unto my cry."

Goeth not out of feigned lips - My supplication is sincere: and the
desire of my heart accompanies the words of my lips.

[Psalms 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 17:2</span></span>

My sentence come forth from thy presence - Thou knowest my heart, and my
ways; judge me as thou shalt find; let me not fall under the judgment of
man.

Let thine eyes behold the things that are equal - Thou knowest whether I
render to all their due, and whether others act justly by me. Thou canst
not be deceived: do justice between me and my adversaries.

[Psalms 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 17:3</span></span>

Thou hast proved mine heart - Thou well knowest whether there be any
evil way in me. Thou hast given me to see many and sore trials; and yet,
through thy mercy, I have preserved my integrity both to thee and to my
king. Thou hast seen me in my most secret retirements, and knowest
whether I have plotted mischief against him who now wishes to take away
my life.

Thou hast tried me - צרפתני tseraphtani; Thou hast put me to the test,
as they do metals in order to detect their alloy, and to purify them:
well expressed by the Vulgate, Igne me examinasti, "Thou hast tried me
by fire;" and well paraphrased in my old Psalter, - The examynd me the
lykkenyng of the fournas, that purges metal, and imang al this, wykednes
es nout funden in me: that es, I am funden clene of syn, and so
ryghtwis. - He who is saved from his sin is right wise; he has found the
true wisdom.

My mouth shall not transgress - This clause is added to the following
verse by the Vulgate and Septuagint: "That my mouth may not speak
according to the works of men, I have observed difficult ways because of
the words of thy lips." That is, So far from doing any improper action,
I have even refrained from all words that might be counted inflammatory
or seditious by my adversaries; for I took thy word for the regulation
of my conduct, and prescribed to myself the most painful duties, in
order that I might, in every respect, avoid what would give offense
either to thee or to man. Among the genuine followers of God, plots and
civil broils are never found.

[Psalms 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 17:4</span></span>

The paths of the destroyer - Some render, hard or difficult paths, the
sense of which is given above. But the passage is exceedingly obscure.
My old Psalter translates and paraphrases as follows: -

Trans. That my mouthe speke noght the werkes of men, for the wordes of
thi lippes I haf keped hard wayse.

Par - That es, that nothing passe of my mouthe bot at falles to the
louyng of the; noght til werkes of men, that dos o gaynes thy wil; als
to say, I spak noght bot gude; and for the wordes of thi lippes, that
es, to ful fil the wordes that thi prophetes saide; I kepe hard waies of
verteus and of tribulacioun, the qwilk men thynk hard; and for thi thai
leve the hard way til heven, and takes the soft way til hel; but it es
ful hard at the end.

[Psalms 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 17:5</span></span>

Hold up my goings in thy paths - David walked in God's ways; but,
without Divine assistance, he could not walk steadily, even in them. The
words of God's lips had shown him the steps he was to take, and he
implores the strength of God's grace to enable him to walk in those
steps. He had been kept from the paths of the destroyer; but this was
not sufficient; he must walk in God's paths - must spend his life in
obedience to the Divine will. Negative holiness ean save no man. "Every
tree that bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the
fire."

[Psalms 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 17:6</span></span>

Incline thine ear unto me - David prayed from a conviction that God
would hear: but he could not be satisfied unless he received an answer.
In a believer's mind the petition and the answer should not be
separated.

[Psalms 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 17:7</span></span>

Show thy marvellous lovingkindness - David was now exposed to imminent
danger; common interpositions of Providence could not save him; if God
did not work miracles for him, he must fall by the hand of Saul. Yet he
lays no claim to such miraculous interpositions; he expects all from
God's lovingkindness.

The common reading here is הפלה חסדיך haphleh chasadeycha, "distinguish
thy holy ones;" but הפלא haple, "do wonders," is the reading of about
seventy MSS., some ancient editions, with the Septuagint, Vulgate,
Chaldee, Syriac, and Arabic. The marginal reading of this verse is
nearer the original than that of the text.

[Psalms 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 17:8</span></span>

Keep me as the apple of the eye - Or, as the black of the daughter of
eye. Take as much care to preserve me now by Divine influence, as thou
hast to preserve my eye by thy good providence. Thou hast entrenched it
deeply in the skull; hast ramparted it with the forehead and
cheek-bones; defended it by the eyebrow, eyelids, and eyelashes; and
placed it in that situation where the hands can best protect it.

Hide me under the shadow of thy wings - This is a metaphor taken from
the hen and her chickens. See it explained at large in the note on [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037) (note.md). The Lord says of his
followers, [Zac 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008.md) : "He that
toucheth you, toucheth the apple of mine eye." How dear are our eyes to
us! how dear must his followers be to God!

[Psalms 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 17:9</span></span>

From my deadly enemies, who compass me about - This is a metaphor taken
from huntsmen, who spread themselves around a large track of forest,
driving in the deer from every part of the circumference, till they are
forced into the nets or traps which they have set for them in some
particular narrow passage. The metaphor is carried on in the following
verses.

[Psalms 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 17:10</span></span>

They are enclosed in their own fat - Dr. Kennicott, Bishop Horsley,
Houbigant, and others, read the passage thus: עלי חבלמו סגרו alai
chablamo sageru, "They have closed their net upon me." This continues
the metaphor which was introduced in the preceding verse, and which is
continued in the two following: and requires only that עלי ali, "upon
me," should began this verse instead of end the preceding; and that חלב
cheleb, which signifies fat, should be read חבל chebel, which signifies
rope, cable, or net. This important reading requires only the
interchange of two letters. The Syriac translates it, shut their mouth:
but the above emendation is most likely to be true.

They speak proudly - Having compassed the mountain on which I had taken
refuge, they now exult, being assured that they will soon be in
possession of their prey.

[Psalms 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 17:11</span></span>

They have now compassed us in our steps - Instead of אשרנו ashshurenu,
"our steps," Dr. Kennicott and others recommend אשרינו ashreynu, "O
lucky we, at last we have compassed him." He cannot now escape; he is
sure to fall into our hands.

They have set their eyes bowing down to the earth - All the commentators
and critics have missed the very expressive and elegant metaphor
contained in this clause. Kennicott says, They drove the hart into
toils, and then shot him. Bishop Horsley says, on the clause, They have
set their eyes bowing down to the earth: "This is the attitude of
huntsmen, taking aim at an animal upon the ground." No, it is the
attitude of the huntsmen looking for the slot, or track of the hart's,
hind's, or antelope's foot on the ground. See at the conclusion of the
Psalm.

[Psalms 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 17:12</span></span>

Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey - I believe the word lion is
here used to express Saul in his strength, kingly power and fierce
rapacity. See the observations at the end of the Psalm.

[Psalms 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 17:13</span></span>

Arise, O Lord, disappoint him - When he arises to spring upon and tear
me to pieces, arise thou, O Lord; disappoint him of his prey; seize him,
and cast him down.

Deliver my soul - Save my life.

From the wicked, which is thy sword - Saul is still meant, and we may
understand the words as either implying the sword, the civil power, with
which God had intrusted him, and which he was now grievously abusing;
or, it may mean, deliver me by Thy sword - cut him off who wishes to cut
me off. On this ground the next verse should be read from men, By thy
hand. So the margin. The hand of God not only meaning his power, but his
providence.

[Psalms 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 17:14</span></span>

From men of the world, which have - ממתים מחלד mimethim mecheled, from
mortal men of time; temporizers; men who shift with the times, who have
no fixed principle but one, that of securing their own secular interest:
and this agrees with what follows - which have their portion in this
life; who never seek after any thing spiritual; who have bartered heaven
for earth, and have got the portion they desired; for thou fillest their
belly with thy hid treasure. Their belly - their sensual appetites - is
their god; and, when their animal desires are satisfied, they take their
rest without consideration, like the beasts that perish.

Their portion in this life - בחיים bachaiyim, in lives, probably meaning
heritable lands and estates; for they leave them to their children, they
descend to posterity, and every one has his life portion in them. They
are lands of lives.

They are full of children - Have a numerous offspring, whom they educate
in the same principles, and to whom they leave a large earthly
patrimony, and who spend it as their fathers have done, and perhaps even
more dissolutely. Often covetous fathers lay up riches, which profligate
sons scatter to all the winds of heaven. I have seen many instances of
this.

[Psalms 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 17:15</span></span>

As for me - I cannot be satisfied with such a portion.

I will behold thy face - Nothing but an evidence of thy approbation can
content my soul.

In righteousness - I cannot have thy approbation unless I am conformed
to thy will. I must be righteous in order that my heart and life may
please thee.

I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness - Nothing but God
can satisfy the wishes of an immortal spirit. He made it with infinite
capacities and desires; and he alone, the infinite Good, can meet and
gratify these desires, and fill this all-capacious mind. No soul was
ever satisfied but by God; and he satisfies the soul only by restoring
it to his image, which, by the fall, it has lost.

I think there is an allusion here to the creation of Adam. When God
breathed into him the breath of lives, and he became a living soul, he
would appear as one suddenly awaked from sleep. The first object that
met his eyes was his glorious Creator, and being made in his image and
in his likeness, he could converse with him face to face - was capable
of the most intimate union with him, because he was filled with holiness
and moral perfection. Thus was he satisfied, the God of infinite
perfection and purity filling all the powers and faculties of his soul.
David sees this in the light of the Divine Spirit, and knows that his
happiness depends on being restored to this image and likeness; and he
longs for the time when he shall completely arise out of the sleep and
death of sin, and be created anew after the image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness. I do not think that he refers to the
resurrection of the body, but to the resurrection of the soul in this
life; to the regaining the image which Adam lost.

The paraphrase in my old Psalter understands the whole of this Psalm as
referring to the persecution, passion, death, and resurrection of
Christ; and so did several of the primitive fathers, particularly St.
Jerome and St. Augustine. I shall give a specimen from [Psa
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#011.md) : -

Projicientes me, nunc circumdederunt me: oculos suos statuerunt
declinare in terram.

Trans. Forth castand me now, thai haf umgyfen me: thair egheu thai sette
to heelde in the erde.

Par - Forth kasten me out of the cite, als the stede had bene fyled of
me: now thai haf umgyfen me in the cros hyngand, als folk that gedyrs
til a somer gamen: for thai sett thair eghen, that es the entent of
thaire hert to heeld in the erde; that es, in erdly thynges to covayte
tham, and haf tham. And thai wende qwen thai slew Crist that he had
suffird al the ill, and thai nane.

Perhaps some of my readers may think that this needs translating, so far
does our present differ fronn our ancient tongue.

Text - They have now cast me forth; they have surrounded me: their eyes
they set down to the earth.

Par - They have cast me out of the city, as if the state were to be
defiled by me: now they have surrounded me hanging on the cross, as
people gathered together at summer games. For they set their eyes, that
is, the intent of their heart, down to the earth; that is, earthly
things, to covet them and to have them: and they thought, when they slew
Christ, that he had suffered all the ill, and they none.

By the slot or track of the hart on the ground, referred to in [Psa
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#011.md), experienced huntsmen can
discern whether there have been a hart there, whether he has been there
lately, whether the slot they see be the track of a hart or a hind, and
whether the animal be young or old. All these can be discerned by the
slot. And if the reader have that scarce book at hand, Tuberville on
Hunting, 4th, 1575 or 1611, he mill find all this information in chapter
22, p. 63, entitled, The Judgment and Knowledge by the Slot of a Hart;
and on the same page; a wood-cut, representing a huntsman with his eyes
set, bowing down to the earth, examining three slots which he had just
found. The cut is a fine illustration of this clause. Saul and his men
were hunting David, and curiously searching every place to find out any
track, mark, or footstep, by which they might learn whether he had been
in such a place, and whether he had been there lately. Nothing can more
fully display the accuracy and intensity of this search than the
metaphor contained in the above clause. He who has been his late
Majesty's huntsmen looking for the slot in Windsor Forest will see the
strength and propriety of the figure used by the psalmist.

[Psalms 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 17:12</span></span>

Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey - This is the picture of Saul.
While his huntsmen were beating every bush, prying into every cave and
crevice, and examining every foot of ground to find out a track, Saul is
ready, whenever the game is started, to spring upon, seize, and destroy
it. The metaphors are well connected, well sustained, and strongly
expressive of the whole process of this persecution.

In the ninth verse the huntsmen beat the forest to raise and drive in
the game. In the tenth they set their nets, and speak confidently of the
expected success. In the eleventh, they felicitate themselves on having
found the slot, the certain indication of the prey being at hand. And in
the twelfth, the king of the sport is represented as just ready to
spring upon the prey; or, as having his bow bent, and his arrow on the
string, ready to let fly the moment the prey appears. It is worthy of
remark, that kings and queens were frequently present, and were the
chiefs of the sport; and it was they who, when he had been killed, broke
up the deer: 1. Slitting down the brisket with their knife or sword;
and, 2. Cutting off the head. And, as Tuberville published the first
edition of his book in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, he gives a large
wood-cut, p. 133, representing this princess just alighted from her
horse - the stag stretched upon the ground - the huntsman kneeling,
holding the fore foot of the animal with his left hand, and with his
right presenting a knife to the queen for the purpose of the breaking
up. As the second edition was published in the reign of James the First,
the image of the queen is taken out and a whole length of James
introduced in the place.

The same appears in Tuberville's Book of Falconrie, connected with the
above. In p. 81, edition 1575, where the flight of the hawk at the heron
is represented, the queen is seated on her charger: but in the edition
of 1611 King James is placed on the same charger, the queen being
removed.

The lion is the monarch of the forest; and is used successfully here to
represent Saul, king of Israel, endeavoring to hunt down David;
hernoming him in on every side; searching for his footsteps; and ready
to spring upon him, shoot him with his bow, or pierce him with his
javelin, as soon as he should be obliged to flee from his last cover.
The whole is finely imagined, and beautifully described.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 18](psa018.md)

</div>
