<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa022)  [Next](psa024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 23:0</span></span>

The Lord is the Pastor of his people; therefore it may be inferred that
they shall not want, [Psa 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001). How he
guides, feeds, and protects them, [Psa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002), [Psa
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003). Even in the greatest dangers
they may be confident of his support, [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004). His abundant provision for them,
[Psa 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005). The confidence they may
have of his continual mercy, and their eternal happiness, [Psa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006).

There is nothing particular in the title; it is simply attributed to
David; but as it appears to be a thanksgiving of the Israelites for
their redemption from the Bablylonish captivity, it cannot with
propriety be attributed to David. Some think it was written by David in
his exile, which is not likely; others, that he penned it when he was
finally delivered from the persecution of Saul. I rather incline to the
opinion that it was written after the captivity. The Chaldee seems to
suppose that it was written to celebrate the goodness of God to the
Israelites in the desert. It is a truly beautiful Psalm. Supposing it to
have been written after the captivity, we see,

1\. The redeemed captives giving thanks to God for their liberty.

2\. Acknowledging that God had brought back their lives from the grave.

3\. They represent themselves in Judea as a flock in an excellent
pasture.

4\. They declare that from the dangers they have passed through, and
from which God had delivered them, they can have no fear of any enemy.

5\. They conclude, from what God has done for them, that his goodness
and mercy shall follow them all their days.

6\. That they shall no more be deprived of God's worship, but shall all
their days have access to his temple.

[Psalms 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 23:1</span></span>

The Lord is my shepherd - There are two allegories in this Psalm which
are admirably well adapted to the purpose for which they are produced,
and supported both with art and elegance. The first is that of a
shepherd; the second, that of a great feast, set out by a host the most
kind and the most liberal. As a flock, they have the most excellent
pasture; as guests, they have the most nutritive and abundant fare. God
condescends to call himself the Shepherd of his people, and his
followers are considered as a flock under his guidance and direction.

1\. He leads them out and in, so that they find pasture and safety.

2\. He knows where to feed them, and in the course of his grace and
providence leads them in the way in which they should go.

3\. He watches over them and keeps them from being destroyed by ravenous
beasts.

4\. If any have strayed, he brings them back.

5\. He brings them to the shade in times of scorching heat; in times of
persecution and affliction, he finds out an asylum for them.

6\. He takes care that they shall lack no manner of thing that is good.

But who are his flock? All real penitents, all true believers; all who
obediently follow his example, abstaining from every appearance of evil,
and in a holy life and conversation showing forth the virtues of Him who
called them from darkness into his marvellous light. "My sheep hear my
voice, and follow me."

But who are not his flock! Neither the backslider in heart, nor the vile
Antinomian, who thinks the more he sins, the more the grace of God shall
be magnified in saving him; nor those who fondly suppose they are
covered with the righteousness of Christ while living in sin; nor the
crowd of the indifferent and the careless, nor the immense herd of
Laodicean loiterers; nor the fiery bigots who would exclude all from
heaven but themselves, and the party who believe as they do. These the
Scripture resembles to swine, dogs, wandering stars, foxes, lions, wells
without water, etc., etc. Let not any of these come forward to feed on
this pasture, or take of the children's bread. Jesus Christ is the good
Shepherd; the Shepherd who, to save his flock, laid down his own life.

I shall not want - How can they? He who is their Shepherd has all power
in heaven and earth; therefore he can protect them. The silver and gold
are his, and the cattle on a thousand hills; and therefore he can
sustain them. He has all that they need, and his heart is full of love
to mankind; and therefore he will withhold from them no manner of thing
that is good. The old Psalter both translates and paraphrases this
clause well: Lord governs me, and nathing sal want to me. In stede of
pastour thare he me sett. "The voice of a rightwis man: Lord Crist es my
kyng, and for thi (therefore) nathyng sal me want: that es, in hym I sal
be siker, and suffisand, for I hope in hymn gastly gude and endles. And
he ledes me in stede of pastoure,that es, understandyng of his worde,
and delyte in his luf. Qwar I am siker to be fild, thar in that stede
(place) he sett me, to be nurysht til perfectioun." Who can say more,
who need say less, than this?

[Psalms 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 23:2</span></span>

He maketh me to lie down in green pastures - בנאות דשא binoth deshe, not
green pastures, but cottages of turf or sods, such as the shepherds had
in open champaign countries; places in which themselves could repose
safely; and pens thus constructed where the flock might be safe all the
night. They were enclosures, and enclosures where they had grass or
provender to eat.

Beside the still waters - Deep waters, that the strongest heat could not
exhale; not by a rippling current, which argues a shallow stream. Or
perhaps he may here refer to the waters of Siloam, or Shiloah, that go
sof tly, [Isa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006), compared with the
strong current of the Euphrates. Thou hast brought us from the land of
our captivity, from beyond this mighty and turbulent river, to our own
country streams, wells, and fountains, where we enjoy peace,
tranquillity, and rest.

The old Psalter gives this a beautiful turn: On the water of rehetyng
forth he me broght. On the water of grace er we broght forth, that makes
to recover our strengthe that we lost in syn. And reheteis (strengthens)
us to do gude workes. My saule he turned, that es, of a synful wreche,
he made it ryghtwis, and waxyng of luf in mekeness. First he turnes our
sautes til hym; and then he ledes and fedes it. Ten graces he telles in
this psalme, the qwilk God gyfs til his lufers, (i.e., them that love
him).

[Psalms 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 23:3</span></span>

He restoreth my soul - Brings back my life from destruction; and
converts my soul from sin, that it may not eternally perish. Or, after
it has backslidden from him, heals its backslidings, and restores it to
his favor. See the old paraphrase on this clause in the preceding note.

In the paths of righteousness - במעגלי צדק bemageley tsedek, "in the
circuits" or "orbits of righteousness." In many places of Scripture man
appears to be represented under the notion of a secondary planet moving
round its primary; or as a planet revolving round the sun, from whom it
receives its power of revolving, with all its light and heat. Thus man
stands in reference to the Sun of righteousness; by his power alone is
he enabled to walk uprightly; by his light he is enlightened; and by his
heat he is vivified, and enabled to bring forth good fruit. When he
keeps in his proper orbit, having the light of the glory of God
reflected from the face of Jesus Christ, he is enabled to enlighten and
strengthen others. He that is enlightened may enlighten; he that is fed
may feed.

For his name's sake - To display the glory of his grace, and not on
account of any merit in me. God's motives of conduct towards the
children of men are derived from the perfections and goodness of his own
nature.

[Psalms 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 23:4</span></span>

Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death - The
reference is still to the shepherd. Though I, as one of the flock,
should walk through the most dismal valley, in the dead of the night,
exposed to pitfalls, precipices, devouring beasts, etc., I should fear
no evil under the guidance and protection of such a Shepherd. He knows
all the passes, dangerous defiles, hidden pits, and abrupt precipices in
the way; and he will guide me around, about, and through them. See the
phrase shadow of death explained on [Mat
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016) (note). "Thof I ward well and
imang tha, that nouther has knowyng of God, ne luf or in myddis of this
lyf, that es schadow of ded; for it es blak for myrkenes of syn; and it
ledes til dede and il men, imang qwam gude men wones: - I sal nout drede
il, pryve nor apert; for thu ert with me in my hert, qwar I fele thu so,
that eftir the schadow of dede, I be with the in thi vera lyf." - Old
Psalter.

For thou art with me - He who has his God for a companion need fear no
danger; for he can neither mistake his way, nor be injured.

Thy rod and thy staff - שבטך shibtecha, thy scepter, rod, ensign of a
tribe, staff of office; for so שבט shebet signifies in Scripture. And
thy staff, ומשענתך umishantecha, thy prop or support. The former may
signify the shepherd's crook; the latter, some sort of rest or support,
similar to our camp stool, which the shepherds might carry with them as
an occasional seat, when the earth was too wet to be sat on with safety.
With the rod or crook the shepherd could defend his sheep, and with it
lay hold of their horns or legs to pull them out of thickets, boys,
pits, or waters. We are not to suppose that by the rod correction is
meant: there is no idea of this kind either in the text, or in the
original word; nor has it this meaning in any part of Scripture.
Besides, correction and chastisement do not comfort; they are not, at
least for the present, joyous, but grievous; nor can any person look
forward to them with comfort. They abuse the text who paraphrase rod
correction, etc. The other term שען shaan signifies support, something
to rest on, as a staff, crutch, stave, or the like. The Chaldee
translates thus: "Even though I should walk in captivity, in the valley
of the shadow of death, I will not fear evil. Seeing thy Word (מימרך
meymerach, thy personal Word) is my Assistant or Support; thy right word
and thy law console me." Here we find that the Word, מימר meymar, is
distinguished from any thing spoken, and even from the law itself. I
cannot withhold the paraphrase of the old Psalter though it considers
the rod as signifying correction: "Sothly I sal drede na nylle; for thy
wande, that es thi lyght disciplyne, that chasties me as thi son: and
thi staf, that es thi stalworth help, that I lene me til, and haldes me
uppe; thai have comforthed me; lerand (learning, teaching) me qwat I
suld do; and haldand my thaught in the, that es my comforth."

[Psalms 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 23:5</span></span>

Thou preparest a table before me - Here the second allegory begins. A
magnificent banquet is provided by a most liberal and benevolent host;
who has not only the bounty to feed me, but power to protect me; and,
though surrounded by enemies, I sit down to this table with confidence,
knowing that I shall feast in perfect security. This may refer to the
favor God gave the poor captive Israelites in the sight of the Chaldeans
who had grievously treated them for seventy years; and whose king,
Cyrus, had not only permitted them now to return to their own land, but
had also furnished them with every thing requisite for their passage,
and for repairing the walls of Jerusalem, and rebuilding the temple of
the Lord, where the sacrifices were offered as usual, and the people of
God feasted on them.

Thou anointest my head with oil - Perfumed oil was poured on the heads
of distinguished guests, when at the feasts of great personages. The
woman in the Gospel, who poured the box of ointment of spikenard on the
head of our Lord (see [Mat 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006), [Mat
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007); [Mar
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008); [Luk
7:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#046)), only acted according to the
custom of her own country, which the host, who invited our Lord, had
shamefully neglected.

My cup runneth over - Thou hast not only given me abundance of food, but
hast filled my cup with the best wine.

[Psalms 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 23:6</span></span>

Goodness and mercy shall follow me - As I pass on through the vale of
life, thy goodness and mercy shall follow my every step; as I proceed,
so shall they. There seems to be an allusion here to the waters of the
rock smitten by the rod of Moses, which followed the Israelites all the
way through the wilderness, till they came to the Promised Land. God
never leaves his true followers providential mercies gracious
influences, and miraculous interferences, shall never be wanting when
they are necessary. I will dwell in the house, ושבתי veshabti, "and I
shall Return to the house of the Lord," for ever, לארך ימים leorech
yamim, "for length of days." During the rest of my life, I shall not be
separated from God's house, nor from God's ordinances; and shall at last
dwell with him in glory. These two last verses seem to be the language
of a priest returned from captivity to live in the temple, and to serve
God the rest of his life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 24](psa024)

</div>
