<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa020)  [Next](psa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 21:0</span></span>

The psalmist returns thanks to God for giving him the victory over his
enemies; which victory he had earnestly requested, [Psa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001), [Psa
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002). He enters into a detail of the
blessings that in consequent of the victory he had obtained, [Psa
21:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003). He predicts the destruction of
all those who may hereafter rise up against him, [Psa
21:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008); and concludes with praising
the power of Jehovah, [Psa 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#013).

In the title of this Psalm there is nothing particularly worthy of
remark. The occasion of it is variously understood. Some think it was
composed to celebrate the victory obtained over Sennacherib; others,
that it was made on the recovery of Hezekiah, and the grant of fifteen
years of longer life; see [Psa 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004).
Others and they with most appearance of propriety consider it a song of
rejoicing composed by David for his victory over the Ammonites which
ended in the capture of the royal city of Rabbah, the crown of whose
king David put on his own head, see [Psa
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003), and to procure which victory
David offered the prayers and sacrifices mentioned in the preceding
Psalm. Lastly, many think that it is to be wholly referred to the
victories of the Messiah; and it must be owned that there are several
expressions in it which apply better to our Lord than to David, or to
any other person; and to him the Targum applies it, as does likewise my
old Anglo-Scottish Psalter in paraphrasing the text.

[Psalms 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 21:1</span></span>

The king shall joy - מלך משיחא melech Meshicha, "the King Messiah." -
Targum. What a difference between ancient and modern heroes! The former
acknowledged all to be of God, because they took care to have their
quarrel rightly founded; the latter sing a Te Deum, pro forma, because
they well know that their battle is not of the Lord. Their own vicious
conduct sufficiently proves that they looked no higher than the arm of
human strength. God suffers such for a time, but in the end he confounds
and brings them to naught.

[Psalms 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 21:2</span></span>

Thou hast given him his heart's desire - This seems to refer to the
prayers offered in the preceding Psalm; see especially [Psa
21:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001).

[Psalms 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 21:3</span></span>

Thou preventest him - To prevent, from prcevenio, literally signifies to
go before. Hence that prayer in the communion service of our public
Liturgy, "Prevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious
favor!" That is, "Go before us in thy mercy, make our way plain, and
enable us to perform what is right in thy sight!" And this sense of
prevent is a literal version of the original word תקדמנו tekademennu.
"For thou shalt go before him with the blessings of goodness."

Our ancestors used God before in this sense. So in Henry V.'s speech to
the French herald previously to the battle of Agincourt: -

"Go therefore; tell thy master, here I am.

My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk;

My army, but a weak and sickly guard:

Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,

Though France himself, and such another neighbor,

Stand in our way."

A crown of pure gold - Probably alluding to the crown of the king of
Rabbah, which, on the taking of the city, David took and put on his own
head. See the history, [Sa2 12:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026)
(note).

[Psalms 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 21:4</span></span>

He asked life of thee - This verse has caused some interpreters to
understand the Psalm of Hezekiah's sickness, recovery, and the promised
addition to his life of fifteen years; but it may be more literally
understood of the Messiah, of whom David was the type, and in several
respects the representative.

[Psalms 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 21:5</span></span>

His glory is great - But great as his glory was, it had its greatness
from God's salvation. There is no true nobility but of the soul, and the
soul has none but what it receives from the grace and salvation of God.

[Psalms 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 21:6</span></span>

Thou hast made him most blessed for ever - Literally, "Thou hast set him
for blessings for ever." Thou hast made the Messiah the Source whence
all blessings for time and for eternity shall be derived. He is the
Mediator between God and man.

Thou hast made him exceeding glad - Jesus, as Messiah, for the joy that
was set before him, of redeeming a lost world by his death, endured the
cross, and despised the shame, and is for ever set down on the right
hand of God.

[Psalms 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 21:7</span></span>

The king trusteth in the Lord - It was not by my skill or valor that I
have gained this victory, but by faith in the strong protecting, and
conquering arm of Jehovah.

He shall not be moved - Perhaps this may be best understood of him who
was David's prototype. His throne, kingdom, and government, shall remain
for ever.

[Psalms 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 21:8</span></span>

Thine hand shall find out - Thy uncontrollable power shall find out all
thine enemies, wheresoever hidden or howsoever secret. God knows the
secret sinner, and where the workers of iniquity hide themselves.

[Psalms 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 21:9</span></span>

Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven - By thy wrath they shall be burnt
up, and they shall be the means of consuming others. One class of
sinners shall, in God's judgments, be the means of destroying another
class; and at last themselves shall be destroyed.

[Psalms 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 21:10</span></span>

Their fruit shalt thou destroy - Even their posterity shall be cut off,
and thus their memorial shall perish.

[Psalms 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 21:11</span></span>

For they intended evil - Sinners shall not be permitted to do all that
is in their power against the godly; much less shall they be able to
perform all that they wish.

[Psalms 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 21:12</span></span>

Therefore shalt thou make them turn their back - God can in a moment
strike the most powerful and numerous army, even in the moment of
victory, with panic; and then even the lame, the army which they had
nearly routed, shall take the prey, and divide the spoil.

Against the face of them - Thou shalt cause them to turn their backs and
fly, as if a volley of arrows had been discharged in their faces. This
seems to be the sense of this difficult verse.

[Psalms 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 21:13</span></span>

Be thou exalted - Exalt thyself. O Lord - thy creatures cannot exalt
thee. Lift thyself up, and discomfit thy foes by thine own strength!
Thou canst give a victory to thy people over the most formidable
enemies, though they strike not one blow in their own defense. God's
right hand has often given the victory to his followers, while they
stood still to see the salvation of God. How little can the strength of
man avail when the Lord raiseth up himself to the battle! His children,
therefore, may safely trust in him, for the name of the Lord is a strong
tower; the righteous flee into it, and are safe.

Praise thy power - God is to receive praise in reference to that
attribute which he has exhibited most in the defense or salvation of his
followers. Sometimes he manifests his power, his mercy, his wisdom, his
longsuffering, his fatherly care, his good providence, his holiness, his
justice, his truth, etc. Whatever attribute or perfection he exhibits
most, that should be the chief subject of his children's praise. One
wants teaching, prays for it, and is deeply instructed: he will
naturally celebrate the wisdom of God. Another feels himself beset with
the most powerful adversaries, with the weakest of whom he is not able
to cope: he cries to the Almighty God for strength; he is heard, and
strengthened with strength in his soul. He therefore will naturally
magnify the all-conquering power of the Lord. Another feels himself
lost, condemned, on the brink of hell; he calls for mercy, is heard and
saved: mercy, therefore, will be the chief subject of his praise, and
the burden of his song.

The old Anglo-Scottish Psalter says, We sal make knowen thi wordes in
gude wil and gude werk, for he synges well that wirkes well. For thi,
sais he twise, we sal syng; ane tyme for the luf of hert; another, for
the schewyng of ryghtwisness, til ensampil.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 22](psa022)

</div>
