<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa025)  [Next](psa027.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 26:0</span></span>

The psalmist appeals to God for his integrity, and desires to be brought
to the Divine test in order to have his innocence proved, [Psa
26:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001.md); shows that he had avoided all
fellowship with the wicked, and associated unth the upright, [Psa
26:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004.md); prays that he may not have his
final lot with the workers of iniquity, [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009.md), [Psa
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010.md); purposes to walk uprightly
before God, [Psa 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#011.md), [Psa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012.md).

This Psalm, and the two following, are supposed by Calmet to be all
parts of one ode, and to relate to the time of the captivity, containing
the prayers, supplications, complaints, and resolutions of the
Israelites in Babylon. This is probable; but we have not evidence enough
to authorize us to be nice on such points. See on [Psa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001) (note.md).

[Psalms 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 26:1</span></span>

Judge me, O Lord - There are so many strong assertions in this Psalm
concerning the innocence and uprightness of its author that many suppose
he wrote it to vindicate himself from some severe reflections on his
conduct or accusations relative to plots, conspiracies, etc. This seems
to render the opinion probable that attributes it to David during his
exile, when all manner of false accusations were brought against him at
the court of Saul.

I have walked in mine integrity - I have never plotted against the life
nor property of any man; I have neither coveted nor endeavored to
possess myself of Saul's crown.

I have trusted - Had I acted otherwise, I could not have been
prosperous, for thou wouldst not have worked miracles for the
preservation of a wicked man.

I shall not slide - I shall be preserved from swerving from the paths of
righteousness and truth.

[Psalms 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 26:2</span></span>

Examine me, O Lord - To thee I appeal; and feel no hesitation in wishing
to have all the motives of my heart dissected and exposed to thy view,
and to that of the world.

[Psalms 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 26:3</span></span>

For thy loving-kindness - A sense of thy favor and approbation was more
to my heart than thrones and sceptres; and in order to retain this
blessing, I have walked in thy truth.

[Psalms 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 26:4</span></span>

I have not sat with vain persons - מתי שוא methey shav, men of lies,
dissemblers, backbiters, etc.

Neither will I go in with dissemblers - נעלמים naalamim, the hidden
ones, the dark designers, the secret plotters and conspirators in the
state.

[Psalms 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 26:5</span></span>

I have hated the congregation of evil doers - I have never made one in
the crowds of discontented persons; persons who, under pretense of
rectifying what was wrong in the state, strove to subvert it, to breed
general confusion, to overturn the laws, seize on private property, and
enrich themselves by the spoils of the country.

[Psalms 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 26:6</span></span>

I will wash mine hands in innocency - Washing the hands was frequent
among the Jews, and was sometimes an action by which a man declared his
innocence of any base or wicked transaction. This Pilate did, to protest
his innocence of the mal-treatment and death of Christ. I will maintain
that innocence of life in which I have hitherto walked; and take care
that nothing shall be found in my heart or life that would prevent me
from using the most holy ordinance, or worshipping thee in spirit and
truth.

So wilt I compass thine altar - It is a mark of respect among the
Hindoos to walk several times round a superior, and round a temple.

[Psalms 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 26:7</span></span>

That I may publish - I have endeavoured to act so as always to keep a
conscience void of offense towards thee and towards man. I have made a
profession of faith in thee, and salvation from thee, and my practice
gives no lie to my profession.

[Psalms 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 26:8</span></span>

Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house - I have carefully used
thine ordinances, that I might obtain more grace to help me to
persevere. And I have not been attentive to those duties, merely because
they were incumbent on me; but I have loved the place where thine honor
dwelleth; and my delight in thy ordinances has made my attendance as
pleasant as it was profitable. This verse would be better translated,
Jehovah, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place of the
tabernacle of thy glory. The habitation must mean the holy of holies,
where the Divine Presence was manifest; and the place of the tabernacle
must refer to the mercy-seat, or the place where the glory of the Lord
appeared between the cherubim, upon the lid or cover of the ark of the
covenant. From his dwelling there, משכן mishcan, the place and the
appearance were called שכינה shechinah; the dwelling of Jehovah, or that
glorious appearance which was the symbol of the Divine Presence.

[Psalms 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 26:9</span></span>

Gather not my soul with sinners - As I have never loved their company,
nor followed their practice, let not my eternal lot be cast with them! I
neither love them nor their ways; may I never be doomed to spend an
eternity with them!

[Psalms 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 26:10</span></span>

Their right hand is full of bribes - He speaks of persons in office, who
took bribes to pervert judgment and justice.

[Psalms 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 26:11</span></span>

But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity - Whatever I may have to do
with public affairs, shall be done with the strictest attention to
truth, justice, and mercy.

Redeem me - From all snares and plots laid against my life and my soul.

And be merciful unto me - I deserve no good, but thou art merciful; deal
with me ever in thy mercy.

[Psalms 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 26:12</span></span>

My foot standeth in an even place - On the above principles I have taken
my stand: to abhor evil; to cleave to that which is good; to avoid the
company of wicked men; to frequent the ordinances of God; to be true and
just in all my dealings with men; and to depend for my support and final
salvation on the mere mercy of God. He who acts in this way, his feet
stand in an even place.

I will bless the Lord - In all my transactions with men, and in all my
assemblings with holy people, I will speak good of the name of the Lord,
having nothing but good to speak of that name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 27](psa027.md)

</div>
