<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa015)  [Next](psa017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 16:0</span></span>

The contents of this Psalm are usually given in the following manner:
David, sojourning among idolaters, and being obliged to leave his own
country through Saul's persecution, cries to God for help; expresses his
abhorrence of idolatry, and his desire to be again united to God's
people, [Psa 16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001); and dedares his
strong confidence in God, who had dealt bountifully with him, [Psa
16:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005). Then follows a remarkable
prophecy of the resurrection of Christ, [Psa
16:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008).

The title of this Psalm in the Hebrew is מכתם לדוד michtam ledavid,
which the Chaldee translates, "A straight sculpture of David." The
Septuagint, Στηλογραφια τῳ Δαυιδ, "The inscription on a pillar to
David;" as if the Psalm had been inscribed on a pillar, to keep it in
remembrance. As כתם catham signifies to engrave or stamp, this has given
rise to the above inscription. מכתם michtam also means pure or stamped
gold; and hence it has been supposed that this title was given to it on
account of its excellence: a golden Psalm, or a Psalm worthy to be
written on letters of gold; as some of the verses of Pythagoras were
called the golden verses, because of their excellence. Gold being the
most excellent and precious of all metals, it has been used to express
metaphorically excellence and perfection of every kind. Thus a golden
tongue or mouth, the most excellent eloquence; so Chrysostom means, this
eminent man having had his name from his eloquence; - a golden book, one
of the choicest and most valuable of its kind, etc. But I have already
sufficiently expressed my doubts concerning the meanings given to these
titles. See the note on the title of [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001) (note).

That David was the author there can be no doubt. It is most pointedly
attributed to him by St. Peter, [Act
2:25-31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025). That its principal parts
might have some relation to his circumstances is also probable; but that
Jesus Christ is its main scope, not only appears from quotations made by
the apostle as above, but from the circumstance that some parts of it
never did and never could apply to David. From the most serious and
attentive consideration of the whole Psalm, I am convinced that every
verse of it belongs to Jesus Christ, and none other: and this, on
reference, I find to be the view taken of it by my ancient Psalter. But
as he is referred to here as the Redeemer of the world, consequently, as
God manifested in the flesh, there are several portions of the Psalm, as
well as in the New Testament, where the Divine and human natures are
spoken of separrately: and if this distinction be properly regarded, we
shall find, not only no inconsistency, but a beautiful harmony through
the whole.

[Psalms 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 16:1</span></span>

Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust - On the mode of
interpretation which I have hinted at above, I consider this a prayer of
the man Christ Jesus on his entering on his great atoning work,
particularly his passion in the garden of Gethsemane. In that passion,
Jesus Christ most evidently speaks as man; and with the strictest
propriety, as it was the manhood, not the Godhead, that was engaged in
the suffering.

שמרני shomreni, keep me - preserve, sustain, this feeble humanity, now
about to bear the load of that punishment due to the whole of the human
race. For in thee, חסיתי chasithi, have I hoped. No human fortitude, or
animal courage, can avail in my circumstances. These are no common
sufferings; they are not of a natural kind; they are not proportioned to
the strength of a human body, or the energy of a human spirit; and my
immaculate humanity, which is subjected to these sufferings, must be
dissolved by them, if not upheld by thee, the strong God. It is worthy
of remark, that our Lord here uses the term, אל El, which signifies the
strong God, an expression remarkably suited to the frailty of that human
nature, which was now entering upon its vicarious sufferings. It will be
seen with what admirable propriety the Messiah varies the appellations
of the Divine Being in this address; a circumstance which no translation
without paraphrase can express.

[Psalms 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 16:2</span></span>

Thou hast said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord - Thou hast said ליהוה
layhovah to Jehovah, the supreme, self-existing, and eternal Being; Thou
art my Lord, אדני אתה adonai attah, Thou art my prop, stay, or support.
As the Messiah, or Son of God, Jesus derived his being and support from
Jehovah; and the man Christ was supported by the eternal Divinity that
dwelt within him, without which he could not have sustained the
sufferings which he passed through, nor have made an atonement for the
sin of the world; it is the suffering Messiah, or the Messiah in
prospect of his sufferings, who here speaks.

My goodness extendeth not to thee - There are almost endless
explanations of this clause; no man can read them without being
confounded by them. The Septuagint read ὁτι των αγαθων μου ου χρειαν
εχεις; Because thou dost not need my goods. The Vulgate follows the
Septuagint. The Chaldee: My good is given only by thyself.

So the Syriac: My good is from thee. The Arabic: Thou dost not need my
good works. And in this sense, with shades of difference, it has been
understood by most commentators and critics.

Bishop Horsley translates, Thou art my good - not besides thee. Dr.
Kennicott, My goodness is not without thee.

I think the words should be understood of what the Messiah was doing for
men. My goodness, טובתי tobathi, "my bounty," is not to thee. What I am
doing can add nothing to thy divinity; thou art not providing this
astonishing sacrifice because thou canst derive any excellence from it:
but this bounty extends to the saints - to all the spirits of just men
made perfect, whose bodies are still in the earth; and to the excellent,
אדירי addirey, "the noble or supereminent ones," those who through faith
and patience inherit the promises. The saints and illustrious ones not
only taste of my goodness, but enjoy my salvation. Perhaps angels
themselves may be intended; they are not uninterested in the
incarnation, passion, death, and resurrection of our Lord. They desire
to look into these things; and the victories of the cross in the
conversion of sinners cause joy among the angels of God.

The קדושים kedoshim, "saints," or consecrated persons, may refer to the
first planters of Christianity, evangelists, apostles, etc., who were
separated from all others, and consecrated to the great important work
of preaching among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. With
these was all the desire, חפץ chephets, the good will and delight of
Christ. In all their ministrations he was both with them and in them.

The passage, taken as referring to David, intimates that he abhorred the
company of the profane and worthless, and delighted to associate with
them that excelled in virtue.

On these two verses the translation and paraphrase of my old Psalter
must not be forgotten: -

[Psa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001) Conserva me, Domine, etc.

Trans. Kepe me Lord, for I hoped in the; I said til Lord, my God thou
ert; for, of my gudes thu has na nede.

Par - The voice of Crist in his manhede; prayand til the fader, and
sayand: Lord, fader, kepe me imang peplis, for I hoped in the, noght in
me. I said til the, my God, thu ert in that, that I am man; for thu has
no nede of my godes; bot I haf of the, al that I haf; here is the wil
pride of men confounded; that evenes that thai haf ought of tham self
bot syn.

[Psa 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002) Sanctis qui sunt in terra,
etc.

Trans. Til halowes the qwilk er his land, he selcouthed all my willes in
tham.

Par - Noght til wiked, bot til halows clene in saule, and depertid fra
erdly bysynes, the qwilk er in his land: that es, that haf fested thair
hope in the land of heven; and rotyd in luf: the qwilk hope es als anker
in stremys of this werld. He selcouthed al my willes, that of wonderful,
he made my willes, of dying and rysing, sett and fulfilled in tham: that
es, in thair profete, qware in that feled qwat it profeted tham my
mekenes that wild dye, and my myght to rise.

[Psalms 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 16:4</span></span>

Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god - The
Chaldee has: "They multiply their idols, and afterwards hasten that they
may offer their gifts." In the Hebrew text there is no word for God, and
therefore Messiah or Savior might be as well substituted; and then the
whole will refer to the unbelieving Jews. They would not have the true
Christ; they have sought, and are seeking, another Messiah; and how
amply fulfilled has the prophetic declaration been in them! Their
sorrows have been multiplied for more than 1800 years.

The Vulgate and Septuagint, and after them the Ethiopic and Arabic, have
given this clause a widely different turn: "their afflictions have been
multiplied, and afterwards they have run swiftly;" referring to the
suffering saints: the more they were afflicted and persecuted, the more
fervent and prosperous they became.

Their drink-offerings of blood will I not offer - נסך nesech is a
libation, whether of wine or water, poured out on the sacrifice. A
drink-offering of blood is not a correct form of expression; it is
rather the libation on the blood of the sacrifice already made.
Coverdale translates the same; but Mathewes, who reformed his text in a
few places, has Their brente offeringes of bloude, without much mending
the text; though by this the exceptionable idea of a drink-offering of
blood is avoided. As applicable to our Lord, here is an intimation that
their libations and sacrifices should cease. None of these should exist
under the Christian dispensation; Jesus Christ's offering upon the cross
being the accomplishment and termination of all such sacrifices.

Nor take up their names into my lips - None of those sacrifices shall be
mentioned with any kind of respect after the end of their institution
shall have been accomplished; for sacrifice, offering, burnt-offering,
and sacrifice for sin, such as are offered according to the law, God
would no longer receive; therefore Jesus said; "Lo, I come to do thy
will; a body hast thou prepared me." Since that time all these
sacrifices have ceased. The old Psalter is curious: -

[Psa 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004) Multiplicate sunt
infirmitates eorum; postea acceleraverunt.

Trans. Manyfaldend er thair sekenes: and sythen thai hasted thaim.

Par - That es at say; thai knew that thai war ful seke in body and
saule, and sythen thai hasted tham til the Leche; for he that feles him
seke, he sekes remedy. Il men wenes that thai er noght seke for thi that
dye in thair syn.

Non congregabo conventicula eroum de sanguinibus, etc.

Trans. I sal noght gadyr the coventes of tha of blodes; ne I sal be
menand of their names thurgh my lippis.

Par - That est at say, by the coventes of haly men, my servaundes sal
nout fleschely, but gastly: for "blode" bytakyns syn and unclenes that
that er in, that folous thair flesche, and the vanites of thair blode;
that er comen of grete kyn. Ne I sal by menand of thair names; for thai
er chaunged fra syn till ryghtwisnes on domesday, qwen I sal speke
thrugh my lippes til thaim that haldes the name of wykednes: sa ye
weryed til fyer with outen end.

[Psalms 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 16:5</span></span>

The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance - The Messiah speaks.
Jehovah is the portion of mine inheritance; I seek no earthly good; I
desire to do the will of God, and that only. It is God who has given me
this lot - to redeem mankind - to have them for mine inheritance. From
him I have received the cup of suffering, which I shall drink for their
sake, through which I shall impart to them the cup of consolation. He,
by the grace of God, has tasted death for every man; and he has
instituted the cup of blessing to commemorate his passion and death.

[Psalms 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 16:6</span></span>

The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places - Here is an allusion to
the ancient division of the land by lot among the Israelites, the
breadth and length being ascertained by lines which were used in
measuring. I have got a rich inheritance of immortal spirits; and I
myself, as man, shall have a name above every name, and be raised to thy
throne, on which I shall sit, and be admired in my saints to all
eternity.

I have a goodly heritage - A Church, an innumerable multitude of saints,
partakers of the Divine nature, and filled with all the fullness of God.
And these shall dwell with me in the heaven of heavens to all eternity.
The old Psalter: -

[Psa 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005) Dominus pars hereditatis mee
et calicis mei, etc.

Trans. Lord es part of myn herytage and of my chalyce; thow ert that sal
restore myn herytage til me.

Par - Lord the fader es part, that es, he es porcioun and mede of myn
herytage; that es of haly men, qwam I weld in herytage. Other men cheses
tham what tham lyst: my part es God, and he es part of my chalyce: that
es, he es my copp of al my delyte and boor. Wereldys men drynkes the
venemus lustes, and the drubly delytes of lychery and covatys: I in my
halows sal drynk God; for thu ert fadyr that sal restore till me, that
es, til my men, myn herytage, that thai lost in Adam: that es thu
restores til tham the knawyng of my bryghthede.

[Psa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006) Punes ceciderunt michi in
preclaris, etc.

Trans. Strynges fel to me in ful bryght: for qwy, myn herytage is ful
bryght til me.

Par - Strynges, that er merkes of my possessioun, in thi bryghtnes, fel
als with cutte; als the possessioun of prestes and dekens in the alde
law, was God; for qwy myn herytage, that es haly men es bryght til me of
that seme layth and aute castyng til some of the werld, til me thai er
fairer and bryght.

[Psalms 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 16:7</span></span>

Who hath given me counsel - Jesus, as man, received all his knowledge
and wisdom from God; [Luk 2:40-52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#040). And
in him were hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

My reins also instruct me - כליותי kilyothai, reins or kidneys, which
from their retired situation in the body, says Parkhurst, and being
hidden in fat, are often used in Scripture for the most secret workings
and affections of the heart.

The kidneys and their fat were always to be burnt in sacrifice, to
indicate that the most secret purposes and affections of the soul are to
be devoted to God.

In the night seasons - That is, in the time of my passion, my secret
purposes and determinations concerning the redemption of man support me.
"For the joy that was set before him he endured the cross, despising the
shame;" [Heb 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002).

[Psalms 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 16:8</span></span>

I have set the Lord always before me - This verse, and all to the end of
[Psa 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011), are applied by St. Peter
to the death and resurreetion of Christ. [Act
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025), etc.

In all that our Lord did, said, or suffered, he kept the glory of the
Father and the accomplishment of his purpose constantly in view. He
tells us that he did not come down from heaven to do his own will, but
the will of the Father who had sent him. See [Joh
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004).

He is at my right hand - That is, I have his constant presence,
approbation, and support. All this is spoken by Christ as man.

I shall not be moved - Nothing can swerve me from my purpose; nothing
can prevent me from fulfilling the Divine counsel, in reference to the
salvation of men.

[Psalms 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 16:9</span></span>

Therefore my heart is glad - Unutterably happy in God; always full of
the Divine presence; because whatsoever I do pleaseth him. The man
Christ Jesus must be constantly in communion with God, because he was
without spot and blemish.

My glory rejoiceth - My tongue, so called by the Hebrews, (see [Psa
57:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#008); [Psa
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#012)), because it was bestowed on us
to glorify God, and because it is our glory, being the instrument of
expressing our thoughts by words. See Dodd. But soul bids as fair to be
the meaning. See the notes on [Act
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025), etc.

My flesh also shall rest in hope - There is no sense in which these and
the following words can be spoken of David. Jesus, even on the cross,
and breathing out his soul with his life, saw that his rest in the grave
would be very short: just a sufficiency of time to prove the reality of
his death, but not long enough to produce corruption; and this is well
argued by St. Peter, [Act 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031).

[Psalms 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 16:10</span></span>

Thine Holy One - This is in the plural number, חסידיך chasideycha, thy
Holy Ones; but none of the versions translate it in the plural; and as
it is in the singular number, חסידך chasidecha, in several ancient
editions, among which is the Complutensian Polyglot, and no less than
two hundred and sixty-four of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., and in
the quotation by St. Peter, in [Act
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027); [Act
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#035), we may take it for granted that
the present reading is a corruption; or that חסידיך is an emphatic
singular.

As to leaving the soul In hell, it can only mean permitting the life of
the Messiah to continue under the power of death; for שאול sheol
signifies a pit, a ditch, the grave, or state of the dead. See the notes
on the parallel places, [Act 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025)
(note), etc.

See corruption - All human beings see corruption, because born in sin,
and liable to the curse. The human body of Jesus Christ, as being
without sin, saw no corruption.

[Psalms 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 16:11</span></span>

Thou wilt show me the path of life - I first shall find the way out of
the regions of death, to die no more. Thus Christ was the first fruits
of them that slept. Several had before risen from the dead, but they
died again. Jesus rose from the dead, and is alive for evermore. Jesus
Christ's resurrection from the dead was the first entrance out of the
grave to eternal life or lives, חיים chaiyim, for the word is in the
plural, and with great propriety too, as this resurrection implies the
life of the body, and the life of the rational soul also.

In thy presence - פניך paneycha, thy faces. Every holy soul has,
throughout eternity, the beatific vision, i.e., "it sees God as he is,"
because it is like him; [Jo1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002). It
drinks in beatification from the presence of the Eternal Trinity.

Thy right hand - The place of honor and dignity; repeatedly used in this
sense in the Scriptures.

Pleasures for evermore - נצח netzach, onwardly; perpetually,
continually, well expressed by our translation, ever and more; an
eternal progression. Think of duration in the most extended and
unlimited manner, and there is still more; more to be suffered in hell,
and more to be enjoyed in heaven. Great God! grant that my readers may
have this beatific sight; this eternal progression in unadulterated,
unchangeable, and unlimited happiness! Hear this prayer for His sake,
who found out the path of life, and who by his blood purchased an
entrance into the holiest! Amen and Amen.

For the application of the whole Psalm to David, see the analysis at the
end, which is a little altered from David's Harp Strung and Tuned.

The remains of this Psalm in the old Psalter are worthy to be inserted:
-

[Jo1 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#007) Benedicam Dominum qui tribuit
michi intellectum, etc.

Trans. I sal blis the Lord that gaf til me undirstandyng; and over that
til the nyght, suyled me my neres.

Par - That es I sal luf the fader that hafs gyfen undyrstandyng til my
servauntes, thurgh the qwilk the herytage of heven may be sene and
welded; and aver that undyrstandyng, in the qwilk I saw, sais Crist, al
sothefast thynges and haly. Of that I sal lof him that my nerys that es
the Jewis of qwas kynd I toke flesch, that es my kyn snybbed me in
wranges and temptaciounis, and passiouns, til the nyght, that es al the
dede thai missaid hym, als so oure nerys; that es our fleschely delytes
makes us worthy snybbyng til our dede; for perfytely may we noght be
with outen syn, qwyles we lyf.

[Jo1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008) Providebam Dominum in
conspectu meo, etc.

Trans. I pervaide God ay in my syght; for he es at the ryght hand til
me, that I be nout styrred.

Par - And in al thys anguys I for gatt nout God: bot I pervayde hym ay
in my syght; that es, I comande o mang passand thynges: I toke nout my
nee fra hym that ay es; bot I fested it in hym, so that he was ay in my
sight, and he es nout fyled in synnes that assyduely with the ee of his
thoght, byhaldes God, for he es at the ryght hand of me: that I be noght
styred; that es, he helps me in desyre of endless gudes, that I last
stabil in hym, and for thi nane il thyng may haf mayster of me.

[Jo1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009) Propter hoc, elatum, est cor
meum, et exultavit lingua mea, etc.

Trans. Thar fore gladded es my hert, and my toung joyed over that, and
my flesch sal rest in hope.

Par - This es ful joy that in hert es resayved, and with toung schewed,
and over that joy in hert and mouth, my flesch sal rest in hope of
rysyng.

[Jo1 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010) Quoniam non derelinques in
Inferno animam meam, etc.

Trans. For thow sal noght lefe my Saule in hell, ne thu sal noght gyf
thi Halow to se corrupcion.

Par - That es at say, the Saule that I haf als veray man, sal noght be
left in hell; and my body that thu haloued, sal noght rote. Here men may
knaw that this es goddes word; for other mens bodis rotes.

[Jo1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#011) Notas michi fecisti vias
vite, etc.

Trans. Knawen thu maked til me, the wayes of lyf: thou sal fil me of joy
with thi face, delytynges in thi ryghth and in til the end.

Par - Knawen thu maked thurgh me till myne, the wayes of lyf, that es
the wayes of mekenes and charite, that men came til heven thurgh
mekenes, fra qwethyn thai fel thurgh Pryde: and thow sal ful fil me;
that es, my servaundes, of joy with thi face; that es, in the syght of
the, apertly; so that thai desyre nothing over, qwen thai af sene the,
face til face, and ay til than delytynges til tham in way of this lyf.
In thi ryght hand; that es thi favoure, and thi mercy the qwilk
delytyngs ledys tham intil the ende, that es, in til perfectioun of
endeles Blisfulhede.

I have given the whole of the translation and comment of this Psalm from
this ancient Psalter, as a curious specimen of the doctrine and language
of our northern neighbors in the thirteenth or fourteenth century.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 17](psa017)

</div>
