<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa038)  [Next](psa040.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 39](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 39:0</span></span>

The psalmist's care and watchfulness over his thoughts, tongue, and
actions, [Psa 39:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001.md). He considers the
brevity and uncertainty of human life, [Psa
39:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004.md); prays for deliverance from
sin, [Psa 39:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008.md); and that he may be
protected and spared till he is fitted for another world, [Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012.md), [Psa
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013.md).

The title says, To the chief Musician, Jeduthun himself, A Psalm of
David. It is supposed that this Jeduthun is the same with Ethan, [Ch1
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#044.md), compared with [Ch1
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#041.md); and is there numbered among the
sons of Merari. And he is supposed to have been one of the four masters
of music, or leaders of bands, belonging to the temple. And it is
thought that David, having composed this Psalm, gave it to Jeduthun and
his company to sing. But several have supposed that Jeduthun himself was
the author. It is very likely that this Psalm was written on the same
occasion with the preceding. It relates to a grievous malady by which
David was afflicted after his transgression with Bath-sheba. See what
has been said on the foregoing Psalm.

[Psalms 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 39:1</span></span>

I said, I will take heed to my ways - I must be cautious because of my
enemies; I must be patient because of my afflictions; I must be watchful
over my tongue, lest I offend my God, or give my adversaries any cause
to speak evil of me.

[Psalms 39:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 39:2</span></span>

I held any peace, even from good - "I ceased from the words of the law,"
says the Chaldee. I spoke nothing, either good or bad. I did not even
defend myself.

My sorrow was stirred - My afflictions increased, and I had an
exacerbation of pain. It is a hard thing to be denied the benefit of
complaint in sufferings, as it has a tendency to relieve the mind, and
indeed, in some sort, to call off the attention from the place of actual
suffering: and yet undue and extravagant complaining enervates the mind,
so that it becomes a double prey to its sufferings. On both sides there
are extremes: David seems to have steered clear of them on the right
hand and on the left.

[Psalms 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 39:3</span></span>

My heart was hot within me - A natural feeling of repressed grief.

While I was musing - What was at first a simple sensation of heat
produced a flame; the fire broke out that had long been smothered. It is
a metaphor taken from vegetables, which, being heaped together, begin to
heat and ferment, if not scattered and exposed to the air; and will soon
produce a flame, and consume themselves and every thing within their
reach.

[Psalms 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 39:4</span></span>

Lord, make me to know mine end - I am weary of life; I wish to know the
measure of my days, that I may see how long I have to suffer, and how
frail I am. I wish to know what is wanting to make up the number of the
days I have to live.

[Psalms 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 39:5</span></span>

My days as a handbreadth - My life is but a span; σπιθαμη του βιου.

And mine age is as nothing - כאין keein, as if at were not before thee.
All time is swallowed up in thy eternity.

Verily every man at his best state - כל אדם נצב col adam nitstab, "every
man that exists, is vanity." All his projects, plans, schemes, etc.,
soon come to nothing. His body also moulders with the dust, and shortly
passes both from the sight and remembrance of men.

[Psalms 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 39:6</span></span>

Walketh in a vain show - בצלם betselem, in a shadow. He is but the
semblance of being: he appears for a while, and then vanisheth away.
Some of the fathers read, "Although every man walketh in the image of
God, yet they are disquieted in vain."

He heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them - He raketh
together. This is a metaphor taken from agriculture: the husbandman
rakes the corn, etc., together in the field, and yet, so uncertain is
life, that he knows not who shall gather them into the granary!

[Psalms 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 39:7</span></span>

And now, Lord, what wait I for? - Have I any object of pursuit in life,
but to regain thy favor and thine image.

[Psalms 39:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 39:8</span></span>

Deliver one from all may transgressions - I seek the pardon of my sins;
I expect it from thy mercy. Grant it, "that I be not the reproach of the
foolish," (the godless and the profane), who deride my expectation, and
say no such blessings can be had. Let them know, by thy saving me, that
there is a God who heareth prayer, and giveth his Holy Spirit to all
them that ask him.

[Psalms 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 39:10</span></span>

Remove thy stroke away from me - This seems to be a figure taken from
gladiators, or persons contending in single combat. One is wounded so as
to be able to maintain the fight no longer: he therefore gives in, and
prays his adversary to spare his life. I am conquered; I can hold the
contest no longer: thou art too powerful for me. He cries what our
ancestors used to term craven; the word spoken by him who was conquered
in the battle ordeal, or trial by combat.

[Psalms 39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 39:11</span></span>

When thou with rebukes dost correct man - תוכחות tochachoth signifies a
vindication of proceedings in a court of law, a legal defense. When God
comes to maintain the credit and authority of his law against a sinner,
he "causes his beauty to consume away:" a metaphor taken from the case
of a culprit, who, by the arguments of counsel, and the unimpeachable
evidence of witnesses, has the facts all proved against him, grows pale,
looks terrified; his fortitude forsakes him, and he faints in court.

Surely every man is vanity - He is incapable of resistance; he falls
before his Maker; and none can deliver him but his Sovereign and Judge,
against whom he has offended.

Selah - This is a true saying, an everlasting truth.

[Psalms 39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 39:12</span></span>

Hear my prayer - Therefore, O Lord, show that mercy upon me which I so
much need, and without which I must perish everlastingly.

I am a stranger with thee - I have not made this earth my home; I have
not trusted in any arm but thine. Though I have sinned, I have never
denied thee, and never cast thy words behind my back. I knew that here I
had no continuing city. Like my fathers, I looked for a city that has
permanent foundations, in a better state of being.

[Psalms 39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 39:13</span></span>

O spare me - Take me not from this state of probation till I have a
thorough preparation for a state of blessedness. This he terms
recovering his strength - being restored to the favor and image of God,
from which he had fallen. This should be the daily cry of every human
spirit: Restore me to thine image, guide me by thy counsel, and then
reeeive me to thy glory!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 40](psa040.md)

</div>
