<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa073)  [Next](psa075.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 74](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 74:0</span></span>

The psalmtst complains of the desolations of the sanctuary, and pleads
with God, [Psa 74:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001.md); shows the
insolence and wickedness of their enemies [Psa
74:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004.md); prays to God to act for them
as he had done for their fathers, whom, by his miraculous power, he had
saved, [Psa 74:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md); begs God to
arise, and vindicate his own honor against his enemies, and the enemies
of his people, [Psa 74:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#018.md).

The title is, Maschil of Asaph, or, "A Psalm of Asaph, to give
instruction." That this Psalm was written at a time when the temple was
ruined, Jerusalem burnt, and the prophets scattered or destroyed, is
evident. But it is not so clear whether the desolations here refer to
the days of Nebuchadnezzar, or to the desolation that took place under
the Romans about the seventieth year of the Christian era. Calmet
inclines to the former opinion; and supposes the Psalm to be a
lamentation over the temple destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar.

[Psalms 74:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 74:1</span></span>

O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? - Hast thou determined that
we shall never more be thy people? Are we never to see an end to our
calamities?

[Psalms 74:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 74:2</span></span>

Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old - We are the
descendants of that people whom thou didst take unto thyself; the
children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Wilt thou never more be
reconciled to us?

[Psalms 74:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 74:3</span></span>

Lift up thy feet - Arise, and return to us, our desolations still
continue. Thy sanctuary is profaned by thine and our enemies.

[Psalms 74:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 74:4</span></span>

Thine enemies roar - Thy people, who were formerly a distinct and
separate people, and who would not even touch a Gentile, are now obliged
to mingle with the most profane. Their boisterous mirth, their cruel
mockings, their insulting commands, are heard every where in all our
assemblies.

They set up their ensigns for signs - שמו אותתם אתות samu othotham
othoth, they set up their standards in the place of ours. All the
ensigns and trophies were those of our enemies; our own were no longer
to be seen.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh verses give a correct historical account
of the ravages committed by the Babylonians, as we may see from [Kg2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004.md), [Kg2
25:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007.md), and [Jer
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007.md), [Jer
52:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#018.md), [Jer
52:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#019.md) : "And the city was broken up,
and all the men fled by night by the way of the gate. They took
Zedekiah, and slew his sons before his eyes; and put out his eyes, and
bound him with fetters of brass, and carried him to Babylon. And on the
second day of the fifth month of the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar,
Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, came unto Jerusalem; and he burnt
the house of the Lord, and the king's house, and every great man's
house; and all the houses of Jerusalem burnt he with fire. And they
broke down the walls of Jerusalem round about. And the pillars of brass
and the bases, and the brazen sea, they broke in pieces, and carried the
brass to Babylon. And the pots, shovels, snuffers and spoons, and the
fire pans and bowls, and such things as were of gold and silver, they
took away." Thus they broke down, and carried away, and destroyed this
beautiful house; and in the true barbarian spirit, neither sanctity,
beauty, symmetry, nor elegance of workmanship, was any thing in their
eyes. What hammers and axes could ruin, was ruined; Jerusalem was
totally destroyed, and its walls laid level with the ground. Well might
the psalmist sigh over such a desolation.

[Psalms 74:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 74:8</span></span>

Let us destroy them - Their object was totally to annihilate the
political existence of the Jewish people.

They have burned up all the synagogues of God in the land - It is
supposed that there were no synagogues in the land till after the
Babylonish captivity. How then could the Chaldeans burn up any in Judea?
The word מועדי moadey, which we translate synagogues, may be taken in a
more general sense, and mean any places where religious assemblies were
held: and that such places and assemblies did exist long before the
Babylonish captivity, is pretty evident from different parts of
Scripture. It appears that Elisha kept such at his house on the sabbaths
and new moons. See [Kg2 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023.md). And
perhaps to such St. James may refer, [Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023.md), a species of synagogues, where
the law was read of old, in every city of the land. And it appears that
such religious meetings were held at the house of the Prophet Ezekiel,
[Eze 33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031.md). And perhaps every
prophet's house was such. This is the only place in the Old Testament
where we have the word synagogue. Indeed, wherever there was a place in
which God met with patriarch or prophet, and any memorial of it was
preserved, there was a מועד moed, or place of religious meeting; and all
such places the Chaldeans would destroy, pursuant to their design to
extinguish the Jewish religion, and blot out all its memorials from the
earth. And this was certainly the most likely means to effect their
purpose. How soon would Christianity be destroyed in England if all the
churches, chapels, and places of worship were destroyed, and only the
poor of the people left in the land; who, from their circumstances,
could not build a place for the worship of God! After such desolation,
what a miracle was the restoration of the Jews!

[Psalms 74:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 74:9</span></span>

We see not our signs - "They have taken away all our trophies, and have
left us no memorial that God has been among us. Even thou thyself hast
left us destitute of all those supernatural evidences that have so often
convinced us that thou wert among us of a truth." But we may say that
they were not totally destitute even of these. The preservation of
Daniel in the lion's den, and of the three Hebrews in the fiery furnace;
the metamorphosis of Nebuchadnezzar; the handwriting that appeared to
Belshazzar; were all so many prodigies and evidences that God had not
left them without proofs of his being and his regard.

There is no more any prophet - There was not one among them in that
place that could tell them how long that captivity was yet to endure.
But there were prophets in the captivity. Daniel was one; but his
prophecies were confined to one place. Ezekiel was another, but he was
among those captives who were by the river Chebar. They had not, as
usual, prophets who went to and fro through the land, preaching
repentance and remission of sins.

[Psalms 74:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 74:11</span></span>

Why withdrawest thou thy hand - It has been remarked, that as the
outward habit of the easterns had no sleeves, the hands and arms were
frequently covered with the folds of the robe; and in order to do any
thing, the hand must be disentangled and drawn out. The literal version
of the Hebrew is: "To what time wilt thou draw back thy hand; yea, thy
right hand, from within thy bosom?" Consomme; that is, manifest thy
power, and destroy thy adversaries. I have, in the introduction to the
book of Psalms, spoken of the old metrical version by Sternhold and
Hopkins, and have stated that it was formed from the original text. A
proof of this may be seen by the learned reader in this and the
preceding verse; where, though their version is harsh, and some of their
expressions quaint almost to ridicule, yet they have hit the true mean
ing which our prose translators have missed: -

[Psa 74:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#010.md) When wilt thou once, Lord,
end this shame,And cease thine en'mies strong?Shall they always
blaspheme thy name,And rail on thee so long?

[Psa 74:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#011.md) Why dost thou draw thy hand
aback,And hide it in thy lap?O pluck it out, and be not slackTo give thy
foes a rap!

[Psalms 74:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 74:12</span></span>

For God is my King of old - We have always acknowledged thee as our
sovereign; and thou hast reigned as a king in the midst of our land,
dispensing salvation and deliverance from the center to every part of
the circumference.

[Psalms 74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 74:13</span></span>

Thou didst divide the sea - When our fathers came from Egypt.

Thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters - Pharaoh, his
captains, and all his hosts were drowned in the Red Sea, when attempting
to pursue them.

[Psalms 74:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 74:14</span></span>

The heads of leviathan - Leviathan might be intended here as a
personification of the Egypttan government; and its heads, Pharaoh and
his chief captains.

To the people inhabiting the wilderness - Probably meaning the birds and
beasts of prey. These were the people of the wilderness, which fed on
the dead bodies of the Egyptians, which the tides had cast ashore. The
Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic read, "Thou hast given him for
meat to the Ethiopians," or Abyssinians.

[Psalms 74:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 74:15</span></span>

Thou didst cleave the fountain - Thou didst cleave the rock in the
wilderness, of which all the congregation drank.

Thou driedst up mighty rivers - Does not this refer to the cutting off
the waters of the Jordan, so that the people passed over dryshod?

[Psalms 74:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 74:16</span></span>

The day is thine, the night also is thine - Thou art the Author of
light, and of the sun, which is the means of dispensing it.

[Psalms 74:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 74:17</span></span>

Thou hast set all the borders of the earth - Thou alone art the Author
of all its grand geographical divisions.

Thou hast made summer and winter - Thou hast appointed that peculiarity
in the poise and rotation of the earth, by which the seasons are
produced.

[Psalms 74:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 74:18</span></span>

Remember this - The heathen not only deny these things, but give the
honor of them to their false gods, and thus blaspheme thy name.

[Psalms 74:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 74:19</span></span>

Deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove - Thy people Israel are
helpless, defenceless, miserable, and afflicted: O deliver them no
longer into the power of their brutal adversaries.

[Psalms 74:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 74:20</span></span>

Have respect unto the covenant - הבט לברית habbet labberith. Pay
attention to the covenant sacrifice; to that offered by Abraham, [Gen
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009.md), etc., when the contracting
parties, God and Abram, passed through between the separated parts of
the covenant sacrifice. An indisputable type of Jesus Christ; and of God
and man meeting in his sacrificed humanity.

The dark places of the earth - The caves, dens, woods, etc., of the land
are full of robbers, cut-throats, and murderers, who are continually
destroying thy people, so that the holy seed seems as if it would be
entirely cut off and the covenant promise thus be rendered void.

The words may either apply to Chaldea or Judea. Judea was at this time
little else than a den of robbers, its own natural inhabitants being
removed. Chaldea was infested with hordes of banditti also.

[Psalms 74:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 74:21</span></span>

Let not the oppressed return ashamed - Do not permit thy people to be so
diminished, that when, according to thy promise, they are restored to
their own land, they may appear to be but a handful of men.

[Psalms 74:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 74:22</span></span>

Plead thine own cause - Thy honor is concerned, as well as our safety
and salvation. The fool - the idolater, reproacheth thee daily - he
boasts of the superiority of his idols, by whose power, he asserts, we
are brought under their domination.

[Psalms 74:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 74:23</span></span>

Forget not the voice - While we pray to thee for our own salvation, we
call upon thee to vindicate thy injured honor: and let all the nations
see that thou lovest thy followers, and hatest those who are thy
enemies. Let not man prevail against thee or thine.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 75](psa075.md)

</div>
