<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa027)  [Next](psa029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 28:0</span></span>

A righteous man in affliction makes supplication to God, and complains
of the malice of his enemies, [Psa
28:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001); whom he describes as impious,
and whose destruction he predicts, [Psa
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005). He blesses God for hearing his
prayers, and for filling him with consolation, [Psa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006), [Psa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007); then prays for God's people,
[Psa 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008), [Psa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009).

This Psalm is of the same complexion with the two preceding; and belongs
most probably to the times of the captivity, though some have referred
it to David in his persecutions. In the five first verses the author
prays for support against his enemies, who appear to have acted
treacherously against him. In the sixth and seventh he is supposed to
have gained the victory, and returns with songs of triumph. The eighth
is a chorus of the people sung to their conquering king. The ninth is
the prayer of the king for his people.

[Psalms 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 28:1</span></span>

O Lord my rock - צורי tsuri not only means my rock, but my fountain, and
the origin of all the good I possess.

If thou be silent - If thou do not answer in such a way as to leave no
doubt that thou hast heard me, I shall be as a dead man. It is a modern
refinement in theology which teaches that no man can know when God hears
and answers his prayers, but by an induction of particulars, and by an
inference from his promises. And, on this ground, how can any man fairly
presume that he is heard or answered at all? May not his inductions be
no other than the common occurrences of providence? And may not
providence be no more than the necessary occurrence of events? And is it
not possible, on this skeptic ground, that there is no God to hear or
answer? True religion knows nothing of these abominations; it teaches
its votaries to pray to God, to expect an answer from him, and to look
for the Holy Spirit to bear witness with their spirits that they are the
sons and daughters of God.

[Psalms 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 28:2</span></span>

Toward thy holy oracle - דביר קדשך debir kodshecha; debir properly means
that place in the holy of holies from which God gave oracular answers to
the high priest. This is a presumptive proof that there was a temple now
standing; and the custom of stretching out the hands in prayer towards
the temple, when the Jews were at a distance from it, is here referred
to.

[Psalms 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 28:3</span></span>

Draw file not away - Let me not be involved in the punishment of the
wicked.

[Psalms 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 28:4</span></span>

Give them - Is the same as thou wilt give them; a prophetic declaration
of what their lot will be.

[Psalms 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 28:5</span></span>

They regard not the works of the Lord - They have no knowledge of the
true God, either as to his nature, or as to his works.

He shall destroy them, and not build them up - This is a remarkable
prophecy, and was literally fulfilled: the Babylonian empire was
destroyed by Cyrus, and never built up again; for he founded the Persian
empire on its ruins. haven the place where Babylon stood is now no
longer known.

[Psalms 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 28:7</span></span>

The Lord is my strength - I have the fullest persuasion that he hears,
will answer, and will save me.

[Psalms 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 28:8</span></span>

The Lord is their strength - Instead of למו lamo, to them, eight MSS. of
Kennicott and De Rossi have לעמו leammo to his people; and this reading
is confirmed by the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, Ethiopic, Arabic, and
Anglo-Saxon. This makes the passage more precise and intelligible; and
of the truth of the reading there can be no reasonable doubt. "The Lord
is the strength of his People, and the saving strength of his anointed."
Both king and people are protected, upheld, and saved by him.

[Psalms 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 28:9</span></span>

Save thy people - Continue to preserve them from all their enemies; from
idolatry, and from sin of every kind.

Bless thine inheritance - They have taken thee for their God; thou hast
taken them for thy people.

Feed them - רעה raah signifies both to feed and to govern. Feed them, as
a shepherd does his flock; rule them, as a father does his children.

Lift them up for ever - Maintain thy true Church; let no enemy prevail
against it. Preserve and magnify them for ever. Lift them up: as hell is
the bottomless pit in which damned spirits sink down for ever; or, as
Chaucer says downe all downe; so heaven is an endless height of glory,
in which there is an eternal rising or exaltation. Down, all down; up,
all up; for ever and ever.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 29](psa029)

</div>
