<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa075)  [Next](psa077) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 76](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 76:0</span></span>

The true God known in Judah, Israel, Salem, and Zion, [Psa
76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001), [Psa
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002). A description of his defeat of
the enemies of his people, [Psa
76:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003). How God us to be worshipped,
[Psa 76:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007). He should be considered
as the chief Ruler: all the potentates of the earth are subject to him,
[Psa 76:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010).

The title, "To the chief Musician on Neginoth, a Psalm or Song of
Asaph." Sae the titles to [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001) :
and 6: The Vulgate, Septuagint, and others have, "A Psalm for the
Assyrians;" and it is supposed to be a thanksgiving for the defeat of
the Assyrians. The Syriac says it is a thanksgiving for the taking of
Rabbah, belonging to the children of Ammon. It is considered by some of
the best commentators to have been composed after the defeat of
Sennacherib. That it was composed after the death of David, and after
the two kingdoms of Israel and Judah were separated, is evident from the
first verse. If Asaph was its author, it could not be the Asaph that
flourished in the days of David but some other gifted and Divinely
inspired man of the same name, by whom several others of the Psalms
appear to have been composed during the captivity.

[Psalms 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 76:1</span></span>

In Judah is God known - The true God revealed himself to the Jews. The
Israelites, after the separation of the tribes, had the same knowledge,
but they greatly corrupted the Divine worship; though still God was
great, even in Israel.

[Psalms 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 76:2</span></span>

In Salem also is his tabernacle - Salem was the ancient name of Zebus,
afterward called Jerusalem. Here was the tabernacle set up; but
afterwards, when the temple was built on Mount Zion, there was his
habitation. The Psalm was evidently composed after the building of
Solomon's temple.

[Psalms 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 76:3</span></span>

There brake he the arrows of the bow - רשפי rishphey, the fiery arrows.
Arrows, round the heads of which inflammable matter was rolled, and then
ignited, were used by the ancients, and shot into towns to set them on
fire; and were discharged among the towers and wooden works of
besiegers. The Romans called them phalaricae; and we find them mentioned
by Virgil, Aen. lib. ix., ver. 705: -

Sed magnum stridens contorta phalarica venit,

Fulminis acta modo.

On this passage Servius describes the phalarica as a dart or spear with
a spherical leaden head to which fire was attached. Thrown by a strong
hand, it killed those whom it hit, and set fire to buildings, etc. It
was called phalarica from the towers called phalae from which it was
generally projected. In allusion to these St. Paul speaks of the fiery
darts of the devil, [Eph 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016), to the
note on which the reader is requested to refer.

The shield and the sword - If this refers to the destruction of
Sennacherib's army, it may be truly said that God rendered useless all
their warlike instruments, his angel having destroyed 185,000 of them in
one night.

[Psalms 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 76:4</span></span>

Than the mountains of prey - This is an address to Mount Zion. Thou art
more illustrious and excellent than all the mountains of prey, i.e.,
where wild beasts wander, and prey on those that are more helpless than
themselves. Zion was the place where God dwelt; the other mountains were
the abode of wild beasts.

[Psalms 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 76:5</span></span>

The stout-hearted are spoiled - The boasting blasphemers, such as
Rab-shakeh, and his master Sennacherib, the king of Assyria.

They have slept their sleep - They were asleep in their tent when the
destroying angel, the suffocating wind, destroyed the whole; they over
whom it passed never more awoke.

None of the men of might - Is not this a strong irony? Where are your
mighty men? their boasted armor, etc.?

[Psalms 76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 76:6</span></span>

At thy rebuke - It was not by any human means that this immense army was
overthrown; it was by the power of God alone. Not only infantry was
destroyed, but the cavalry also.

The chariot and horse - That is, the chariot horses, as well as the men,
were

Cast into a dead sleep - Were all suffocated in the same night. On the
destruction of this mighty host, the reader is requested to refer to the
notes on 2 Kings 19.

[Psalms 76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 76:7</span></span>

Thou, even thou, art to be feared - The Hebrew is simple, but very
emphatic: אתה נורא אתה attah nora attah, "Thou art terrible; thou art."
The repetition of the pronoun deepens the sense.

When once thou art angry? - Literally, From the time thou art angry. In
the moment thy wrath is kindled, in that moment judgment is executed.
How awful is this consideration! If one hundred and eighty-five thousand
men were in one moment destroyed by the wrath of God, canst thou, thou
poor, miserable, feeble sinner, resist his will, and turn aside his
thunder!

[Psalms 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 76:8</span></span>

Thou didst cause judgment to be heard - When God declared by his prophet
that the enemy should not prevail, but on the contrary be destroyed, the
earth the land, and by metonymy the inhabitants of the land, were struck
with astonishment and terror, so as not to be able to move. The great
boaster Sennacherib, who carried terror, dismay and desolation every
where, was now struck with dumb amazement; and the angel of the
Almighty, in a moment, stopped the breath of those hosts in which he
confided.

[Psalms 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 76:9</span></span>

The meek of the earth - The humbled or oppressed people of the land. The
poor Jews, now utterly helpless, and calling upon the Lord for succor.

[Psalms 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 76:10</span></span>

Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee - The rage of Sennacherib
shall only serve to manifest thy glory. The stronger he is, and the more
he threatens, and the weaker thy people, the more shall thy majesty and
mercy appear in his destruction and their support.

The remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain - The Hebrew gives rather a
different sense: "Thou shalt gird thyself with the remainder of wrath."
Even after thou hast sent this signal destruction upon Sennacherib and
his army, thou wilt continue to pursue the remnant of the persecutors of
thy people; their wrath shall be the cause of the excitement of thy
justice to destroy them. As a man girds himself with his girdle, that he
may the better perform his work, so thou wilt gird thyself with wrath,
that thou mayest destroy thy enemies. A good maxim has been taken from
this verse: "God often so counterworks the evil designs of men against
his cause and followers, that it turns out to their advantage and his
glory; nor does he permit them to go to the extent of what they have
purposed, and of what they are able to perform. He suffers them to do
some mischief, but not all they would or can do." But how different is
the reading of the Vulgate! Quoniam cogitatio hominis confitebitur tibi:
et reliquiae cogitationis diem festum agent tibi: "The thought of man
shall praise thee; and the remains of thought shall celebrate a feast
day to thee." The Septuagint and the Ethiopic have understood the text
in the same way. Some translate thus: "Certainly, the ferocity of the
man (Sennacherib) shall praise thee: and thou shalt gird thyself with
the spoils of the furious." The spoils of this great army shall be a
booty for thy people. Probably this is the true notion of the place. The
old Psalter renders it thus: For thoght of man sal schrife (confess) to
the, and levyngs (remains) of thoght a feste day till the sal wirk. The
paraphrase is curious, of which this is the substance: "When man
forsakes perfitly his synne, and sithen (afterwards) rightwisness werks;
it is a feste day; whenne the conscience is clered, and makes feste with
the swetnes of goddes lufe, restand fra besynes of any creatur in erth:
Than is God at hame with his spouse dwelland."

[Psalms 76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 76:11</span></span>

Vow, and pay unto the Lord - Bind yourselves to him, and forget not your
obligations.

Let all that be round about him - All the neighboring nations, who shall
see God's judgments against his enemies, should

Bring presents unto him - Give him that homage which is due unto him.

That ought to be feared - למורא lammora, "to the terrible One;" lest
they be consumed as the Assyrians have been.

[Psalms 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 76:12</span></span>

He shall cut off the spirit of princes - Even in the midst of their
conquests, he can fill them with terror and dismay, or cut them off in
their career of victory.

He is terrible to the icings of the earth - "He is the only Ruler of
princes;" to him they must account. And a terrible account most of them
will have to give to the great God; especially those who, instigated by
the desire of dominion, have, in the lust of conquest which it
generates, laid countries waste by fire and sword, making widows and
orphans without number, and extending the empire of desolation and
death.

Thus all are under his dominion, and are accountable to him. Even those
whom man cannot bring to justice, God will; and to judge them is one
grand use of a final judgment day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 77](psa077)

</div>
