<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa030)  [Next](psa032.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 31:0</span></span>

The psalmist, with strong confidence in God, in a time of distress prays
earnestly for deliverance, [Psa
31:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001.md). He expresses his abhorrence of
evil, [Psa 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006.md); gratefully mentions
former interpositions of God, [Psa
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007.md), [Psa
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#008.md); continues to detail the miseries
of his case, [Psa 31:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009.md); points out
the privileges of them that fear God, [Psa
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019.md), [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020.md); shows that God had heard his
prayers, notwithstanding he had given himself over for lost, [Psa
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021.md), [Psa
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022.md); calls on the saints to love
God, and to have confidence in him, because he preserves the faithful,
and plentifully rewards the proud doer, [Psa
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023.md), [Psa
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#024.md).

This Psalm contains no notes of time or place, to help us to ascertain
when, where, or on what account it was written. Nor have we any certain
evidence relative to the author: it might have been written by David
during his persecution by Saul. Some think Jeremiah to have been the
author: the thirteenth verse begins exactly with the same words as [Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010.md). There are several other
apparent references to passages in the book of Jeremiah, which shall be
produced in the notes.

[Psalms 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 31:1</span></span>

In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust - I confide in thee for every good I
need: let me not be confounded by not receiving the end of my faith, the
supply of my wants, and the salvation of my soul.

[Psalms 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 31:2</span></span>

Bow down thine ear - Listen to my complaint. Put thy ear to my lips,
that thou mayest hear all that my feebleness is capable of uttering. We
generally put our ear near to the lips of the sick and dying, that we
may hear what they say. To this the text appears to allude.

Strong rock - Rocks, rocky places, or caves in the rocks, were often
strong places in the land of Judea. To such natural fortifications
allusions are repeatedly made by the Hebrew poetic writers.

[Psalms 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 31:4</span></span>

Pull me out of the net - They have hemmed me in on every side, and I
cannot escape but by miracle.

[Psalms 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 31:5</span></span>

Into thine hand I commit my spirit - These words, as they stand in the
Vulgate, were in the highest credit among our ancestors; by whom they
were used in all dangers, difficulties, and in the article of death. In
manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum, was used by the sick when
about to expire, if they were sensible; and if not, the priest said it
in their behalf. In forms of prayer for sick and dying persons, these
words were frequently inserted in Latin, though all the rest of the
prayer was English; for it was supposed there was something sovereign in
the language itself. But let not the abuse of such words hinder their
usefullness. For an ejaculation nothing can be better; and when the
pious or the tempted with confidence use them, nothing can exceed their
effect. "Into thy hands I commend my spirit; for thou hast redeemed me,
O Lord God of truth." I give my soul to thee, for it is thine: thou hast
redeemed it by thy blood; it is safe nowhere but in thy hand. Thou hast
promised to save them that trust in thee; thou art the God of truth, and
canst not deny thyself. But these words are particularly sanctified, or
set apart for this purpose, by the use made of them by our blessed Lord
just before he expired on the cross. "And when Jesus had cried with a
loud voice, he said, Πατερ, εις χειρας σου παρατιθεμαι το πνευμα μου·
'Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit,'" [Luk
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046.md). The rest of the verse was not
suitable to the Savior of the world, and therefore he omits it; but it
is suitable to us who have been redeemed by that sacrificial death. St.
Stephen uses nearly the same words, and they were the last that he
uttered. [Act 7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059.md).

[Psalms 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 31:6</span></span>

I have hated them - That is, I have abominated their ways. Idolaters are
the persons of whom David speaks.

I trust in the Lord - While they trust in vanities vain things; (for an
idol is nothing in the worid); and in lying vanities; (for much is
promised and nothing given); I trust in Jehovah, who is God
all-sufficient, and is my Shepherd, and therefore I shall lack no good
thing.

[Psalms 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 31:7</span></span>

Thou hast known my soul in adversities - When all forsook me; when none
could help me; when I could not save my own life; when my enemies were
sure that I could not escape; then I found thee to be my Friend and
Supporter. When friend, so called, finds it convenient not to know his
friend in affliction and poverty, then thou didst acknowledge me as
thine own, all worthless as I was. Human friendships may fail; but the
Friend of sinners never fails. Cicero defines a real friend, Amicus
certus in re incerta cernitor: "A friend in need is a friend indeed."
Reader, such a Friend is the Lord.

[Psalms 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 31:8</span></span>

Thou hast set my foot in a large room - Many hair-breadth escapes David
had for his life; at that time especially when, playing before Saul, the
furious king took a spear and endeavored to pierce him through the body,
but he escaped and got to the deserts. Here God, who had saved his life,
set his feet in a large room. The seventh and eighth verses speak of
what God had done previously for him.

[Psalms 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 31:9</span></span>

Mine eye is consumed - He now returns, and speaks of his present
situation. Grief had brought many tears from his eyes, many agonies into
his soul, and many distressful feelings into his whole frame.

My soul and my belly - The belly is often taken for the whole body. But
the term belly or bowels, in such as case as this, may be the most
proper; for in distress and misery, the bowels being the most tender
part, and in fact the very seat of compassion, they are often most
affected. In Greek the word σπλαγχνον signifies a bowel, and
σπλαγχνιζομαι signifies to be moved with compassion; to feel misery in
the bowels at the sight of a person in pain and distress.

[Psalms 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 31:10</span></span>

My life is spent with grief - My life is a life of suffering and
distress, and by grief my days are shortened. Grief disturbs the
functions of life, prevents the due concoction of food, injures the
digestive organs, destroys appetite, impairs the nervous system, relaxes
the muscles, induces morbid action in the animal economy, and hastens
death. These effects are well expressed in the verse itself.

My years with sighing - אנחה anachah. This is a mere natural expression
of grief; the very sounds which proceed from a distressed mind;
an-ach-ah! common, with little variation, to all nations, and nearly the
same in all languages. The och-och-on of the Irish is precisely the same
sound, and the same sense. Thousands of beauties or this kind are to be
found in the sacred language.

[Psalms 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 31:11</span></span>

I was a reproach - When proscribed at the court of Saul, my enemies
triumphed, and loaded me with execrations; my neighbors considered me as
a dangerous man, now deservedlJr driven from society; my acquaintance,
who knew me best, were afraid to hold any communication with me; and
they who saw me in my exile avoided me as if affected with a contagious
disorder,

[Psalms 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 31:12</span></span>

I am forgotten as a dead man - I am considered as a person adjudged to
death. I am like a broken vessel-like a thing totally useless.

[Psalms 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 31:13</span></span>

I have heard the slander of many - To this and the two foregoing verses
the reader may find several parallels; [Jer
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018.md) to the end of [Jer
19:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001.md)., and ten first verses of
chapter 20: This has caused several to suppose that Jeremiah was the
author of this Psalm.

[Psalms 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 31:14</span></span>

But I trusted in thee - Hitherto thou hast been my Helper, and thou art
my God; I have taken thee for my eternal portion.

[Psalms 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 31:15</span></span>

My times are in thy hand - The events of my life are under thy control.
No danger can happen to me without thy foresight; thou seest what is
prepared for or meditated against me; thou canst therefore deliver me
from mine enemies.

[Psalms 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 31:16</span></span>

Make thy face to shine upon thy servant - Only let me know that thou art
reconciled to and pleased with me, and then, come what will, all must be
well.

Save me for thy mercies' sake - Literally, Save me in thy mercy.

[Psalms 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 31:17</span></span>

Let the wicked be ashamed - Those who traduce my character and lay
snares for my life; let them be confounded.

[Psalms 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 31:18</span></span>

Let the lying lips be put to silence - As to my enemies, persecutors,
and slanderers, abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound
their devices. See [Jer 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018.md).

[Psalms 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 31:19</span></span>

O how great is thy goodness - God's goodness is infinite; there is
enough for all. enough for each, enough for evermore. It is laid up
where neither devils nor men can reach it, and it is laid up for them
that fear the Lord; therefore every one who trembles at his word, may
expect all he needs from this Fountain that can never be dried ufp.

Which thou hast wrought - Thou hast already prepared it; it is the work
of thy own hands; thou hast provided it and proportioned it to the
necessities of men, and all who trust in thee shall have it. And for
them especially it is prepared who trust in thee before men - who boldly
confess thee amidst a crooked and perverse generation.

[Psalms 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 31:20</span></span>

Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy presence - בסתר פניך besether
paneycha, "With the covering of thy countenance." Their life shall be so
hidden with Christ in God, that their enemies shall not be able to find
them out. To such a hiding-place Satan himself dare not approach. There
the pride of man cannot come.

Thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion - Thou shalt put them in the
innermost part of thy tent. This implies that they shall have much
communion and union with God; that they shall be transformed into his
likeness, and have his highest approbation.

[Psalms 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 31:21</span></span>

In a strong city - If this Psalm was written by David, this must refer
to his taking refuge with achish, king of Gath, who gave him Ziklag, a
fortified city, to secure himself and followers in. See [Sa1
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#006.md). This is more likely than that it
was Keilah, where he only had intimation of the traitorous design of the
inhabitants to deliver him up to Saul; so that the place was no refuge
to him, howsoever fortified. Perhaps the passage may mean that, under
the protection of God, he was as safe as if he had been in a fortified
city.

[Psalms 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 31:22</span></span>

I said in my haste - Not duly adverting to the promise of God, I was led
to conclude that my enemies were so strong, so numerous, and had so many
advantages against me, that I must necessarily fall into and by their
hands; however, I continued to pray, and thou didst hear the voice of my
supplication.

[Psalms 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 31:23</span></span>

O love the Lord, all ye his saints - It is only the saints that can love
God, as they only are made partakers of the Divine nature. Holy spirits
can love God, who is the fountain of their holiness; and the saints
should love him.

Preserveth the faithful - Those who, being filled with the love of God,
bring forth the fruits of that love - universal obedience to the will of
God; for to such persons his commands are not grievous, their duty is
their delight; while a man is faithful to the grace he has received,
that is, uses and improves the talents with which God has intrusted him,
God's service is perfect freedom.

The proud doer - The man of the proud heart, haughty and supercilious
carriage, and insulting and outrageous conduct. A proud man is
peculiarly odious in the sight of God; and in the sight of reason how
absurd! A sinner, a fallen spirit, an heir of wretchedness and
corruption-proud!

Proud of what? Of an indwelling devil! Well; such persons shall be
plentifully rewarded. They shall get their due, their whole due, and
nothing but their due.

[Psalms 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 31:24</span></span>

Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart - In [Co1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#013.md), St. Paul says, "Watch ye, stand
fast in the faith; quit you like men; be strong:" Γρηγορειτε, στηκετε εν
τῃ πιστει, ανδριζεσθε, κραταιουσθε. The latter words he seems to have
borrowed from the Septuagint, who translate, "Be of good courage, and he
shall strengthen your heart," by Ανδριζεσθε και κραταιουσθω ἡ καρδια
ὑμων "Act like men, and your hearts shall be strengthened." They that
hope in God, and are endeavoring to walk carefully before him, may take
courage at all times, and expect the fullness of the blessing of the
Gospel of peace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 32](psa032.md)

</div>
