<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa079)  [Next](psa081.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 80](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 80:0</span></span>

A prayer for the captives, [Psa
80:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001.md). A description of their
miseries, [Psa 80:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#004.md). Israel compared
to a vineyard, [Psa 80:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008.md). Its
desolate state, and a prayer for its restoration, [Psa
80:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#015.md).

The title: see Psalm 45, [Psa 60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001.md),
and 69, where every thing material is explained. This Psalm seems to
have been written on the same occasion with the former. One ancient MS.
in the public library in Cambridge writes the eightieth and the
seventy-ninth all as one Psalm; the subject-matter is precisely the same
- was made on the same occasion, and probably by the same author.

[Psalms 80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 80:1</span></span>

O Shepherd of Israel - The subject continued from the last verse of the
preceding Psalm.

Leadest Joseph - Israel and Joseph mean here the whole of the Jewish
tribes; all were at this time in captivity; all had been the people of
the Lord; all, no doubt, made supplication unto him now that his
chastening hand was upon them; and for all the psalmist makes
supplication.

That dwellest between the cherubims - It was between the cherubim, over
the cover of the ark, called the propitiatory or mercy-seat, that the
glory of the Lord, or symbol of the Divine Presence, appeared. It is on
this account that the Lord is so often said to dwell between the
cherubim. Of these symbolical beings there is a long and painful
account, or system of conjectures, in Parkhurst's Hebrew Lexicon, of
about twenty quarto pages, under the word כרב carab.

Shine forth - Restore thy worship; and give us such evidences of thy
presence now, as our fathers had under the first tabernacle, and
afterwards in the temple built by Solomon.

[Psalms 80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 80:2</span></span>

Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh - It is supposed that these
three tribes represent the whole, Benjamin being incorporated with
Judah, Manasseh comprehending the country beyond Jordan, and Ephraim all
the rest - Dodd.

[Psalms 80:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 80:3</span></span>

Turn us again - השיבנו hashibenu, convert or restore us. There are four
parts in this Psalm, three of which end with the above words; see the
third, seventh, and nineteenth verses; and one with words similar, [Psa
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014.md).

[Psalms 80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 80:5</span></span>

Thou feedest them with the bread of tears - They have no peace, no
comfort, nothing but continual sorrow.

In great measure - שליש shalish, threefold. Some think it was a certain
measure used by the Chaldeans, the real capacity of which is not known.
others think it signifies abundance or abundantly.

[Psalms 80:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 80:6</span></span>

Thou makest us a strife - The neighboring districts have a controversy
about us; we are a subject of contention to them. A people so
wonderfully preserved, and so wonderfully punished, is a mystery to
them. They see in us both the goodness and severity of God. Or, all the
neighboring nations join together to malign and execrate us. We are
hated by all; derided and cursed by all.

[Psalms 80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 80:8</span></span>

Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt - This is a most elegant metaphor,
and every where well supported. The same similitude is used by Isaiah,
[Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001.md), etc.; by Jeremiah, [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021.md); by Ezekiel, [Eze
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005.md), [Eze
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006.md); by Hosea, [Hos
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001.md); by Joel, [Joe
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007.md); by Moses, [Deu
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032.md), [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033.md); and often by our Lord himself,
[Mat 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001.md), etc.; [Mat
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#033.md), etc.; [Mar
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001.md), etc. And this was the ordinary
figure to represent the Jewish Church. We may remark several analogies
here: -

1\. This vine was brought out of Egypt that it might be planted in a
better and more favorable soil. The Israelites were brought out of their
Egyptian bondage that they might be established in the land of Canaan,
where they might grow and flourish, and worship the true God.

2\. When the husbandman has marked out a proper place for his vineyard,
he hews down and roots up all other trees; gathers out the stones,
brambles, etc., that might choke the young vines, and prevent them from
being fruitful, So God cast out the heathen nations from the land of
Canaan, that his pure worship might be established, and that there might
not remain there any incitements to idolatry.

[Psalms 80:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 80:9</span></span>

Thou preparedst - before it -

3\. When the ground is properly cleared, then it is well digged and
manured, and the vines are placed in the ground at proper distances,
etc. So when God had cast out the heathen, he caused the land to be
divided by lot to the different tribes, and then to the several families
of which these tribes were composed.

And didst cause it to take deep root -

4\. By sheltering, propping up, and loosening the ground about the
tender plants, they are caused to take a deep and firm rooting in the
ground. Thus did God, by especial manifestations of his kind providence,
support and protect the Israelites in Canaan; and by various religious
ordinances, and civil institutions, he established them in the land;
and, by the ministry of priests and prophets, did every thing necessary
to make them morally fruitful.

It filled the land -

5\. To multiply vines, the gardener cuts off a shoot from the old tree,
leaving a joint or knob both at top and bottom; then plants it in proper
soil; the lower knob furnishes the roots, and the upper the shoot, which
should be carefully trained as it grows, in order to form another vine.
By these means one tree will soon form a complete vineyard, and multiply
itself to any given quantity. Thus God so carefully, tenderly, and
abundantly blessed the Israelites, that they increased and multiplied;
and, in process of time, filled the whole land of Canaan. Vines are
propagated, not only by cuttings, but by layers, seed, grafting, and
inoculation.

[Psalms 80:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 80:10</span></span>

The hills were covered -

6\. The vine, carefully cultivated in a suitable soil, may be spread to
any extent. In the land of Judea it formed shades under which the people
not only sheltered and refreshed themselves in times of sultry heats;
but it is said they even ate, drank, and dwelt under the shelter of
their vines. See [Kg1 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#025.md); [Mic
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004.md); 1 Maccabees 14:12. God so blessed
the Jews, particularly in the days of David and Solomon, that all the
neighboring nations were subdued - the Syrians, Idumeans, Philistines,
Moabites, and Ammonites.

[Psalms 80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 80:11</span></span>

She sent out her boughs unto the sea and her branches unto the river -
The Israelitish empire extended from the River Euphrates on the east to
the Mediterranean Sea on the west, and from the same Euphrates on the
north of the promised land to its farthest extent on the south; Syria
bounding the north, and Arabia and Egypt the south. And this was
according to the promises which God had made to the fathers, [Exo
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031.md); [Deu
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024.md).

[Psalms 80:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 80:12</span></span>

Why hast thou broken down -

7\. When a vineyard is planted, it is properly fenced to preserve it
from being trodden down, or otherwise injured by beasts, and to protect
the fruit from being taken by the unprincipled passenger. So God
protected Jerusalem and his temple by his own almighty arm; and none of
their enemies could molest them as long as they had that protection. As
it was now spoiled, it was a proof that that protection had been
withdrawn; therefore the psalmist addresses the Lord with, "Why hast
thou broken down her hedges?" Had God continued his protection,
Jerusalem would not have been destroyed.

[Psalms 80:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 80:13</span></span>

The boar out of the wood - Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who was a
fierce and cruel sovereign. The allusion is plain. The wild hops and
buffaloes make sad havoc in the fields of the Hindoos, and in their
orchards: to keep them out, men are placed at night on covered stages in
the fields.

[Psalms 80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 80:14</span></span>

Return - O God of hosts - Thou hast abandoned us, and therefore our
enemies have us in captivity. Come back to us, and we shall again be
restored.

Behold, and visit this vine - Consider the state of thy own people, thy
own worship, thy own temple. Look down! Let thine eye affect thy heart.

[Psalms 80:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 80:15</span></span>

The vineyard which thy right hand hath planted - Thy holy and pure
worship which thy Almighty power had established in this city.

And the branch - thou madest strong for thy self - The original ועל בן
veal ben, "and upon the Son whom thou hast strengthened for thyself."
Many have thought that the Lord Jesus is meant. And so the Chaldee
understood it, as it translates the passage thus: ועל מלכא משיחא veal
Malca Meshicha, And upon the King Messiah, whom thou hast strengthened
for thyself." The Syriac, Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic,
have, "the Son of man,' as in the seventeenth verse. Eighteen of
Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. have בן אדם ben Adam, "Son of man," and
as the Versions have all the same reading, it was probably that of the
original copies. As Christ seems here to be intended, this is the first
place in the Old Testament where the title Son of man is applied to him.
The old Psalter understands this of setting Christ at the right hand of
God.

[Psalms 80:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 80:17</span></span>

The man of thy right hand - The only person who can be said to be at the
right hand of God as intercessor, is Jesus the Messiah. Let him become
our Deliverer: appoint him for this purpose, and let his strength be
manifested In our weakness! By whom are the Jews to be restored, if
indeed they ever be restored to their own land, but by Jesus Christ? By
Him alone can they find mercy; through Him alone can they ever be
reconciled to God.

[Psalms 80:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 80:18</span></span>

So wilt not we go back from thee - We shall no more become idolaters:
and it is allowed on all hands that the Jews were never guilty of
idolatry after their return from the Babylonish captivity.

Quicken us - Make us alive, for we are nearly as good as dead.

We will call upon they name - We will invoke thee. Thou shalt be for
ever the object of our adoration, and the center of all our hopes.

[Psalms 80:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 80:19</span></span>

Turn as again - Redeem us from this captivity.

O Lord God of hosts - Thou who hast all power in heaven and earth, the
innumerable hosts of both worlds being at thy command.

Cause thy face to shine - Let us know that thou art reconciled to us.
Let us once more enjoy thy approbation. Smile upon thy poor rebels,
weary of their sins, and prostrate at thy feet, imploring mercy.

And we shall be saved - From the power and oppression of the Chaldeans,
from the guilt and condemnation of our sins, and from thy wrath and
everlasting displeasure. Thus, O God, save Us!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 81](psa081.md)

</div>
