<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa014)  [Next](psa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 15:0</span></span>

The important question answered, Who is a proper member of the Church
militant? and who shall finally join the Church triumphant? Verse [Psa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001) contains the question; [Psa
15:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002), the answer.

The title, מזמור לדוד mizmor ledavid, a Psalm of David, has nothing in
it particularly worthy of notice. If it were a Psalm composed during the
captivity, relating to their return and settlement in their own land,
with the restoration of their temple service and all the ordinances of
God, and a description of the persons who should then be considered
Israelites indeed, the name of David is improperly prefixed. But the
subject is of the most general utility, and demands the most solemn and
serious attention of all men who profess to believe in the immortality
of the soul.

[Psalms 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 15:1</span></span>

Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? - The literal translation of
this verse is, "Lord, who shall sojourn in thy tabernacle? who shall
dwell in the mountain of thy holiness?" Fwor the proper understanding of
this question we must note the following particulars: -

1\. The tabernacle, which was a kind of moveable temple, was a type of
the Church militant, or the state of the people of God in this world.

2\. Mount Zion, the holy mount, where the temple was built, was the type
of the kingdom of heaven. There the ark became stationary, and was no
longer carried about from place to place; and the whole was typical of
the rest that remains for the people of God.

3\. The Tabernacle was a temporary and frequently-removed building,
carried about from place to place, and not long in any one place.
Concerning this it is said: מי יגור mi yagur, "Who shall lodge, or
sojourn," there? It is not a residence, or dwelling-place, but a place
to lodge in for a time.

4\. The Temple was a fixed and permanent building; and here it is
inquired, מי ישכן mi yiscon, "Who shall dwell, abide," or have his
permanent residence, there?

5\. The tabernacle being a migratory temple, carried about on the
shoulders of the priests and Levites, there was no dwelling there for
any; they could but lodge or sojourn.

6\. The temple being fined, the priests, Levites, etc., became permanent
occupiers. There was no lodging or sojourning, but permanent residence
for all connected with it.

7\. The tabernacle is, therefore, a proper type of the Church militant,
wandering up and down, tossed by various storms and tempests; the
followers of God, having here no continuing city; sojourning only on
earth to get a preparation for eternal glory.

8\. The temple is also a proper type or emblem of the Church triumphant
in heaven. "Here the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest." It is the dwelling-place the eternal residence, of all who are
faithfui unto death, who are made pillars in that temple of God, to go
no more out for ever.

The questions therefore are,

1\. Who can be considered a fit member of the Church of Christ here
below? and,

2\. Who shall be made partakers of an endless glory? In answer to these
questions, the character of what we may term a true Israelite, or a good
Christian, is given in the following particulars: -

[Psalms 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 15:2</span></span>

He that walketh uprightly - הולך תמים holech tamim,

1\. He walks perfectly. Who sets God before his eyes, takes his word for
the rule of his conduct, considers himself a sojourner on earth, and is
continually walking to the kingdom of God. He acts according to the
perfections of God's law; he has respect to all its parts, and feels the
weight and importance of all its injunctions.

And worketh righteousness -

2\. He is not satisfied with a contemplative life; he has duties to
perform. The law of righteousness has placed him in certain relations,
and each of these relations has its peculiar duties. פעל צדק poel
tsedek, the words here used, signify to give just weight, to render to
all their dues.

1\. As he is the creature of God, he has duties to perform to him. He
owes God his heart: May son, give me thy heart; and should love him with
all his heart, soul, mind, and strength. This is giving God his due.

2\. As a member of civil society, he has various duties to perform to
his fellows, as they have to him. He is to love them as himself, and do
unto all men as he would they should do unto him.

3\. There are duties which he owes to himself. That his body may be in
health, vigor, and activity, he should avoid every thing by which it
might be injured, particularly all excesses in eating, drinking,
sleeping, etc. That his soul may be saved, he should avoid all sin; all
irregular and disorderly passions. He owes it to his soul to apply to
God for that grace which produces repentance, faith, and holiness; and
in order to get all these blessings, he should read, watch, pray, hear
the word preached, and diligently use all the ordinances of God. He who
acts not thus, defrauds both his body and soul: but the person in the
text works righteousness - gives to all their due; and thus keeps a
conscience void of oifence, both towards God and man.

And speaketh the truth in his heart -

3\. He is a true man; in him there is no false way. He is no man of
pretenses; speaking one thing, and meaning another. He professes nothing
but what he feels and intends; with him there are no hollow friendships,
vain compliments, nor empty professions of esteem, love, regard, or
friendship. His mouth speaks nothing but what his heart dictates. His
heart, his tongue, and his hand, are all in unison. Hypocrisy, guile,
and deceit, have no place in his soul.

[Psalms 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 15:3</span></span>

He that backbiteth not with his tongue - לא רגל על לשנו lo ragal al
leshono, "he foots not upon his tongue."

4\. He is one who treats his neighbor with respect. He says nothing that
might injure him in his character, person, or property; he forgets no
calumny, he is author of no slander, he insinuates nothing by which his
neighbor may be injured. The tongue, because of its slanderous
conversation, is represented in the nervous original as kicking about
the character of an absent person; a very common vice, and as
destructive as it is common: but the man who expects to see God abhors
it, and backbites not with his tongue. The words backbite and backbiter
come from the Anglo-Saxon bac, the back, and to bite. How it came to be
used in the sense it has in our language, seems at first view
unaccountable; but it was intended to convey the treble sense of
knavishness, cowardice, and brutality. He is a knave, who would rob you
of your good name; he is a coward, that would speak of you in your
absence what he dared not to do in your presence; and only an
ill-conditioned dog would fly at and bite your back when your face was
turned. All these three ideas are included in the term; and they all
meet in the detractor and calumniator. His tongue is the tongue of a
knave, a coward, and a dog. Such a person, of course, has no right to
the privileges of the Church militant, and none of his disposition can
ever see God.

Nor doeth evil to his neighbor -

5\. He not only avoids evil speaking, but he avoids also evil acting
towards his neighbor. He speaks no evil of him; he does no evil to him;
he does him no harm; he occasions him no wrong. On the contrary, he
gives him his due. See under the second particular.

Nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour -

6\. The word חרפה cherpah, which we here translate a reproach, comes
from חרף charaph, to strip, or make bare, to deprive one of his
garments; hence חרף choreph, the winter, because it strips the fields of
their clothing, and the trees of their foliage. By this, nature appears
to be dishonored and disgraced. The application is easy: a man, for
instance, of a good character is reported to have done something wrong:
the tale is spread, and the slanderers and backbiters carry it about;
and thus the man is stripped of his fair character, of his clothing of
righteousness, truth, and honesty. All may be false; or the man, in an
hour of the power of darkness, may have been tempted and overcoxne; may
have been wounded in the cloudy and dark day, and deeply mourns his fall
before God. Who that has not the heart of a devil would not strive
rather to cover than make bare the fault? Those who feed, as the proverb
says, like the flies, passing over all a man's whole parts to light upon
his wounds, will take up the tale, and carry it about. Such, in the
course of their diabolic work, carry the story of scandal to the
righteous man; to him who loves his God and his neighbor. But what
reception has the tale-bearer? The good man taketh it not up; לא נשא lo
nasa, he will not bear it; it shall not be propagated from him. He
cannot prevent the detractor from laying it down; but it is in his power
not to take it up: and thus the progress of the slander may be arrested.
He taketh not up a reproach against his neighbour; and the tale-bearer
is probably discouraged from carrying it to another door. Reader, drive
the slanderer of your neighbor far away from you: ever remembering that
in the law of God, as well as in the law of the land, "the receiver is
as bad as the thief."

[Psalms 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 15:4</span></span>

In whose eves a vile person is contemned -

7\. This man judges of others by their conduct; he tries no man's heart.
He knows men only by the fruits they bear; and thus he gains knowledge
of the principle from which they proceed. A vile person, נמאס nimas, the
reprobate, one abandoned to sin; is despised, נבזה nibzeh, is loathsome,
as if he were covered with the elephantiasis or leprosy, for so the word
implies. He may be rich, he may be learned, he may be a great man and
honorable with his master, in high offices in the state; but if he be a
spiritual leper, an infidel, a profligate, the righteous man must
despise him, and hold him, because he is an enemy to God and to man, in
sovereign contempt. If he be in power, he will not treat him as if
worthy of his dignity; while he respects the office he will detest the
man. And this is quite right; for the popular odium should ever be
pointed against vice.

Aben Ezra gives a curious turn to this clause, which he translates thus:
"He is mean and contemptible in his own eyes;" and it is certain that
the original, נבזה בעיניו נמאס nibzeh beeynaiv nimas, will bear this
translation. His paraphrase on it is beautiful: "A pious man, whatever
good he may have done, and however concordant to the Divine law he may
have walked, considers all this of no worth, compared with what it was
his duty to do for the glory of his Creator." A sentiment very like that
of our Lord, [Luk 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010) : "So likewise
ye, when ye shall have done all those things which are commanded you,
say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty
to do."

Taken in this sense, the words intimate, that the man who is truly
pious, who is a proper member of the Church militant, and is going
straight to the Church triumphant, is truly humble; he knows he has
nothing but what he has received, he has no merit, he trusts not in
himself, but in the living God. He renounces his own righteousness, and
trusts in the eternal mercy of God through the infinitely meritorious
atonement made by Jesus Christ. The language of his heart is: -

"I loathe myself when God I see,And into nothing fall;

Content that thou exalted be,And Christ be all in all."

He honoureth them that fear the Lord -

8\. This cause is a proof, however just the sentiment, that Aben Ezra
has mistaken the meaning of the preceding clause. The truly pious man,
while he has in contempt the honorable and right honorable profligate,
yet honors them that fear the Lord, though found in the most abject
poverty; though, with Job, on the dunghill, or, with Lazarus, covered
with sores at the rich man's gate. Character is the object of his
attention; persons and circumstances are of minor importance.

The fear of the Lord is often taken for the whole of religion; and
sometimes for that reverence which a man feels for the ma jesty and
holiness of God, that induces him to hate and depart from evil. Here it
may signify the lowest degree of religion, repentance whereby we forsake
sin.

Sweareth to his own hurt, and changeth not -

9\. If at any time he have bound himself by a solemn engagement to do so
and so, and he finds afterwards that to keep his oath will be greatly to
his damage; yet such reverence has he for God and for truth that he will
not change, be the consequences what they may. He is faithful also to
his promises; his bare word will bind him equally with an oath. He that
will not be honest without an oath will not be honest with one.

The Hebrew might be thus translated: "He sweareth to afflict himself,
and does not change;" and thus the Chaldee has rendered this clause. He
has promised to the Lord to keep his body under, and bring it into
subjection; to deny himself that he may not pamper the flesh, and have
the more to give to the poor.

[Psalms 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 15:5</span></span>

Putteth not out his money to usury -

10\. As usury signifies unlawful interest, or that which is got by
taking advantage of the necessity of a distressed neighbor, no man that
fears God can be guilty of it. The word נשך neshech, which we translate
usury, comes from nashach, to bite as a serpent; and here must signify
that biting or devouring usury, which ruins the man who has it to pay.
"The increase of usury is called נשך neshech, because it resembles the
biting of a serpent. For as this is so small at first, as scarcely to be
perceptible, but the venom soon spreads and diffuses itself till it
reaches the vitals; so the increase of usury, which at first is not
perceived nor felt, at length grows so much as by degrees to devour
another's substance." Middoch's edition of Leigh's Critica Sacra, sub
voce נשך.

The Jews ever were, and are still, remarkable for usury and usurious
contracts; and a Jew that is saved from it is in the fair way, charity
would suppose, to the kingdom of heaven. The Roman laws condemned the
usurer to the forfeiture of four times the sum. Cato de Rust., lib. i.

Nor taketh reward against the innocent -

11\. He neither gives nor receives a bribe in order to pervert justice
or injure an innocent man in his cause. The lawyer, who sees a poor man
opposed by a rich man, who, though he is convinced in his conscience
that the poor man has justice and right on his side, yet takes the
larger fee from the rich man to plead against the poor man, has in fact
taken a bribe against the innocent, and without the most signal
interposition of the mercy of God, is as sure of hell as if he were
already there.

He that doeth these things - He in whose character all these excellences
meet, though still much more is necessary under the Christian
dispensation, shall never be moved - he shall stand fast for ever. He is
an upright, honest man, and God will ever be his support.

Now we have the important question answered, Who shall go to heaven? The
man who to faith in Christ Jesus adds those eleven moral excellences
which have been already enumerated. And only such a character is fit for
a place in the Church of Christ.

On this verse there is a singular reading in my old MS. Psalter, which I
must notice. The clause, Qui pecuniam suam non dedit ad usuram, "who
putteth not out his money to usury," is thus translated: He that gat
nout his catel til oker. Now this intimates that the author had either
read pecudem, Cattle, for pecuniam, Money; or that catel was the only
money current in his time and country. And indeed it has long been the
case, that the Scottish peasantry paid their rents in kind; so many cows
or sheep given to the laird for the usufruct of the ground. That this is
no mistake in the translation is evident enough from the paraphrase,
where he repeats the words, with his gloss upon them: He that gaf nout
his Catel till oker bodyly als covaytus men dos gastly: that he seke
naght for his gude dede, na mede of this werld, bot anely of heven.

The very unusual word oker signifies produce of any kind, whether of
cattle, land, money, or even the human offspring. It is found in the
Anglo-Saxon, the Gothic, the German, and the Danish; in all which
languages it signifies produce, fruit, offspring, usury, and the like.
Dr. Jameson does not show the word in any of its forms, though it is
evident that it existed in the ancient Scotttsh language.

The word catel may be used here for chattels, substance of any kind,
moveable or immoveable; but this word itself was originally derived from
cattle, which were from the beginning the principal substance or riches
of the inhabitants of the country. Indeed the word pecunia, money, was
derived from pecus, cattle, which were no longer used as a medium of
commerce when silver and gold came into use. There is a passage in
Chaucer where cattel catching seems to be used for getting money.

Speaking of the wicked priests of his time, he says: -

Some on her churches dwell

Apparailled poorely proud of porte;

The seven Sacramentes thei doen sell,

In Cattel catching is her comfort.

Of each matter thei wollen mell;

And doen hem wrong is her disport.

To affraie the people thei been fell

And hold hem lower than doeth the Lorde.

Plowmanne's Tale, 3d part.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 16](psa016)

</div>
