<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa070)  [Next](psa072) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 71](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 71:0</span></span>

The prophet, in confidence, prays for God's favor, [Psa
71:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001); recounts God's kindness to him
from youth to old age, [Psa 71:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006);
shows what his adversaries plot against him, and prays for their
confusion, [Psa 71:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#010); promises
fidelity, and determines to be a diligent preacher of righteousness even
in old age, [Psa 71:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014); takes
encouragement in God's mercy, and foresees the confusion of all his
adversaries, [Psa 71:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#020).

There is no title to this Psalm either in the Hebrew or Chaldee; and the
reason is, it was written as a part of the preceding Psalm, as appears
by about twenty-seven of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. The Vulgate,
Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic, have, "A Psalm of David for the sons
of Jonadab, and the first of those who were led captives." For the
first, second, and third verses, see the notes on their parallels, [Psa
31:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001) (note).

[Psalms 71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 71:3</span></span>

Be thou my strong habitation - Instead of מען maon, habitation, many of
Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. read מעז maoz, munition or defense. Be
thou my rock of defense.

Thou hast given commandment to save me - Thou hast determined my escape,
and hast ordered thy angels to guard me. See [Psa
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011), [Psa
91:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#012).

[Psalms 71:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 71:4</span></span>

Out of the hand of the wicked - Probably his unnatural son Absalom,
called here רשע rasha, the Wicked, because he had violated all laws,
human and Divine.

The unrighteous and cruel man - Probably Ahithophel who was the
iniquitous counsellor of a wicked and rebellious son.

[Psalms 71:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 71:5</span></span>

My trust from my youth - When I was born into the world, thou didst
receive me, and thou tookest me under thy especial care. "My praise
shall be continually of thee." Rather, I have always made thee my boast.

[Psalms 71:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 71:7</span></span>

I am as a wonder unto many - I am כמופת kemopheth "as a portent," or
"type:" I am a typical person; and many of the things that happen to me
are to be considered in reference to him of whom I am a type. But he may
mean I am a continual prodigy. My low estate, my slaying the lion and
the bear, conquering the Philistine, escaping the fury of Saul, and
being raised to the throne of Israel, are all so many wonders of thy
providence, and effects of thy power and grace.

[Psalms 71:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 71:9</span></span>

Cast me not off in the time of old age - The original might be
translated and paraphrased thus: "Thou wilt not cast me off till the
time of old age; and according to the failure of my flesh, thou wilt not
forsake me." My expectation of rest and happiness will not be deferred
till the time that I shall be an aged man, Thou wilt not withdraw thy
presence from me as my flesh decays, and as my natural strength abates;
but, on the contrary, as my outward man decays, my inward man shall be
renewed day by day. It was in David's old age that the rebellion of
Absalom took place.

[Psalms 71:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 71:10</span></span>

Lay wait for my soul - They seek to destroy my life.

[Psalms 71:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 71:11</span></span>

God hath forsaken him - "God, who has been his special help all through
life, and who has guarded him so that no hand could be raised
successfully against him, has now cast him off; therefore we shall
easily prevail against him. His present adversity shows that God is no
longer his friend." Thus men judge. "Secular prosperity is a proof of
God's favor: adversity is a proof of his displeasure." But this is not
God's way, except in especial judgments, etc. He never manifests his
pleasure or displeasure by secular good or ill.

[Psalms 71:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 71:13</span></span>

Let them be confounded - They shall be confounded: these are prophetic
denunciations.

[Psalms 71:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 71:14</span></span>

I will hope continually - I shall expect deliverance after deliverance,
and blessing after blessing; and, in consequence, I will praise thee
more and more. As thy blessings abound, so shall my praises.

[Psalms 71:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 71:15</span></span>

I know not the numbers - I must be continually in the spirit of
gratitude, praise, and obedience, for thy blessings to me are
innumerable.

[Psalms 71:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 71:16</span></span>

I will go - אבוא abo, I will enter, i.e., into the tabernacle, in the
strength or mightinesses of Adonai Jehovah, the supreme God, who is my
Prop, Stay, and Support.

I will make mention of thy righteousness - I will continually record and
celebrate the acts of thy mercy and goodness. They are without number,
([Psa 71:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#015)), and of these alone will
I speak.

[Psalms 71:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 71:17</span></span>

Thou hast taught me from my youth - I have had thee for my continual
instructor: and thou didst begin to teach me thy fear and love from my
tenderest infancy. Those are well taught whom God instructs; and when he
teaches, there is no delay in learning.

[Psalms 71:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 71:18</span></span>

Old and grey-headed - In the ninth verse he mentioned the circumstance
of old age; here he repeats it, with the addition of hoary-headedness,
which, humanly speaking, was calculated to make a deeper impression in
his favor. Though all these things are well known to God, and he needs
not our information, yet he is pleased to say, "Come now, and let us
reason together." And when his children plead and reason with him, they
are acting precisely as he has commanded.

[Psalms 71:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 71:19</span></span>

Thy righteousness - is very high - עד מרום ad marom - is up to the
exalted place, reaches up to heaven. The mercy of God fills all space
and place. It crowns in the heavens what it governed upon earth.

Who hast done great things - גדלות gedoloth. Thou hast worked miracles,
and displayed the greatest acts of power.

Who is like unto thee! - מי כמוך mi camocha. God is alone, - who can
resemble him? He is eternal. He can have none before, and there can be
none after; for in the infinite unity of his trinity he is that eternal,
unlimited, impartible, incomprehensible, and uncompounded ineffable
Being, whose essence is hidden from all created intelligences, and whose
counsels cannot be fathomed by any creature that even his own hand can
form. Who is Like Unto Thee! will excite the wonder, amazement, praise,
and adoration of angels and men to all eternity.

[Psalms 71:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 71:20</span></span>

Thou, which hast showed me great and sore troubles - Multiplied straits
and difficulties. And thou hast only showed them.

Hadst thou permitted them to have fallen upon me with all their own
energy and natural consequences, they would have destroyed me. As it
was, I was nearly buried under them.

Shalt quicken me again - Shalt revive me - put new life in me. This has
been applied to the passion of our Lord, and his resurrection; for it is
added, Thou: -

Shalt bring me up again from the depths of the earth - Death shall not
prey upon my body; thy Holy One can see no corruption. As applicable to
David, it might mean his being almost overwhelmed with afflictions; and
his deliverance was like a life from the dead.

[Psalms 71:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 71:21</span></span>

Thou shalt increase my greatness - Thou wilt restore me to my throne and
kingdom; and it shall be done in such a way that all shall see it was
the hand of God; and I shall have the more honor on the account.

Comfort me on every side - I shall have friends in all quarters; and the
tribes on all sides will support me.

[Psalms 71:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 71:22</span></span>

I will also praise thee with the psaltery - בכלי נבל bichli nebel, with
the instrument nebel. Unto thee will I sing with the harp; בכנור
bechinnor, with the kinnor. Both were stringed instruments, and the
principal used in the Jewish worship; and with which, or any thing like
them, in Divine worship, we, as Christians, have nothing to do.

[Psalms 71:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 71:23</span></span>

My lips shall greatly rejoice and my soul - My lips shall use words
expressive of my soul's happiness and gratitude. Thou hast redeemed me;
and thou shalt have the eternal praise.

[Psalms 71:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 71:24</span></span>

Talk of thy righteousness - The righteousness of God is frequently used
in this Psalm, and in other places, to signify his justice, judgments,
faithfulness, truth, mercy, etc. There are few words of more general
import in the Bible.

They are confounded - The counsel of Ahithophel is confounded, and
turned to foolishness, and he was so ashamed that he went and hanged
himself. As to the vain and wicked Absalom, he met with the fate that he
had meditated against his father. Though not yet done, David sees all
these things as actually accomplished; for he had got a Divine assurance
that God would bring them to pass.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 72](psa072)

</div>
