<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa049)  [Next](psa051.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 50:0</span></span>

God, the Sovereign Judge, cites before his throne all his people, and
the priests and the judges, [Psa
50:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001.md); and reproaches them for their
vain confidence in the sacrifices they had offered, [Psa
50:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007.md); and shows them the worship he
requires, [Psa 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md), [Psa
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md); and then enters into a
particular detail of their hypocrisy, injustice, and union with
scandalous transgressors; all of whom he threatens with heavy judwments,
[Psa 50:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016.md). The blessedrusss of him
who worships God aright, and walks unblamably, [Psa
50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023.md).

In the title this is said to be A Psalm of Asaph. There are twelve that
go under his name; and most probably he was author of each, for he was
of high repute in the days of David, and is mentioned second to him as a
composer of psalms: Moreover Hezekiah the king, and the princes,
commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with the WordS of
David, and of Asaph the Seer. His band, sons or companions, were also
eminent in the days of David, as we learn from 1 Chronicles 25, etc.
Asaph himself was one of the musicians who sounded with cymbals of
brass, [Ch1 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#019.md). And he is mentioned
with great respect, [Neh 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#046.md) : And
in the days of David and Asaph of old there were Chief of the Singers,
and Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving unto God. He was certainly a
prophetic man: he is called a seer - one on whom the Spirit of God
rested; and seems from this, his education, and natural talent to be
well qualified to compose hymns or psaims in the honor of God. Persons
capable of judging, on a comparison of those Psalms attributed to Asaph
with those known to be of David, have found a remarkable difference in
the style. The style of David is more polished, flowing, correct, and
majestic, than that of Asaph, which is more stiff and obscure. He has
been compared to Persius and to Horace; he is keen, full of
reprehensions, and his subjects are generally of the doleful kind; which
was probably caused by his living in times in which there was great
corruption of manners, and much of the displeasure of God either
theatened or manifested. It is not known on what particular occasion
this Psalm was written; but at most times it was suitable to the state
of the Jewish Church.

[Psalms 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 50:1</span></span>

The mighty God, even the Lord, hath spoken - Here the essential names of
God are used: אל אלהים יהוה El, Elohim, Yehovah, hath spoken. The six
first verses of this Psalm seem to contain a description of the great
judgment: to any minor consideration or fact it seems impossible, with
any propriety, to restrain them. In this light I shall consider this
part of the Psalm, and show: -

First, The preparatives to the coming of the great Judge. El Elohim
Jehovah hath spoken, and called the earth - all the children of men from
the rising of the sun unto the going down thereof. Out of Zion, the
perfection of beauty, (מכלל יפי michlal yophi, the beauty where all
perfection is comprised), God hath shined, [Psa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001.md), [Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002.md).

1\. He has sent his Spirit to convince men of sin, righteousness, and
judgment.

2\. He has sent his Word; has made a revelation of himself; and has
declared both his law and his Gospel to mankind: "Out of Zion, the
perfection of beauty, God hath shined," [Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002.md). For out of Zion the law was to
go forth, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md).

Secondly, The accompaniments.

1\. His approach is proclaimed, [Psa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003.md) : "Our God shall come."

2\. The trumpet proclaims his approach: "He shall not keep silence."

3\. Universal nature shall be shaken, and the earth and its works be
burnt up: "A fire shall devour before him and it shall be very
tempestuous round about him," [Psa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003.md).

Thirdly, The witnesses are summoned and collected, and collected from
all quarters; some from heaven, and some from earth.

1\. Guardian angels.

2\. Human associates: "He shall call to the heavens from above, and to
the earth, that he may judge his people," [Psa
50:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#004.md).

Fourthly, The procedure. As far as it respects the righteous, orders are
issued: "Gather my saints," those who are saved from their sins and made
holy, "together unto me." And that the word saints might not be
misunderstood it is explained by "those that have made a covenant with
me by sacrifice;" those who have entered into union with God, through
the sacrificial offering of the Lord Jesus Christ. All the rest are
passed over in silence. We are told who they are that shall enter into
the joy of their Lord, viz., only the saints, those who have made a
covenant with God by sacrifice. All, therefore, who do not answer this
description are excluded from glory.

Fifthly, The final issue: all the angelic hosts and all the redeemed of
the Lord, join in applauding acclamation at the decision of the Supreme
Judge. The heavens (for the earth is no more, it is burnt up) shall
declare his righteousness, the exact justice of the whole procedure,
where justice alone has been done without partiality, and without
severity, nor could it be otherwise, for God is Judge himself. Thus the
assembly is dissolved; the righteous are received into everlasting
glory, and the wicked turned into hell, with all those who forget God.
Some think that the sentence against the wicked is that which is
contained, [Psa 50:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016.md). See the
analysis at the end, and particularly on the six first verses, in which
a somewhat different view of the subject is taken.

[Psalms 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 50:7</span></span>

Hear, O my people - As they were now amply informed concerning the
nature and certainty of the general judgment, and were still in a state
of probation, Asaph proceeds to show them the danger to which they were
exposed, and the necessity of repentance and amendment, that when that
great day should arrive, they might be found among those who had made a
covenant with God by sacrifice. And he shows them that the sacrifice
with which God would be well pleased was quite different from the
bullocks, he-goats, etc., which they were in the habit of offering. In
short, he shows here that God has intended to abrogate those sacrifices,
as being no longer of any service: for when the people began to trust in
them, without looking to the thing signified, it was time to put them
away. When the people began to pay Divine honors to the brazen serpent,
though it was originally an ordinance of God's appointment for the
healing of the Israelites, it was ordered to be taken away; called
nehushtan, a bit of brass; and broken to pieces. The sacrifices under
the Jewish law were of God's appointment; but now that the people began
to put their trust in them, God despised them.

[Psalms 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 50:8</span></span>

I will not reprove thee - I do not mean to find fault with you for not
offering sacrifices; you have offered them, they have been continually
before me: but you have not offered them in the proper way.

[Psalms 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 50:10</span></span>

Every beast of the forest is mine - Can ye suppose that ye are laying me
under obligation to you, when ye present me with a part of my own
property?

[Psalms 50:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 50:12</span></span>

The world is mine, and the fullness thereof - Ye cannot, therefore, give
me any thing that is not my own.

[Psalms 50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 50:13</span></span>

Will I eat the flesh of bulls - Can ye be so simple as to suppose that I
appointed such sacrifices for my own gratification? All these were
significative of a spiritual worship, and of the sacrifice of that Lamb
of God which, in the fullness of time, was to take away, in an atoning
manner, the sin of the world.

[Psalms 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 50:14</span></span>

Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the Most High - זבח
zebach, "sacrifice unto God, אלהים Elohim, the תודה todah,
thank-offering," which was the same as the sin-offering, viz. a bullock,
or a ram, without blemish; only there were, in addition, "unleavened
cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil; and
cakes of fine flour mingled with oil and fried," [Lev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012.md).

And pay thy vows - נדריך nedareycha, "thy vow-offering, to the Most
High." The neder or vow-offering was a male without blemish, taken from
among the beeves, the sheep, or the goats. Compare [Lev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019.md) with [Psa
50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022.md). Now these were offerings, in
their spiritual and proper meaning, which God required of the people:
and as the sacrificial system was established for an especial end - to
show the sinfulness of sin, and the purity of Jehovah, and to show how
sin could be atoned for, forgiven, and removed; this system was now to
end in the thing that it signified, - the grand sacrifice of Christ,
which was to make atonement, feed, nourish, and save the souls of
believers unto eternal life; to excite their praise and thanksgiving;
bind them to God Almighty by the most solemn vows to live to him in the
spirit of gratitude and obedience all the days of their life. And, in
order that they might be able to hold fast faith and a good conscience,
they were to make continual prayer to God, who promised to hear and
deliver them, that they might glorify him, [Psa
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md).

From the [Psa 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016.md) to the [Psa
50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022.md) Asaph appears to refer to the
final rejection of the Jews from having any part in the true covenant
sacrifice.

[Psalms 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 50:16</span></span>

But unto the wicked - The bloodthirsty priests, proud Pharisees, and
ignorant scribes of the Jewish people.

[Psalms 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 50:17</span></span>

Seeing thou hatest instruction - All these rejected the counsel of God
against themselves; and refused to receive the instructions of Christ.

[Psalms 50:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 50:18</span></span>

When thou sawest a thief - Rapine, adulteries, and adulterous divines,
were common among the Jews in our Lord's time. The Gospels give full
proof of this.

[Psalms 50:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 50:21</span></span>

These things hast thou done - My eye has been continually upon you,
though my judgments have not been poured out: and because I was silent,
thou didst suppose I was such as thyself; but I will reprove thee, etc.
I will visit for these things.

[Psalms 50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 50:22</span></span>

Now consider this - Ye have forgotten your God, and sinned against him.
He has marked down all your iniquities, and has them in order to exhibit
against you. Beware, therefore, lest he tear you to pieces, when there
is none to deliver; for none can deliver you but the Christ you reject.
And how can ye escape, if ye neglect so great a salvation?

[Psalms 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 50:23</span></span>

Whoso offereth praise - These are the very same words as those in [Psa
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md), זבח תודה; and should be read
the same way independently of the points, zebach todah, "sacrifice the
thank-offering." Jesus is the great eucharistic sacrifice; offer him up
to God in your faith and prayers. By this sacrifice is God glorified,
for in him is God well pleased; and it was by the grace or good pleasure
of God that he tasted death for every man.

Ordereth his conversation - שם דרך sam derech, Disposeth his way. -
Margin. Has his way There, שם דרך sham derech, as many MSS. and old
editions have it; or makes that his custom.

Will I show the salvation of God - אראנו arennu, I will cause him to see
בישע beyesha, into the salvation of God; into God's method of saving
sinners by Christ. He shall witness my saving power even to the
uttermost; such a salvation as it became a God to bestow, and as a
fallen soul needs to receive; the salvation from all sin, which Christ
has purchased by his death. I sall scheu til him, the hele of God; that
es Jeshu, that he se him in the fairehed of his majeste - Old Psalter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 51](psa051.md)

</div>
