<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa077)  [Next](psa079) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 78](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 78:0</span></span>

An enumeration of the principal effects of the goodness of God to his
people, vv. 1-16; of their rebellions and punishment, vv. 17-33; their
feigned repentance, [Psa 78:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034);
God's compassion towards them, [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038), [Psa
78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039); their backsliding, and
forgetfulness of his mercy, [Psa
78:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040); the plagues which he brought
upon the Egyptians, [Psa 78:43-51](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#043); the
deliverance of his own people, and their repeated ingratitude and
disobedience, [Psa 78:52-58](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#052); their
punishment, [Psa 78:59-64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#059); God's wrath
against their adversaries, [Psa 78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065),
[Psa 78:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066); his rejection of the
tribes of Israel abut his choice of the tribe of Judah, and of David to
be king over his people, [Psa
78:67-72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067).

The title, Maschil of Asaph; or, according to the margin, A Psalm for
Asaph to give instruction; contains nothing particular. The Arabic has,
"A sermon from Asaph to the people." The Psalm was probably not written
by David, but after the separation of the ten tribes of Israel, and
after the days of Rehoboam, and before the Babylonish captivity, for the
temple was still standing, [Psa 78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069).
Calmet supposes that it was written in the days of Asa, who had gained,
by the aid of the Syrians, a great victory over the Israelites; and
brought back to the pure worship of God many out of the tribes of
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon. See 2 Chronicles 15 and [Ch2
16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001).

[Psalms 78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 78:1</span></span>

Give ear, O my people - This is the exordium of this very pathetic and
instructive discourse.

[Psalms 78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 78:2</span></span>

In a parable - Or, I will give you instruction by numerous examples; see
[Psa 49:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001) (note), which bears a
great similarity to this; and see the notes there. The term parable, in
its various acceptations, has already been sufficiently explained; but
משל mashal may here mean example, as opposed to תורה torah, law or
precept, [Psa 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001).

[Psalms 78:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 78:3</span></span>

Which we have heard and known - We have heard the law, and known the
facts.

[Psalms 78:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 78:4</span></span>

We will not hide them - In those ancient times there was very little
reading, because books were exceedingly scarce; tradition was therefore
the only, or nearly the only, means of preserving the memory of past
events. They were handed down from father to son by parables or pithy
sayings and by chronological poems. This very Psalm is of this kind, and
must have been very useful to the Israelites, as giving instructions
concerning their ancient history, and recounting the wonderful deeds of
the Almighty in their behalf.

[Psalms 78:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 78:6</span></span>

A testimony in Jocob - This may signify the various ordinances, rites,
and ceremonies prescribed by the law; and the word law may mean the
moral law, or system of religious instruction, teaching them their duty
to God, to their neighbor, and to themselves. These were commanded to
the fathers - the patriarchs and primitive Hebrews, that they should
make them known to their children, who should make them known to the
generation that was to come, whose children should also be instructed
that they might declare them to their children; to the end that their
hope might be in God, that they might not forget his works, and might
keep his commandments: that they might not be as their fathers, but have
their heart right and their spirit steadfast with God, [Psa
78:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006). Five generations appear to be
mentioned above: 1. Fathers; 2. Their children; 3. The generation to
come; 4. And their children; 5. And their children. They were never to
lose sight of their history throughout all their generations. Some think
the testimony here may mean the tabernacle.

[Psalms 78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 78:9</span></span>

The children of Ephraim - turned back - This refers to some defeat of
the Ephraimites; and some think to that by the men of Gath, mentioned
[Ch1 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#021). R. D. Kimchi says this
defeat of the Ephraimites was in the desert; and although the story be
not mentioned in the law, yet it is written in the Books of the
Chronicles, where we read, on the occasion of "Zabad the Ephraimite, and
Shuthelah, etc., whom the men of Gath, who were born in the land, slew;
and Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to
comfort him," [Ch1 7:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#020) : but to
what defeat of the Ephraimites this refers is not certainly known;
probably the Israelites after the division of the two kingdoms are
intended.

[Psalms 78:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 78:10</span></span>

They kept not the covenant; of God - They abandoned his worship, both
moral and ritual. Thev acted like the Ephraimites in the above case, who
threw down their bows and arrows, and ran away.

[Psalms 78:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 78:12</span></span>

The field of Zoan - "In campo Taneos," Vugate. Tanis was the capital of
Pharaoh, where Moses wrought so many miracles. It was situated in the
Delta, on one of the most easterly branches of the Nile. It was
afterwards called Thanis; and from it the district was called the
Thanitic Canton. See Calmet. Dr. Shaw thinks Zoan was intended to
signify Egypt in general.

[Psalms 78:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 78:13</span></span>

He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through - The reader is
requested to consult the notes on the parallel passages marked in the
margin on this verse and [Psa
78:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014), etc., where all these
miracles are largely explained.

[Psalms 78:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 78:18</span></span>

By asking meat for their lust - לנפשם lenaphsham, "for their souls,"
i.e., for their lives; for they said in their hearts that the light
bread, the manna, was not sufficient to sustain their natural force, and
preserve their lives. It seems, however, from the expression, that they
were wholly carnal; that they had no spirituality of mind; they were
earthly, animal, and devilish.

[Psalms 78:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 78:22</span></span>

They believed not in God - After all the miracles they had seen, they
were not convinced that there was a Supreme Being! and, consequently,
they did not trust in his salvation - did not expect the glorious rest
which he had promised them. Their descendants in the present day are
precisely in this state. Multitudes of them disbelieve the Divine origin
of their law, and have given up all hopes of a Messiah.

[Psalms 78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 78:24</span></span>

The corn of heaven - The manna. It fell about their camp in the form of
seeds; and as it appeared to come down from the clouds, it was not
improperly termed heavenly corn, or heavenly grain, דגן שמים degan
shamayim. The word shamayim is frequently taken to express the
atmosphere.

[Psalms 78:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 78:25</span></span>

Man did eat angels' food - לחם אבירים אכל איש lechem abbirim achal ish,
"Man did eat the bread of the mighty ones;" or, each person ate, etc.
They ate such bread as could only be expected at the tables of the rich
and great, the best, the most delicate food. How little did this gross
people know of the sublime excellence of that which they called light
bread, and which they said their soul loathed; [Num
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#005)! It was a type of Jesus Christ
for so says St. Paul: "They all ate the same spiritual meat, and drank
the same spiritual drink," etc., [Co1
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003), [Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004). And our Lord calls himself "the
bread that came down from heaven, that giveth life unto the world," [Joh
6:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#031) : but a Jew sees nothing but
with the eyes of flesh. It is true their doctors or rabbins are full of
allegories, mysteries, and conceits; but they are, in general, such as
would disgrace the Cabinet des Fees, and would not be tolerated in the
nursery. O, how thick a veil hangs over their gross and hardened hearts.

[Psalms 78:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 78:26</span></span>

He caused an east wind to blow - See the note on [Num
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#031).

[Psalms 78:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 78:32</span></span>

For all this they sinned still - How astonishing is this! They were
neither drawn by mercies, nor awed by judgments! But we shall cease to
wonder at this, if we have a thorough acquaintance with our own hearts.

[Psalms 78:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 78:33</span></span>

Their days did he consume in vanity - By causing them to wander forty
years in the wilderness, vainly expecting an end to their labor, and the
enjoyment of the promised rest, which, by their rebellions, they had
forfeited.

[Psalms 78:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 78:34</span></span>

When he slew them - While his judgments were upon them, then they began
to humble themselves, and deprecate his wrath. When they saw some fall,
the rest began to tremble.

[Psalms 78:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 78:35</span></span>

That God was their rock - They recollected in their affliction that
Jehovah was their Creator, and their Father; the Rock, the Source, not
only of their being, but of all their blessings; or, that he was their
sole Protector.

And the high God their Redeemer - ואל עליון גאלם veel elyon goalam, "And
the strong God the Most High, their kinsman." That one who possessed the
right of redemption; the nearest akin to him who had forfeited his
inheritance; so the word originally means, and hence it is often used
for a redeemer. The Hebrew word גאל goel answers to the Greek σωτηρ, a
savior; and is given to the Lord Jesus Christ, the strong God, the Most
High, the Redeemer of a lost world. After this verse there is the
following Masoretic note: חצי הספר chatsi hassepher, "The middle of the
book." And thus the reader has arrived at the middle of the Psalter, a
book for excellence unparalleled.

[Psalms 78:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 78:36</span></span>

Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth - What idea could
such people have of God, whom they supposed they could thus deceive?
They promised well, they called him their God, and their fathers' God;
and told him how good, and kind, and merciful he had been to them. Thus,
their mouth flattered him. And they said that, whatever the Lord their
God commanded them to do, they would perform.

And they lied unto him - I think the Vulgate gives the true sense of the
Hebrew: Dilexerunt eum in ore suo; et lingua sua mentiti Bunt ei, -
"They loved him with their mouth; and they lied unto him with their
tongue." "That is," says the old Psalter, "thai sayde thai lufed God,
bot thai lighed, als thair dedes schewes; for thai do noght als thai
hight; for when God ceses to make men rad; than cese thai to do wele."

[Psalms 78:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">psa 78:37</span></span>

Their heart was not right - When the heart is wrong, the life is wrong;
and because their heart was not right with God, therefore they were not
faithful in his covenant.

[Psalms 78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 78:38</span></span>

But he, being full of compassion - Feeling for them as a father for his
children.

Forgave their iniquity - יחפר yechapper, made an atonement for their
iniquity.

And did not stir up all his wrath - Though they often grieved his
Spirit, and rebelled against him, yet he seldom punished them; and when
he did chastise them, it was as a tender and merciful Father. He did not
stir up all his wrath - the punishment was much less than the iniquity
deserved.

[Psalms 78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">psa 78:39</span></span>

He remembered that they were but flesh - Weak mortals. He took their
feeble perishing state always into consideration, and knew how much they
needed the whole of their state of probation; and therefore he bore with
them to the uttermost. How merciful is God!

A wind that passeth away, and cometh not again - I believe this to be a
bad translation and may be productive of error; as if when a man dies
his being were ended, and death were an eternal sleep. The original is,
רוח הולך ולא ישוב ruach holech velo yashub: and the translation should
be, "The spirit goeth away, and it doth not return." The present life is
the state of probation; when therefore the flesh - the body, fails, the
spirit goeth away into the eternal world, and returneth not hither
again. Now God, being full of compassion, spared them, that their
salvation might be accomplished before they went into that state where
there is no change; where the pure are pure still, and the defiled are
defiled still. All the Versions are right; but the polyglot translator
of the Syriac, rocho, has falsely put ventus, wind, instead of spiritus,
soul or spirit. The Arabic takes away all ambiguity: "He remembered that
they were flesh; and a spirit which, when it departs, does not again
return." The human being is composed of flesh and spirit, or body and
soul; these are easily separated, and, when separated, the body turns to
dust, and the spirit returns no more to animate it in a state of
probation. Homer has a saying very like that of the psalmist: -

Ανδρος δε ψυχη παλιν ελθειν ουτε ληἱστη,

Ουθ' ἑλετη, επει αρ κεν αμειψεται ἑρκος οδοντων.

IL. ix., ver., 408.

"But the soul of man returns no more;

nor can it be acquired nor caught after it has

passed over the barrier of the teeth."

Pope has scarcely given the passage its genuine meaning: -

"But from our lips the vital spirit fled

Returns no more to wake the silent dead."

And the Ossian-like version of Macpherson is but little better: "But the
life of man returns no more; nor acquired nor regained is the soul which
once takes its flight on the wind." What has the wind to do with the
ἑρκος οδοντων of the Greek poet?

Several similar sayings may be found among the Greek poets; but they all
suppose the materiality of the soul.

[Psalms 78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 78:41</span></span>

Limited the Holy One of Israel - The Chaldee translates, "And the Holy
One of Israel they signed with a sign." The Hebrew word התוו hithvu is
supposed to come from the root תוה tavah, which signifies to mark; and
hence the letter ת tau, which in the ancient Hebrew character had the
form of a cross X, had its name probably because it was used as a mark.
Mr. Bate observes that in hithpael it signifies to challenge or accuse;
as one who gives his quark or pledge upon a trial, and causes his
adversary to do the same. Here it most obviously means an insult offered
to God.

[Psalms 78:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">psa 78:44</span></span>

Turned their rivers into blood - See on [Exo
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020) (note).

[Psalms 78:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">psa 78:45</span></span>

He sent - flies - and frogs - See on [Exo
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#006) (note), and [Exo
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#024) (note).

[Psalms 78:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">psa 78:46</span></span>

The caterpillar and - the locust - See on [Exo
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013) (note).

[Psalms 78:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">psa 78:47</span></span>

He destroyed their vines with hail - Though the vine was never plentiful
in Egypt, yet they have some; and the wine made in that country is among
the most delicious. The leaf of the vine is often used by the Egyptians
of the present day for wrapping up their mince-meat, which they lay leaf
upon leaf, season it after their fashion, and so cook it, making it a
most exquisite sort of food, according to Mr. Maillet.

And their sycamore-trees - This tree was very useful to the ancient
Egyptians, as all their coffins are made of this wood; and to the
modern, as their barques are made of it. Besides, it produces a kind of
fig, on which the common people in general live; and Mr. Norden observes
that "they think themselves well regaled when they have a piece of
bread, a couple of sycamore figs, and a pitcher of water from the Nile."
The loss therefore of their vines and sycamore-trees must have been very
distressing to the Egyptians.

[Psalms 78:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">psa 78:48</span></span>

He gave up their cattle - See on [Exo
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023) (note).

[Psalms 78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 78:49</span></span>

By sending evil angels - This is the first mention we have of evil
angels. There is no mention of them in the account we have of the
plagues of Egypt in the Book of Exodus, and what they were we cannot
tell: but by what the psalmist says here of their operations, they were
the sorest plague that God had sent; they were marks or the fierceness
of his anger, wrath, indignation, and trouble. Some think the destroying
angel that slew all the first-born is what is here intended; but this is
distinctly mentioned in [Psa 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061). An
angel or messenger may be either animate or inanimate; a disembodied
spirit or human being; any thing or being that is an instrument sent of
God for the punishment or support of mankind.

[Psalms 78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">psa 78:54</span></span>

The border of his sanctuary - קדשו kodsho, "of his holy place," that is,
the land of Canaan, called afterwards the mountain which his right hand
had purchased; because it was a mountainous country, widely differing
from Egypt, which was a long, continued, and almost perfect level.

[Psalms 78:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">psa 78:57</span></span>

They were turned aside like a deceitful bow - The eastern bow, which
when at rest is in the form of a \[curved figure\], must be recurved, or
turned the contrary way, in order to be what is called bent and strung.
If a person who is unskilful or weak attempt to recurve and string one
of these bows, if he take not great heed it will spring back and regain
its quiescent position, and perhaps break his arm. And sometimes I have
known it, when bent, to start aside, and regain its quiescent position,
to my no small danger, and in one or two cases to my injury. This image
is frequently used in the sacred writings; but no person has understood
it, not being acquainted with the eastern bow \[curved figure\], which
must be recurved, or bent the contrary way, \[figure\] in order to be
proper for use. If not well made, they will fly back in discharging the
arrow. It is said of the bow of Jonathan, it turned not back, [Sa2
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#022), לא נשוג אחור lo nasog achor,
"did not twist itself backward." It was a good bow, one on which he
could depend. Hosea, [Hos 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#016),
compares the unfaithful Israelites to a deceitful bow; one that, when
bent, would suddenly start aside and recover its former position. We may
find the same passage in [Jer 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003). And
this is precisely the kind of bow mentioned by Homer, Odyss. xxi., which
none of Penelope's suitors could bend, called καμπυλα τοξα and αγκυλα
τοξα, the crooked bow in the state of rest; but τοξον παλιντονον, the
recurred bow when prepared for use. And of this trial of strength and
skill in the bending of the bow of Ulysses, none of the critics and
commentators have been able to make any thing, because they knew not the
instrument in question. On the τοξου θησις of Homer, I have written a
dissertation elsewhere. The image is very correct; these Israelites,
when brought out of their natural bent, soon recoiled, and relapsed into
their former state.

[Psalms 78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">psa 78:60</span></span>

He forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh - The Lord, offended with the
people, and principally with the priests, who had profaned his holy
worship, gave up his ark into the hands of the Philistines. And so true
it is that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, that he never returned
to it again. See [Sa1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001); 2 Samuel 6;
[Kg1 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#001); where the several removals
of the ark are spoken of, and which explain the remaining part of this
Psalm. Because God suffered the Philistines to take the ark, it is said,
[Psa 78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061) : "He delivered his
strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand;" and [Psa
78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067), that "he refused the tabernacle
of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim;" for Shiloh was in the
tribe of Ephraim the son of Joseph; and God did not suffer his ark to
return thither, but to go to Kirjath-jearim, which was in the tribe of
Benjamin, from thence to the house of Obed-edom: and so to Zion in the
tribe of Judah, as it follows, [Psa
78:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#068).

The tabernacle which Moses had constructed in the wilderness remained at
Shiloh even after the ark was taken by the Philistines and afterwards
sent to Kirjath-jearim. From Shiloh it was transported to Nob;
afterwards to Gibeon, apparently under the reign of Saul; and it was
there at the commencement of Solomon's reign, for this prince went
thither to offer sacrifices, [Kg1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#004).
From the time in which the temple was built, we know not what became of
the tabernacle of Moses: it was probably laid up in some of the chambers
of the temple. See Calmet.

[Psalms 78:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">psa 78:63</span></span>

Their maidens were not given to marriage - הוללו hullalu, were not
celebrated with marriage songs. It is considered a calamity in the east
if a maiden arrives at the age of twelve years without being sought or
given in marriage.

[Psalms 78:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">psa 78:64</span></span>

Their priests fell by the sword - Hophni and Phinehas, who were slain in
that unfortunate battle against the Philistines in which the ark of the
Lord was taken, [Sa1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011).

A Chaldee Targum on this passage says, "In the time in which the ark of
the Lord was taken by the Philistines, Hophni and Phinehas, the two
priests, fell by the sword at Shiloh; and when the news was brought,
their wives made no lamentation, for they both died the same day."

[Psalms 78:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">psa 78:65</span></span>

Then the Lord awaked - He seemed as if he had totally disregarded what
was done to his people, and the reproach that seemed to fall on himself
and his worship by the capture of the ark.

Like a mighty man - כגבור kegibbor, like a hero that shouteth by reason
of wine. One who, going forth to meet his enemy, having taken a
sufficiency of wine to refresh himself, and become a proper stimulus to
his animal spirits shouts - gives the war-signal for the onset;
impatient to meet the foe, and sure of victory. The idea is not taken
from the case of a drunken man. A person in such a state would be very
unfit to meet his enemy, and could have little prospect of conquest.

[Psalms 78:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">psa 78:66</span></span>

He smote his enemies in the hinder part - This refers to the hemorrhoids
with which he afflicted the Philistines. See the note on [Sa1
5:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#006) (note).

[Psalms 78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">psa 78:67</span></span>

He refused the tabernacle of Joseph - See the note on [Psa
78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060) (note).

[Psalms 78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">psa 78:69</span></span>

He built his sanctuary like high palaces - כמו רמים kemo ramim, which
several of the Versions understand of the monoceros or rhinoceros. The
temple of God at Jerusalem was the only one in the land, and stood as
prominent on Mount Zion as the horn of the unicorn or rhinoceros does
upon his snout. And there he established his ark, to go no more out as
long as the temple should last. Before this time it was frequently in a
migratory state, not only in the wilderness, but afterwards in the
promised land. See the notes on [Psa
78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060) (note).

[Psalms 78:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">psa 78:70</span></span>

He chose David - See the account [Sa1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011) (note), etc.

[Psalms 78:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#071)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_071">psa 78:71</span></span>

From following the ewes - Instances of this kind are not unfrequent in
the ancient Greek and Roman history. Croesus said that Gypes, who was
the first of his race, was a slave, and rose to sovereignty, succeeding
his predecessor, of whose sheep he had been the pastor.

[Psalms 78:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_072">psa 78:72</span></span>

So he fed them - Here David is mentioned as having terminated his reign.
He had fed the people, according to the integrity of his heart, for that
was ever disposed to do the will of God in the administration of the
kingdom: and his hand being skillful in war, he always led them out to
victory against their enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 79](psa079)

</div>
