<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa090)  [Next](psa092) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 91](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 91:0</span></span>

The safety of the godly man, and his confidence, [Psa
91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001), [Psa
91:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#002). How he is defended and
preserved, [Psa 91:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003). The angels of
God are his servants, [Psa 91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011), [Psa
91:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#012); and he shall tread on the necks
of his adversaries, [Psa 91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013). What
God says of, and promises to, such a person, [Psa
91:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014).

This Psalm has no title in the Hebrew; nor can it be determined on what
occasion or by whom it was composed. It is most likely by the author of
the preceding; and is written as a part of it, by fifteen of Kennicott's
and De Rossi's MSS., commencing before the repetition of the four last
words of the ninetieth. It is allowed to be one of the finest Psalms in
the whole collection. Of it Simon de Muis has said: "It is one of the
most excellent works of this kind which has ever appeared. It is
impossible to imagine any thing more solid, more beautiful, more
profound, or more ornamented. Could the Latin or any modern languages
express thoroughly all the beauties and elegancies as well of the words
as of the sentences, it would not be difficult to persuade the reader
that we have no poem, either in Greek or Latin, comparable to this
Hebrew ode."

[Psalms 91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 91:1</span></span>

He that dwelleth in the secret place - The Targum intimates that this is
a dialogue between David, Solomon, and Jehovah. Suppose we admit this, -
then

David asserts: "He who dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty," [Psa
91:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001).

Solomon answers: "I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my
fortress; my God, in him will I trust," [Psa
91:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#002).

David replies, and tells him what blessings he shall receive from God if
he abide faithful, [Psa 91:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003).

Then the Supreme Being is introduced, and confirms all that David had
spoken concerning Solomon, [Psa
91:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014) : and thus this sacred and
instructive dialogue ends.

In the secret place of the Most High - Spoken probably in reference to
the Holy of holies. He who enters legitimately there shall be covered
with the cloud of God's glory - the protection of the all-sufflcient
God. This was the privilege of the high priest only, under the law: but
under the new covenant all believers in Christ have boldness to enter
tnto the holiest by the blood of Jesus; and those who thus enter are
safe from every evil.

[Psalms 91:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 91:2</span></span>

I will say of the Lord - This is my experience: "He is my fortress, and
in him will I continually trust."

[Psalms 91:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 91:3</span></span>

Surely he shall deliver thee - If thou wilt act thus, then the God in
whom thou trustest will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, from
all the devices of Satan, and from all dangerous maladies. As the
original word, דבר dabar, signifies a word spoken, and deber, the same
letters, signifies pestilence; so some translate one way, and some
another: he shall deliver thee from the evil and slanderous word; he
shall deliver thee from the noisome pestilence - all blasting and
injurious winds, effluvia, etc.

[Psalms 91:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 91:4</span></span>

He shall cover thee with his feathers - He shall act towards thee as the
hen does to her brood, - take thee under his wings when birds of prey
appear, and also shelter thee from chilling blasts. This is a frequent
metaphor in the sacred writings; see [Psa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008) (note), [Psa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001) (note), [Psa
61:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#004) (note), and the notes on them.
The Septuagint has Εν τοις μεταφρενοις αυτου επισκιασει σοι· He will
overshadow thee between his shoulders; alluding to the custom of parents
carrying their weak or sick children on their backs, and having them
covered even there with a mantle. Thus the Lord is represented carrying
the Israelites in the wilderness. See [Deu
32:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011) (note), where the metaphor is
taken from the eagle.

His truth shall be thy shield and buckler - His revelation; his Bible.
That truth contains promises for all times and circumstances; and these
will be invariably fulfilled to him that trusts in the Lord. The
fulfillment of a promise relative to defense and support is to the soul
what the best shield is to the body.

[Psalms 91:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 91:5</span></span>

The terror by night - Night is a time of terrors, because it is a time
of treasons, plunder, robbery, and murder. The godly man lies down in
peace, and sleeps quietly, for he trusts his body, soul, and substance,
in the hand of God; and he knows that he who keepeth Israel neither
slumbers nor sleeps. It may also mean all spiritual foes, - the rulers
of the darkness of this world. I have heard the following petition in an
evening family prayer: "Blessed Lord, take us into thy protection this
night; and preserve us from disease, from sudden death, from the
violence of fire, from the edge of the sword, from the designs of wicked
men, and from the influence of malicious spirits!"

Nor for the arrow - The Chaldee translates this verse, "Thou shalt not
fear the demons that walk by night; nor the arrow of the angel of death
which is shot in the day time." Thou needest not to fear a sudden and
unprovided-for death.

[Psalms 91:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 91:6</span></span>

Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction
that wasteth at noonday - The rabbins supposed that the empire of death
was under two demons, one of which ruled by day, the other by night. The
Vulgate and Septuagint have - the noonday devil. The ancients thought
that there were some demons who had the power to injure particularly at
noonday. To this Theocritus refers, Id. 1: ver. 15: -

Ου θεμις, ω ποιμαν, το μεσαμβρινον, ου θεμις αμμιν

Συρισδεν· τον Πανα δεδοικαμες· η γαρ απ' αγρας

Τανικα κεκμακως αμπαυεται, εντι γε πικρος,

Και οἱ αει δριμεια χολα ποτι ῥινι καθηται.

"It is not lawful, it is not lawful, O shepherd, to play on the flute at
noonday: we fear Pan, who at that hour goes to sleep in order to rest
himself after the fatigues of the chase; then he is dangerous, and his
wrath easily kindled."

Lucan, in the horrible account he gives us of a grove sacred to some
barbarous power, worshipped with the most horrid rites, refers to the
same superstition: -

Lucus erat longo nunquam violatus ab aevo,

Non illum cultu populi propiore frequentant,

Sed cessere deis: medio cum Phoebus in axe est.

Aut coelum nox atra tenet, pavet ipse sacerdos

Accessus, dominumque timet deprendere luci.

Lucan, lib. iii., ver. 399.

"Not far away, for ages past, had stood

An old inviolated sacred wood:

The pious worshippers approach not near,

But shun their gods, and kneel with distant fear:

The priest himself, when, or the day or night

Rolling have reached their full meridian height,

Refrains the gloomy paths with wary feet,

Dreading the demon of the grove to meet;

Who, terrible to sight, at that fixed hour

Still treads the round about this dreary bower."

Rowe.

It has been stated among the heathens that the gods should be worshipped
at all times, but the demons should be worshipped at midday: probably
because these demons, having been employed during the night, required
rest at noonday and that was the most proper time to appease them. See
Calmet on this place. Both the Vulgate and Septuagint seem to have
reference to this superstition.

The Syriac understands the passage of a pestilential wind, that blows at
noonday. Aquila translates, of the bite of the noonday demon.

[Psalms 91:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 91:7</span></span>

A thousand shall fall at thy side - Calmet thinks this place should be
translated thus: "A thousand enemies may fall upon thee on one side, and
ten thousand may fall upon thee on thy right hand: but they shall not
come nigh thee to take away thy life." It is a promise of perfect
protection, and the utmost safety.

[Psalms 91:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 91:8</span></span>

The reward of the wicked - Thou shalt not only be safe thyself, but thou
shalt see all thy enemies discomfited and cast down.

[Psalms 91:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 91:9</span></span>

Because thou hast made the Lord - Seeing thou hast taken Jehovah, the
Most High, for thy portion and thy refuge, no evil shall come nigh thy
dwelling; thou shalt be safe in thy soul, body, household, and property,
[Psa 91:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#010). Every pious man may expect
such protection from his God and Father.

[Psalms 91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 91:11</span></span>

He shall give his angels charge over thee - Evil spirits may attempt to
injure thee; but they shall not be able. The angels of God shall have an
especial charge to accompany, defend, and preserve thee; and against
their power, the influence of evil spirits cannot prevail. These will,
when necessary, turn thy steps out of the wag of danger; ward it off
when it comes in thy ordinary path; suggest to thy mind prudent
counsels, profitable designs, and pious purposes; and thus minister to
thee as a child of God, and an heir of salvation.

To keep thee in all thy ways - The path of duty is the way of safety.

Thou canst not reasonably expect protection if thou walk not in the way
of obedience. Thy ways are the paths of duty, which God's word and
providence have marked out for thee. The way of sin is not thy way - thy
duty, thy interest. Keep in thy own ways, not in those of sin, Satan,
the world, and the flesh; and God will take care of thee.

[Psalms 91:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 91:12</span></span>

They shall bear thee up in their hands - Take the same care of thee as a
nurse does of a weak and tender child; lead thee, - teach thee to walk,
- lift thee up out of the way of danger, "lest thou shouldst dash thy
foot against a stone," receive any kind of injury, or be prevented from
pursuing thy path with safety and comfort.

Let us remember that it is God, whose these angels are; He gives them
charge from Him they receive their commission, - to Him they are
responsible for their charge. From God thou art to expect them; and for
their help he alone is to receive the praise. It is expressly said, He
shall give his angels charge; to show that they are not to be prayed to
nor praised but God alone, whose servants they are. See the note on [Mat
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#006).

[Psalms 91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 91:13</span></span>

Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder - Even the king of the forest
shall not be able to injure thee; should one of these attack thee, the
angels whom God sends will give thee an easy victory over him. And even
the asp, (פתן pethen), one of the most venomous of serpents, shall not
be able to injure thee.

The asp is a very small serpent, and peculiar to Egypt and Libya. Its
poison kills without the possibility of a remedy. Those who are bitten
by it die in about from three to eight hours; and it is said they die by
sleep, without any kind of pain. Lord Bacon says the asp is less painful
than all the other instruments of death. He supposes it to have an
affinity to opium, but to be less disagreeable in its operation. It was
probably an this account that Cleopatra, queen of Egypt, chose to die by
the asp, as she was determined to prevent the designs of Augustus, who
intended to have carried her captive to Rome to grace his triumph.

The dragon shalt thou trample - The תנין tannin, which we translate
dragon, means often any large aquatic animal; and perhaps here the
crocodile or alligator.

[Psalms 91:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 91:14</span></span>

Because he hath set his love upon me - Here the Most High is introduced
as confirming the word of his servant. He has fixed his love - his heart
and soul, on me.

Therefore will I deliver him - I will save him in all troubles,
temptations, and evils of every kind.

I will set him on high - I will place him out of the reach of all his
enemies. I will honor and ennoble him, because he hath known my name -
because he has loved, honored, and served me, and rendered me that
worship which is my due. He has known me to be the God of infinite mercy
and love.

[Psalms 91:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 91:15</span></span>

He shall call upon me - He must continue to pray; all his blessings must
come in this way, when he calls, I will answer him - I will give him
whatever is best for him.

I will be with him in trouble - Literally, I am with him. עמו אנכי immo
anochi; as soon as the trouble comes, I are there.

I will deliver him - For his good I may permit him to be exercised for a
time, but delivered he shall be.

And honor him - אכבדהו acabbedehu, "I will glorify him." I will load him
with honor; that honor that comes from God. I will even show to men how
highly I prize such.

[Psalms 91:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 91:16</span></span>

With long life - Literally, With length of days will I fill him up.

He shall neither live a useless life, nor die before his time. He shall
live happy and die happy.

And show him my salvation - ואראהו בשועתי vearehu bishuathi, "I will
make him see (or contemplate) in my salvation." He shall discover
infinite lengths, breadths, depths, and heights, in my salvation. He
shall feel boundless desires, and shall discover that I have provided
boundless gratifications for them. He shall dwell in my glory, and
throughout eternity increase in his resemblance to and enjoyment of me.
Thus shall it be done to the man whom the Lord delighteth to honor; and
he delights to honor that man who places his love on him. In a word, he
shall have a long life in this world, and an eternity of blessedness in
the world to come.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 92](psa092)

</div>
