<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa064)  [Next](psa066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 65:0</span></span>

God is praised for the fullilment of his promises, and for his mercy in
forgiving sins, [Psa 65:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001). He is
praised for the wonders that he works in nature, which all mankind must
acknowledge, [Psa 65:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004); for the
fertilizing showers which he sends upon the earth, and the abundance
thereby produced both for men and cattle, [Psa
65:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009).

The title, "To the chief Musician or conqueror, a Psalm and Song of
David." So the Hebrew; and, in effect, the Chaldee, Ethiopic, and best
copies of the Septuagint. The Arabic has, "A Psalm of David concerning
the transmigration of the people."

The Vulgate is singular: "A Psalm of David. A hymn of Jeremiah and
Ezekiel for the people of the transmigration, when they began to go
out," from Babylon, understood. This title is of no authority; it
neither accords with the subject of the Psalm, nor with the truth of
history. Calmet has very properly remarked that Jeremiah and Ezekiel
were never found together, to compose this Psalm, neither before at, nor
after the captivity. It should therefore be utterly rejected. In the
Complutensian edition Haggai is added to Jeremiah and Ezekiel, all with
equal propriety.

It is supposed to have been written after a great drought, when God had
sent a plentiful rain on the land. I rather think that there was no
direct drought or rain in the prophet's view, but a celebration of the
praises of God for his giving rain and fruitful seasons, and filling
men's mouths with food, and their hearts with gladness. There is a
particular providence manifested in the quantity of rain that falls upon
the earth, which can neither be too much admired nor praised.

[Psalms 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 65:1</span></span>

Praise waiteth for thee - Praise is silent or dumb for thee. Thou alone
art worthy of praise; all other perfections are lost in thine; and he
who considers thee aright can have no other subject of adoration.

Unto thee shall the vow be performed - All offerings and sacrifices
should be made to thee. All human spirits are under obligation to live
to and serve thee. All Jews and Christians, by circumcision and baptism,
belong to thee; and they are all bound to pay the vow of their
respective covenants to thee alone; and the spirit of this vow is, to
love thee with all their powers and to serve thee with a perfect heart
and willing mind, all the days of their life.

[Psalms 65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 65:2</span></span>

Unto thee shall all flesh come - All human beings should pray to God;
and from him alone the sufficient portion of human spirits is to be
derived. It is supposed to be a prediction of the calling of the
Gentiles to the faith of the Gospel of Christ. A minister, immensely
corpulent, began his address to God in the pulpit with these words: "O
thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come!" and most
unluckily laid a strong emphasis on All Flesh. The coincidence was
ominous; and I need not say, the people were not edified, for the effect
was ludicrous. I mention this fact, which fell under my own notice, to
warn those who minister in righteousness to avoid expressions which may
be capable, from a similar circumstance, of a ludicrous application. I
have known many good men who, to their no small grief, have been
encumbered with a preternatural load of muscles; an evil to be
deprecated and deplored.

[Psalms 65:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 65:3</span></span>

Iniquities prevail against me - This is no just rendering of the
original, דברי עונת גברו מני dibrey avonoth gaberu menni; "iniguitous
words have prevailed against me," or, "The words of iniquity are strong
against me." All kinds of calumnies, lies, and slanders have been
propagated, to shake my confidence, and ruin my credit.

Our transgressions, thou shalt purge them away - Whatsoever offenses we
have committed against thee, thou wilt pardon; תכפרם tecapperem, thou
wilt make atonement for them, when with hearty repentance and true faith
we turn unto thee. This verse has been abused to favor Antinomian
licentiousness. The true and correct translation of the former clause
will prevent this.

The old Scottish Version of this verse, in their singing Psalms, is most
execrable: -

"Iniquities, I must confess,

Prevail against me do:

And as for our trans-gres-sions

Them purge away wilt thou."

O David, if thou art capable of hearing such abominable doggerel
substituted for the nervous words thou didst compose by the inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, what must thou feel, if chagrin can affect the
inhabitants of heaven!

[Psalms 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 65:4</span></span>

Blessed is the man whom thou choosest - This is spoken in reference to
the priests who were chosen of God to minister at the tabernacle; and
who were permitted to approach, draw nigh, to the Divine Majesty by the
various offerings and sacrifices which they presented.

We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house - Though we are not
priests, and have not the great felicity to minister before thee in holy
things; yet we can worship at thy temple, feel the outpouring of thy
Spirit, and be made happy with the blessings which thou dispensest there
to thy true worshippers.

[Psalms 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 65:5</span></span>

By terrible things in righteousness - The Vulgate joins this clause to
the preceding verse: "Thy holy temple is wonderful in right eousness:
thou wilt hear us, O God of our salvation." But the psalmist may refer
to those wonderful displays of God's providence in the change of
seasons, and fertilization of the earth; and, consequently, in the
sustenance of all animal beings.

The confidence of all the ends of the earth - Thou art the hope of thy
people scattered through different parts of the world, and through the
isles of the sea. This passage is also understood of the vocation of the
Gentiles.

[Psalms 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 65:6</span></span>

Setteth fast the mountains - It is by thy strength they have been
raised, and by thy power they are girded about or preserved. He
represents the mountains as being formed and pitched into their proper
places by the mighty hand of God; and shows that they are preserved from
splitting, falling down, or mouldering away, as it were, by a girdle by
which they are surrounded. The image is very fine. They were hooped
about by the Divine power.

[Psalms 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 65:7</span></span>

Stilleth the noise of the seas - Thou art Sovereign over all the
operation of sea and land. Earthquakes are under thy control: so are the
flux and reflux of the sea; and all storms and tempests by which the
great deep is agitated. Even the headstrong multitude is under thy
control; for thou stillest the madness of the people.

[Psalms 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 65:8</span></span>

Are afraid at thy tokens - Thunder and lightning, storms and tempests,
eclipses and meteors, tornadoes and earthquakes, are proofs to all who
dwell even in the remotest parts of the earth, that there is a Supreme
Being who is wonderful and terrible in his acts. By these things an
eternal power and Godhead become manifest even to the most barbarous.
From this verse to the end of the Psalm there is a series of the finest
poetic imagery in the world.

The outgoings of the morning, etc. - The rising and setting sun, the
morning and evening twilight, the invariable succession of day and
night, are all ordained by thee, and contribute to the happiness and
continuance of man and beast. Or, All that fear thee praise thee in the
morning, when they go to their work, and in the evening, when they
return home, for thy great goodness manifested in the continuance of
their strength, and the success of their labor.

[Psalms 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 65:9</span></span>

Thou visitest the earth - God is represented as going through the whole
globe, and examining the wants of every part, and directing the clouds
how and where to deposit their fertilizing showers, and the rivers where
to direct their beneficial courses.

The river of God - Some think the Jordan is meant; and the visiting and
watering refer to rain after a long drought. But the clouds may be thus
denominated, which properly are the origin of rivers.

Thou preparest them corn - Or, Thou wilt prepare them corn, because
"thou hast provided for it." Thou hast made all necessary provision for
the fertilization of the earth. Thou hast endued the ground with a
vegetative power. Rains, dews, and the genial heat of the sun enable it
to put forth that power in providing grass for cattle, and corn for the
service of man.

[Psalms 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 65:10</span></span>

Thou waterest the ridges - In seedtime thou sendest that measure of rain
that is necessary, in order to prepare the earth for the plough; and
then, when the ridges are thrown into furrows, thou makest them soft
with showers, so as to prepare them for the expansion of the seed, and
the vegetation and developement of the embryo plant.

Thou blessest the springing thereof - Literally, Thou wilt bless its
germinations - its springing buds. Thou watchest over the young sprouts;
and it is by thy tender, wise, and provident care that the ear is
formed; and by thy bountiful goodness that mature grains fill the ear;
and that one produces thirty, sixty, or a hundred or a thousand fold.

[Psalms 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 65:11</span></span>

Thou crownest the year - A full and plentiful harvest is the crown of
the year; and this springs from the unmerited goodness of God. This is
the diadem of the earth; עטרת ittarta, Thou encirclest, as with a
diadem. A most elegant expression, to show the progress of the sun
through the twelve signs of the zodiac, producing the seasons, and
giving a sufficiency of light and heat alternately to all places on the
surface of the globe, by its north and south declination (amounting to
23 28' at the solstices) on each side of the equator. A more beautiful
image could not have been chosen; and the very appearance of the space
termed the zodiac on a celestial globe, shows with what propriety the
idea of a circle or diadem was conceived by this inimitable poet.

Thy paths drop fatness - מעגליך magaleycha, "thy orbits." The various
planets, which all have their revolutions within the zodiacal space, are
represented as contributing their part to the general fructification of
the year. Or perhaps the solar revolution through the twelve signs,
dividing the year into twelve parts or months, may be here intended; the
rains of November and February, the frosts and snows of December and
January, being as necessary for the fructification of the soil, as the
gentle showers of spring, the warmth of summer, and the heat and drought
of autumn. The earth's diurnal rotation on its axis, its annual
revolution in its orbit, and the moon's course in aecompanying the
earth, are all wheels or orbits of God, which drop fatness, or produce
fertility in the earth.

[Psalms 65:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 65:12</span></span>

The pastures of the wilderness - Even the places which are not
cultivated have their suffiency of moisture, so as to render them proper
places of pasturage for cattle. The terms wilderness and desert, in the
Sacred Writings, mean, in general, places not inhabited and
uncultivated, though abounding with timber, bushes, and herbage.

The little hills rejoice - Literally, The hills gird themselves with
exultation. The metaphor appears to be taken from the frisking of lambs,
bounding of kids, and dancing of shepherds and shepherdesses, in the
joy-inspiring summer season.

[Psalms 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 65:13</span></span>

The pastures are clothed with flocks - Cattle are seen in every plain,
avenue, and vista, feeding abundantly; and the valleys are clothed, and
wave with the richest harvests; and transports of joy are heard every
where in the cheerful songs of the peasantry, the singing of the birds,
the neighing of the horse, the lowing of the ox, and the bleating of the
sheep. Claudian uses the same image: -

Viridis amictus montium.

"The green vesture of the mountains."

Shout for joy, they also sing - They are not loud and unmeaning sounds,
they are both music and harmony in their different notes; all together
form one great concert, and the bounty of God is the subject which they
all celebrate. What an inimitable description! And yet the nervous
Hebrew is not half expressed, even by the amended translation and
paraphrase above.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 66](psa066)

</div>
