<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa092)  [Next](psa094) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 93](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 93:0</span></span>

The universal government of God, [Psa
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001), [Psa
93:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002); the opposition to that
government, [Psa 93:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003), [Psa
93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004); the truth of God's testimonies,
[Psa 93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005).

This Psalm has no title either in the Hebrew or Chaldee. The Vulgate,
Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic, state it to be "A song of praise of
David for the day preceding the Sabbath, when the earth was founded;"
but in such a title there is no information on which any man can rely.
This Psalm is written as a part of the preceding in twelve of
Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. It was probably written at the close of
the captivity by the Levites, descendants of Moses.

[Psalms 93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 93:1</span></span>

The Lord reigneth - He continues to govern every thing he has created;
and he is every way qualified to govern all things, for he is clothed
with majesty and with strength - dominion is his, and he has supreme
power to exercise it; and he has so established the world that nothing
can be driven out of order; all is ruled by him. Nature is his agent: or
rather, nature is the sum of the laws of his government; the operations
carried on by the Divine energy, and the effects resulting from those
operations.

He hath girded himself - The girding with strength refers to the girding
in order to strengthen the loins, arms, knees, etc. When a Hindoo is
about to set off on a journey, to lift a burden, or to do something that
requires exertion, he binds firmly his loose upper garment round his
loins - Ward.

[Psalms 93:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 93:2</span></span>

Thy throne is established of old - There never was a time in which God
did not reign, in which he was not a supreme and absolute Monarch; for
he is from everlasting. There never was a time in which he was not;
there never can be a period in which he shall cease to exist.

[Psalms 93:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 93:3</span></span>

The floods have lifted up - Multitudes of people have confederated
against thy people; and troop succeeds troop as the waves of the sea
succeed each other.

[Psalms 93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 93:4</span></span>

The Lord - is mightier than the noise of many waters - Greater in
strength than all the peoples and nations that can rise up against him.

Mighty waves of the sea - Even the most powerful empires can prevail
nothing against him; therefore those who trust in him have nothing to
fear.

[Psalms 93:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 93:5</span></span>

Thy testimonies are very sure - Thou wilt as surely fulfill thy word as
thou wilt keep possession of thy throne.

Holiness becometh thine house - Thy nature is holy, all thy works are
holy, and thy word is holy; therefore, thy house - thy Church should be
holy. The building itself should be sanctified - should be so
consecrated to thy worship alone, that it shall never be employed in any
other service. The ministers of this Church should be holy, the members
holy, the ordinances holy; its faith, its discipline, and its practice
holy. And this at all times, and in all circumstances; for holiness
becometh thine house-for ever," לארך ימים le-orech yamim, for length of
days. During the whole lapse of time; till the sun and moon shall be no
more. The old Psalter says the house of God is man's saule; and of this
house holiness is נאוה naavah, "the ornament;" it produces that meek and
quiet spirit which is in the sight of God of great price. No decoration
of person nor simplicity of dress can supply the place of this heavenly
clothing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 94](psa094)

</div>
