<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa012)  [Next](psa014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 13:0</span></span>

This Psalm contains the sentiments of an afflicted soul that earnestly
desires succor from the Lord. The psalmist complains of delay, [Psa
13:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md); prays for light and comfort,
because he finds himself on the brink of death, [Psa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md); dreads the revilings of his
enemies, [Psa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md); anticipates a
favorable answer, and promises thanksgiving, [Psa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md), [Psa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md).

There is nothing particular in the inscription. The Psalm is supposed to
have been written during the captivity, and to contain the prayers and
supplications of the distressed Israelites, worn out with their long and
oppressive bondage.

[Psalms 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 13:1</span></span>

How long wilt thou forget me - The words עד אנה ad anah, to what length,
to what time, translated here how long? are four times repeated in the
two first verses, and point out at once great dejection and extreme
earnestness of soul.

Hide thy face from me? - How long shall I be destitute of a clear sense
of thy approbation?

[Psalms 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 13:2</span></span>

Take counsel in my soul - I am continually framing ways and means of
deliverance; but they all come to naught, because thou comest not to my
deliverance. When a soul feels the burden and guilt of sin, it tries
innumerable schemes of self-recovery; but they are all useless. None but
God can speak peace to a guilty conscience.

Mine enemy be exalted - Satan appears to triumph while the soul lies
under the curse of a broken law.

[Psalms 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 13:3</span></span>

Consider and hear me - Rather, answer me. I have prayed; I am seeking
thy face I am lost without thee; I am in darkness; my life draws nigh to
destruction; if I die unforgiven, I die eternally. O Lord my God,
consider this; hear and answer, for thy name's sake.

[Psalms 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 13:4</span></span>

Let mine enemy say - Satan's ordinary method in temptation is to excite
strongly to sin, to blind the understanding and inflame the passions;
and when he succeeds, he triumphs by insults and reproaches. None so
ready then to tell the poor soul how deeply, disgracefully, and
ungratefully it has sinned! Reader, take heed.

When I am moved - When moved from my steadfastness and overcome by sin.
O what desolation is made by the fall of a righteous soul! Itself
covered with darkness and desolation, infidels filled with scoffing, the
Church clad in mourning, the Spirit of God grieved, and Jesus crucified
afresh, and put to an open shame! O God, save the pious reader from such
wreck and ruin!

[Psalms 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 13:5</span></span>

But I have trusted in thy mercy - Thou wilt not suffer me to fall; or if
I have fallen, wilt thou not, for his sake who died for sinners, once
more lift up the light of thy countenance upon me? Wilt thou not cover
my sin?

My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation - There is no true joy but of
the heart; and the heart cannot rejoice till all guilt is taken away
from the conscience.

[Psalms 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 13:6</span></span>

I will sing unto the Lord - That heart is turned to God's praise which
has a clear sense of God's favor.

Because he hath dealt bountifully with me - כי גמל עלי ki gamel alai,
because he hath recompensed me. My sorrows were deep, long continued,
and oppressive, but in thy favor is life. A moment of this spiritual joy
is worth a year of sorrow! O, to what blessedness has this godly sorrow
led! He has given me the oil of joy for the spirit of heaviness, and the
garments of praise for mourning.

The old MS. Psalter, which I have so frequen,tly mentioned and quoted,
was written at least four hundred years ago, and written probably in
Scotland, as it is in the Scottish dialect. That the writer was not
merely a commentator, but a truly religious man, who was well acquainted
with the travail of the soul, and that faith in the Lord Jesus Christ
which brings peace to the troubled heart, is manifested from various
portions of his comment. To prove this I shall, I think I may say, favor
the reader with another extract from this Psalm on the words, "How long
wilt thou forget me," etc., [Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md).
I have only to observe that with this commentator a true penitent, one
who is deeply in earnest for his salvation, is called a "perfyte man";
i.e., one wholly given up to God.

How lang lord for getes thu me in the endyng? How lang o way turnes thou
thi face fro me? The voice of haly men that covaytes and yernes the
comyng of Iehu Crist, that thai might lyf with hym in ioy; and pleynaund
tham of delaying. And sais, Lord how lang for getes the me in the
endyng? That I covayte to haf and hald. That es how lang delayes thu me
fra the syght of Iehu Crist, that es ryght endyng of myn entent. And how
lang turnes thu thi face fra me? that es, qwen wil thu gif me perfyte
Knawing of the? This wordes may nane say sothly, bot a perfyte man or
woman, that has gedyrd to gydir al the desyres of thair Saule, and with
the nayle of luf fested tham in Iehu Crist. Sa tham thynk one hour of
the day war our lang to dwel fra hym; for tham langes ay til hym; bot
tha that lufs noght so, has no langyng that he come: for thair
conscience sais thaim, that thai haf noght lufed hym als that suld have
done."

The language of true Christian experience has been the same in all times
and nations. "But he that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love;"
and to such this is strange language.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 14](psa014.md)

</div>
