<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa065)  [Next](psa067.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 66:0</span></span>

The psalmist exhorts all to praise God for the wonders he has wrought,
[Psa 66:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001.md); calls on Israel to
consider his mighty acts in behalf of their fathers, [Psa
66:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005.md); his goodness in their own
behalf [Psa 66:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#008.md); he resolves to
pay his vows to God, and offer his promised sacrifices, [Psa
66:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013.md); calls on all to hear what
God had done for his soul, [Psa
66:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#015.md).

There is nothing particular in the title of the Psalm. It is not
attributed to David either by the Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac, Septuagint,
Vulgate, or Ethiopic. The Arabic alone prefixes the name of David. The
Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic, call it a psalm of the
resurrection: but for this there is no authority. By many of the
ancients it is supposed to be a celebration of the restoration from the
Babylonish captivity. Others think it commemorates the deliverance of
Israel from Egypt, their introduction into the Promised Land, and the
establishment of the worship of God in Jerusalem.

[Psalms 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 66:1</span></span>

Make a joyfull noise - Sing aloud to God, all ye lands - all ye people
who, from different parts of the Babylonish empire, are now on return to
your own land.

[Psalms 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 66:2</span></span>

The honor of his name - Let his glorious and merciful acts be the
subject of your songs.

[Psalms 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 66:3</span></span>

How terrible art thou - Consider the plagues with which he afflicted
Egypt before he brought your fathers from their captivity, which obliged
all his enemies to submit.

Thine enemies submit themselves - Literally, lie unto thee. This was
remarkably the case with Pharaoh and the Egyptians. They promised again
and again to let the people go, when the hand of the Lord was upon them:
and they as frequently falsified their word.

[Psalms 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 66:4</span></span>

All the earth - The whole land shall worship thee. There shall no more
an idol be found among the tribes of Israel. This was iterally true.
After the Babylonish captivity the Israelites never relapsed into
idolatry.

Selah - Remark it: this is a well attested truth.

[Psalms 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 66:5</span></span>

Come and see the works of God - Let every man lay God's wonderful
dealings with us to heart; and compare our deliverance from Babylon to
that of our fathers from Egypt.

[Psalms 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 66:6</span></span>

He turned the sea into dry land - This was a plain miracle: no human art
or contrivance could do this. Even in the bed of the waters They did
rejoice in him. We have not less cause to praise and be thankful.

[Psalms 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 66:7</span></span>

Be ruleth by his power - His omnipotence is employed to support his
followers, and cast down his enemies.

His eyes behold the nations - He sees what they purpose, what they
intend to do; and what they will do, if he restrain them not.

Let not the rebellious exalt themselves - They shall not succeed in
their designs: they have their own aggrandizement in view, but thou wilt
disappoint and cast them down.

Selah - Mark this. It is true.

[Psalms 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 66:8</span></span>

O bless our God - Who have so much cause as you to sing praises to the
Lord? Hear what he has done for you:

[Psalms 66:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 66:9</span></span>

Which holdeth our soul in life - Literally, "he who placeth our soul
בחיים bachaiyim, in lives." We are preserved alive, have health of body,
and feel the life of God in our hearts.

And suffereth not her feet to be moved - Keeps us steadfast in his
testimonies. We have our life, our liberty, and our religion. O, what
hath the Lord wrought for us! "Make, therefore, the voice of his praise
to be heard." Let God and man know you are thankful.

[Psalms 66:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 66:10</span></span>

For thou, O God, hast proved us - This is a metaphor taken from melting
and refining metals; afflictions and trials of various kinds are
represented as a furnace where ore is melted, and a crucible where it is
refined. And this metaphor is used especially to represent cases where
there is doubt concerning the purity of the metal, the quantity of
alloy, or even the nature or kind of metal subjected to the trial. So
God is said to try the Israelites that he might know what was in them;
and whether they would keep his testimonies: and then, according to the
issue, his conduct towards them would appear to be founded on reason and
justice.

[Psalms 66:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 66:11</span></span>

Thou broughtest us into the net - This refers well to the case of the
Israelites, when, in their departure from Egypt, pursued by the
Egyptians, having the Red Sea before them, and no method of escape,
Pharaoh said, "The wilderness hath shut them in, - they are entangled;"
comparing their state to that of a wild beast in a net.

Affliction upon our loins - Perhaps this alludes to that sharp pain in
the back and loins which is generally felt on the apprehension of sudden
and destructive danger.

[Psalms 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 66:12</span></span>

Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads - Thou hast permitted us to
fall under the dominion of our enemies; who have treated us as broken
infantry are when the cavalry dashes among their disordered ranks,
treading all under the horses' feet.

We went through fire and through water - Through afflictions of the most
torturing and overwhelming nature. To represent such, the metaphors of
fire and water are often used in Scripture. The old Psalter considers
these trials as a proof of the uprightness of those who were tried - We
passid thrugh fire and watir: that is, thurgh wa and wele, as a man that
leves noght his waye for hete na for kald, for dry na for wette; and
thou out lede us fra tribulacyon intill koling (cooling) that is, in
till endles riste, that we hope to hafe after this travell.

Wealthy place - Well watered place, to wit, the land of Judea.

[Psalms 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 66:13</span></span>

I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings - Now that thou hast
restored us to our own land, and established us in it, we will establish
thy worship, and offer all the various kinds of sacrifices required by
thy law.

I will pay thee my vows - We often vowed, if thou wouldst deliver us
from our bondage, to worship and serve thee alone: now thou hast heard
our prayers, and hast delivered us; therefore will we fulfill our
engagements to thee. The old Psalter gives this a pious turn: - I sall
yelde till the my woues, that is, the vowes of louying (praising) the;
whilk vowes my lipes divisid sayand, that I am noght, and thou arte all:
and I hafe nede of the, noght thou of me. This is a right distinction -
It is certainly a good distinction, and it is strictly true. The
allsufficient God needs not his creatures.

[Psalms 66:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 66:14</span></span>

When I was in trouble - This is generally the time when good resolutions
are formed, and vows made; but how often are these forgotten when
affliction and calamity are removed!

[Psalms 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 66:15</span></span>

I will offer, etc. - Thou shalt have the best of the herd and of the
fold; the lame and the blind shall never be given to thee for sacrifice.

The incense of rams - The fine effluvia arising from the burning of the
pure fat.

[Psalms 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 66:16</span></span>

Come and hear, all ye that fear God - While in captivity, the psalmist
had sought the Lord with frequent prayer for his own personal salvation,
and for the deliverance of the people; and God blessed him, heard his
prayer, and turned the captivity. Now that he is returned in safety, he
is determined to perform his vows to the Lord; and calls on all them
that fear their Maker, who have any religious reverence for him, to
attend to his account of the Lord's gracious dealings with him. He
proposes to tell them his spiritual experience, what he needed, what he
earnestly prayed for, and what God has done for him. Thus he intended to
teach them by example, more powerful always than precept, however
weighty in itself, and impressively delivered.

[Psalms 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 66:17</span></span>

I cried unto him with my mouth - My prayer was fervent; he heard and
answered; and my tongue celebrated his mercies; and he as graciously
received my thanksgiving, as he compassionately heard my prayer.

[Psalms 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 66:18</span></span>

If I regard iniquity in my heart - "If I have seen (ראיתי raithi)
iniquity in my heart," if I have known it was there, and encouraged it;
if I pretended to be what I was not; if I loved iniquity, while I
professed to pray and be sorry for my sin; the Lord, אדני Adonai, my
Prop, Stay, and Supporter, would not have heard, and I should have been
left without help or support.

[Psalms 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 66:19</span></span>

Verily God hath heard me - A sure proof that my prayer was upright, and
my heart honest, before him.

[Psalms 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 66:20</span></span>

Blessed be God - I therefore praise God, who has not turned aside my
prayer, and who has not withheld his mercy from me. Thus he told them
what God had done for his soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 67](psa067.md)

</div>
