<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa072)  [Next](psa074.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 73](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 73:0</span></span>

The psalmist speaks of God's goodness to his people, [Psa
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001.md); shows how much he was stumbled
at the prosperity of the wicked, and describes their state, [Psa
73:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002.md); details the process of the
temptation, and the pain he suffered in consequence, [Psa
73:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013.md); shows how he was delivered,
and the dismal reverse of the state of the once prosperous ungodly man,
by which his own false views were corrected, [Psa
73:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017.md); his great confidence in God,
and the good consequences of it, [Psa
73:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023.md).

This is the commencement of the Third Book of the Psalter; and the Psalm
before us has for title, A Psalm of Asaph; or, as the margin has it, A
Psalm for Asaph. The title in the Hebrew is מזמור לאסף mizmor leasaph;
"A Psalm of Asaph:" and it is likely that this Asaph was the composer of
it; that he lived under the Babylonish captivity; and that he published
this Psalm to console the Israelites under bondage, who were greatly
tried to find themselves in such outward distress and misery, while a
people much more wicked and corrupt than they, were in great prosperity,
and held them in bondage.

[Psalms 73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 73:1</span></span>

Truly God is good to Israel - Captives as they were, they still had many
blessings from God; and they had promises of deliverance, which must be
fulfilled in due time.

Such as are of a clean heart - Those who have a clean heart must have
inward happiness: and, because they resemble God, they can never be
forsaken by him.

[Psalms 73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 73:2</span></span>

My feet were almost gone - I had nearly given up my confidence. I was
ready to find fault with the dispensations of providence; and thought
the Judge of all the earth did not do right.

[Psalms 73:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 73:3</span></span>

I was envious at the foolish - I saw persons who worshipped not the true
God, and others who were abandoned to all vices, in possession of every
temporal comfort, while the godly were in straits, difficulties, and
affliction. I began then to doubt whether there was a wise providence;
and my mind became irritated. It seems to have been a maxim among the
ancient heathens, Θεου ονειδος τους κακους ευδαιμονειν, "The prosperity
of the wicked is a reproach to the gods." But they had no just
conception of a state of future rewards and punishments. Besides, man
could not bear prosperity. If men had uninterrupted comforts here,
perhaps not one soul would ever seek a preparation for heaven. Human
trials and afflictions, the general warfare of human life, are the
highest proof of a providence as benevolent as it is wise. Were the
state of human affairs different from what it is, hell would be more
thickly peopled; and there would be fewer inhabitants in glory. There is
reason to doubt whether there would be any religion upon earth had we
nothing but temporal prosperity. Indeed, all the following verses are
proofs of it.

[Psalms 73:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 73:4</span></span>

No bands in their death - Many of the godly have sore conflicts at their
death. Their enemy then thrusts sore at them that they may fall; or that
their confidence in their God may be shaken. But of this the ungodly
know nothing. Satan will not molest them; he is sure of his prey; they
are entangled, and cannot now break their nets; their consciences are
seared, they have no sense of guilt. If they think at all of another
world, they presume on that mercy which they never sought, and of which
they have no distinct notion. Perhaps, "they die without a sigh or a
groan; and thus go off as quiet as a lamb" - to the slaughter.

[Psalms 73:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 73:6</span></span>

Pride compasseth them about as a chain - Perhaps there is an allusion
here to the office which some of them bore. Chains of gold, and golden
rings, were ensigns of magistracy and civil power. As these chains
encompassed their necks, or the rings their wrists and fingers, as the
signs of the offices in virtue of which they acted; so חמס chamas,
violence, oppressive conduct, encompassed them. They made no other use
of their great power, than to oppress the poor and the needy; and to
drive things to extremities. The Chaldee, instead of a chain, represents
this as a crown or diadem, which they had formed out of the plunder of
the poor and defenseless.

[Psalms 73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 73:7</span></span>

Their eyes stand out with fatness - "Their countenance is changed
because of fatness." - Chaldee. By fatness, or corpulency, the natural
lines of the face are changed, or rather obliterated. The characteristic
distinctions are gone; and we see little remaining besides the human
hog.

They have more than heart could wish - I doubt this translation. Whose
heart ever said, I have enough, which had not its portion with God? It
would be more literal to say, "They surpass the thoughts of their
heart." They have more than they expected, though not more than they
wish.

[Psalms 73:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 73:8</span></span>

They are corrupt - ימיקו yamiku, they mock, act dissolutely.

And speak wickedly concerning oppression - They vindicate excessive acts
of government: they push justice to its rigour. They neither show
equity, lenity, nor mercy; they are cruel, and they vindicate their
proceedings.

[Psalms 73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 73:9</span></span>

Set their mouth against the heavens - They blaspheme God, ridicule
religion, mock at Providence, and laugh at a future state.

Their tongue walketh through the earth - They find fault with every
thing; they traduce the memory of the just in heaven, and ridicule the
saints that are upon earth. They criticize every dispensation of God.

[Psalms 73:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 73:10</span></span>

Therefore his people return hither - There are very few verses in the
Bible that have been more variously translated than this; and, like the
man in the fable, they have blown the hot to cool it, and the cold to
warm it. It has been translated, "Therefore God's people fall off to
them; and thence they reap no small advantage." And, "Therefore let his
people come before them; and waters in full measure would be wrung out
from them." That is, "Should God's people come before them, they would
squeeze them to the utmost; they would wring out all the juice in their
bodies." The Chaldee has, "Therefore, are they turned against the people
of the Lord, that they may bruise and beat them with mallets; that they
may pour out to them abundance of tears." The Vulgate, "Therefore shall
my people return here, and days of abundance shall be found by them."
The Septuagint is the same. The Ethiopic, Arabic, and Syriac, nearly the
same. The Hebrew text is, לכן ישוב עמו הלם ומי מלא ימצו למו lachen
yashub ammo (עמי ammi) halom; umey male yimmatsu lamo; "Therefore shall
my people be converted, where they shall find abundance of waters." That
is, The people, seeing the iniquity of the Babylonians, and feeling
their oppressive hand, shall be converted to me; and I shall bring them
to their own land, where they shall find an abundance of all the
necessaries of life. I believe this to be the meaning; and thus we find
their afflictions were sanctified to them; for they obliged them to
return to God, and then God caused them to return to their own land. The
Vulgate translates ומי מלא umey male, "abundance of waters," by et dies
pleni, "and days of plenty;" for it has read ימי yemey, days, for ומי
umey, and waters. Almost all the Versions support this reading; but it
is not acknowledged by any MS. The old Psalter is here mutilated.

[Psalms 73:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 73:11</span></span>

They say, How doth God know? - My people are so stumbled with the
prosperity of the wicked, that they are ready in their temptation to
say, "Surely, God cannot know these things, or he would never dispense
his favors thus." Others consider these words as the saying of the
wicked: "We may oppress these people as we please, and live as we list;
God knows nothing about it."

[Psalms 73:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 73:12</span></span>

These are the ungodly - The people still speak. It is the ungodly that
prosper, the irreligious and profane.

[Psalms 73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 73:13</span></span>

I have cleansed my heart in vain - It is no advantage to us to worship
the true God, to walk according to the law of righteousness, and keep
the ordinances of the Most High.

[Psalms 73:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 73:14</span></span>

For all the day long have I been plagued - Far from enjoying worldly
prosperity, we are not only poor, but we are afflicted also; and every
succeeding day brings with it some new trouble.

[Psalms 73:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 73:15</span></span>

If I say, I will speak thus - I have at last discovered that I have
reasoned incorrectly; and that I have the uniform testimony of all thy
children against me. From generation to generation they have testified
that the Judge of all the earth does right; they have trusted in thee,
and were never confounded. They also met with afflictions and sore
trials, but thou didst bring them safely through all, didst sustain them
in the worst, and sanctifiedst the whole to their eternal good.

[Psalms 73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 73:16</span></span>

When I thought to know this - When I reviewed the history of our
fathers, I saw that, though thou hadst from time to time hidden thy face
because of their sins, yet thou hadst never utterly abandoned them to
their adversaries; and it was not reasonable to conclude that thou
wouldst do now what thou hadst never done before; and yet the
continuance of our captivity, the oppressive hardships which we suffer,
and the small prospect there is of release, puzzle me again. These
things have been very painful to me.

[Psalms 73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 73:17</span></span>

Until I went into the sanctuary - Until, in the use of thy ordinances, I
entered into a deep consideration of thy secret counsels, and considered
the future state of the righteous and the wicked; that the unequal
distribution of temporal good and evil argued a future judgment; that
the present is a state of trial; and that God exercises his followers
according to his godly wisdom and tender mercy. Then light sprang up in
my mind, and I was assured that all these exercises were for our
benefit, and that the prosperity of the wicked here was a prelude to
their destruction. And this I saw to be their end.

That this Psalm was written during the captivity, there is little room
to doubt. How then can the psalmist speak of the sanctuary? There was
none at Babylon; and at Jerusalem it had been long since destroyed?
There is no way to solve this difficulty but by considering that מקדשי
mikdeshey may be taken in the sense of holy places - places set apart
for prayer and meditation. And that the captives had such places in them
captivity, there can be no doubt; and the place that is set apart to
meet God in, for prayer, supplication, confession of sin, and
meditation, is holy unto the Lord; and is, therefore, his sanctuary,
whether a house or the open field. Calmet thinks by holy meditations a
view of the Divine secrets, to which he refers, [Psa
73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024.md), is here meant.

[Psalms 73:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 73:18</span></span>

Thou didst set them on slippery places - Affluence is a slippery path;
few have ever walked in it without falling. It is possible to be
faithful in the unrighteous mammon, but it is very difficult. No man
should desire riches; for they bring with them so many cares and
temptations as to be almost unmanageabe. Rich men, even when pious, are
seldom happy; they do not enjoy the consolations of religion. A good
man, possessed of very extensive estates, unblamable in his whole
deportment, once said to me: "There must be some strange malignity in
riches thus to keep me in continual bondage, and deprive me of the
consolations of the Gospel." Perhaps to a person to whom his estates are
a snare, the words of our Lord may be literally applicable: "Sell what
thou hast, and give to the poor; and thou shalt have treasure in heaven:
and come, take up thy cross, and follow me." But he went away sorrowful,
for he had great possessions! May we not then say with the psalmist,
Surely thou digest set them in slippery places, etc.?

[Psalms 73:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 73:19</span></span>

Are they brought into desolation - This is often a literal fact. I have
known several cases where persons, very rich, have by sudden losses been
brought into desolation as in a moment; in consequence of which they
were utterly consumed in terrors.

[Psalms 73:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 73:20</span></span>

As a dream when one awaketh - So their goods fled away. Their possession
was a dream - their privation, real.

Thou shalt despise their image - While destitute of true religion,
whatever appearance they had of greatness, nobility, honor, and
happiness; yet in the sight of God they had no more than the ghost or
shade of excellence which God is said here to despise. Who would be rich
at such risk and dishonor?

[Psalms 73:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 73:21</span></span>

Thus may heart was grieved - The different views which I got of this
subject quite confounded me; I was equally astonished at their sudden
overthrow and my own ignorance. I felt as if I were a beast in
stupidity. I permitted my mind to be wholly occupied with sensible
things, like the beasts that perish and did not look into a future
state; nor did I consider, nor submit to, the wise designs of an
unerring Providence.

[Psalms 73:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 73:23</span></span>

I am continually with thee - I now see that myself and my people are
under thy guardian care; that we are continually upheld by thee; and
while in thy right hand, we shall not be utterly cast down.

[Psalms 73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 73:24</span></span>

Thou shalt guide me with thy counsel - After we have suffered awhile,
receiving directions and consolations from thy good Spirit, by means of
thy prophets, who are in the same captivity with ourselves; thou wilt
grant us deliverance, restore us to our own land, and crown us with
honor and happiness. Any sincere follower of God may use these words in
reference to this and the coming world. Thy counsel - thy Word and
Spirit, shall guide me through life; and when I have done and suffered
thy righteous will, thou wilt receive me into thy eternal glory.

[Psalms 73:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 73:25</span></span>

Whom have I in heaven but thee? - The original is more emphatic: מי לי
בשמים ועמך לא חפצתי בארץ mi li bashshamayim; veimmecha lo chaphatsti
baarets. "Who is there to me in the heavens? And with thee I have
desired nothing in the earth." No man can say this who has not taken God
for his portion in reference to both worlds.

[Psalms 73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 73:26</span></span>

My flesh - faileth - I shall soon die: and my heart - even my natural
courage, will fail; and no support but what is supernatural will then be
available. Therefore, he adds:

God is the strength of my heart - Literally, the rock of my heart.

And my portion - Allusion is here made to the division of the promised
land. I ask no inheritance below; I look for one above. I do not look
for this in the possession of any place; it is God alone that can
content the desires and wishes of an immortal spirit. And even this
would not satisfy, had I not the prospect of its being for ever, לעולם
leolum, "to eternity!'

[Psalms 73:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 73:27</span></span>

They that are far from thee shall perish - The term perish is generally
used to signify a coming to nothing, being annihilated; and by some it
is thus applied to the finally impenitent, they shall all be
annihilated. But where is this to be found in the Scriptures? In no
part, properly understood. In the new heavens and the new earth none of
the wicked shall be found; for therein dwells righteousness - nothing
but God and righteous spirits; but at the same time the wicked shall be
in their own place. And to suppose that they shall be annihilated, is as
great a heresy, though scarcely so absurd, as to believe that the pains
of damnation are emendatory, and that hellfire shall burn out. There is
presumptive evidence from Scripture to lead us to the conclusion, that
if there be not eternal punishment, glory will not be eternal; as the
same terms are used to express the duration of both. No human spirit
that is not united to God can be saved. Those who are Far from Thee
shall perish - they shall be lost, undone, ruined, and that without
remedy. Being separated from God by sin, they shall never be rejoined;
the great gulf must be between them and their Maker eternally.

All them that go a whoring from thee - That is, all that worship false
gods; all idolaters. This is the only meaning of the word in such a
connection. I have explained this elsewhere.

[Psalms 73:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 73:28</span></span>

It is good for me to draw near - We have already seen that those who are
far off shall perish; therefore, it is ill for them. Those who draw near
- who come in the true spirit of sacrifice, and with the only available
offering, the Lord Jesus, shall be finally saved; therefore, it is good
for them.

I have put my trust in the Lord God - I confide in Jehovah, my Prop and
Stay. I have taken him for my portion.

That I may declare all thy works - That I may testify to all how good it
is to draw nigh to God; and what a sufficient portion he is to the soul
of man.

The Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic, add, in the gates of the
daughter of Sion. These words appear to make a better finish; but they
are not acknowledged by any Hebrew MS.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 74](psa074.md)

</div>
