<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa089)  [Next](psa091.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 90](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 90:0</span></span>

The eternity of God, [Psa 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001.md), [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002.md); the frailty of the state of man,
[Psa 90:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003.md); the general limits of
human life, [Psa 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010.md); the danger of
displeasing God, [Psa 90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011.md); the
necessity of considering the shortness of life, and of regaining the
favor of the Almighty, [Psa 90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012.md);
earnest prayer for the restoration of Israel, [Psa
90:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013.md).

The title of this Psalm is, A Prayer of Moses the man of God. The
Chaldee has, "A prayer which Moses the prophet of the Lord prayed when
the people of Israel had sinned in the wilderness." All the Versions
ascribe it to Moses; but that it could not be of Moses the lawgiver is
evident from this consideration, that the age of man was not then
seventy or eighty years, which is here stated to be its almost universal
limit, for Joshua lived one hundred and ten years, and Moses himself one
hundred and twenty; Miriam his sister, one hundred and thirty; Aaron his
brother, one hundred and twenty-three; Caleb, four-score and five years;
and their contemporaries lived in the same proportion. See the note on
[Psa 90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004) (note.md). Therefore the Psalm
cannot at all refer to such ancient times. If the title be at all
authentic, it must refer to some other person of that name; and indeed
איש אלהים ish Elohim, a man of God, a divinely inspired man, agrees to
the times of the prophets, who were thus denominated. The Psalm was
doubtless composed during or after the captivity; and most probably on
their return, when they were engaged in rebuilding the temple; and this,
as Dr. Kennicott conjectures, may be the work of their hands, which they
pray God to bless and prosper.

[Psalms 90:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 90:1</span></span>

Lord, thou hast been our dwellingplace - מעון maon; but instead of this
several MSS. have מעוז maoz, "place of defense," or "refuge," which is
the reading of the Vulgate, Septuagint, Arabic, and Anglo-Saxon. Ever
since thy covenant with Abraham thou hast been the Resting-place,
Refuge, and Defence of thy people Israel. Thy mercy has been lengthened
out from generation to generation.

[Psalms 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 90:2</span></span>

Before the mountains were brought forth - The mountains and hills appear
to have been everlasting; but as they were brought forth out of the womb
of eternity, there was a time when they were not: but Thou hast been ab
aeternitate a parte ante, ad aeternitatem a parte post; fram the
eternity that is past, before time began; to the eternity that is after,
when time shall have an end. This is the highest description of the
eternity of God to which human language can reach.

[Psalms 90:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 90:3</span></span>

Thou turnest man to destruction - Literally, Thou shalt turn dying man,
אנוש enosh, to the small dust, דכא dacca but thou wilt say, Return, ye
children of Adam. This appears to be a clear and strong promise of the
resurrection of the human body, after it has long slept, mingled with
the dust of the earth.

[Psalms 90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 90:4</span></span>

For a thousand years in thy sight - As if he had said, Though the
resurrection of the body may be a thousand (or any indefinite number of)
years distant; yet, when these are past, they are but as yesterday, or a
single thatch of the night. They pass through the mind in a moment, and
appear no longer in their duration than the time required by the mind to
reflect them by thought. But, short as they appear to the eye of the
mind, they are nothing when compared with the eternity of God! The
author probably has in view also that economy of Divine justice and
providence by which the life of man has been shortened from one thousand
years to threescore years and ten, or fourscore.

[Psalms 90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 90:5</span></span>

Thou carriest them away as with a flood - Life is compared to a stream,
ever gliding away; but sometimes it is as a mighty torrent, when by
reason of plague, famine, or war, thousands are swept away daily. In
particular cases it is a rapid stream, when the young are suddenly
carried off by consumptions, fevers, etc.; this is the flower that
flourisheth in the morning, and in the evening is cut down and withered.
The whole of life is like a sleep or as a dream. The eternal world is
real; all here is either shadowy or representative. On the whole, life
is represented as a stream; youth, as morning; decline of life, or old
age, as evening, death, as sleep; and the resurrection as the return of
the flowers in spring. All these images appear in these curious and
striking verses, [Psa 90:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#003.md).

[Psalms 90:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 90:7</span></span>

We are consumed by thine anger - Death had not entered into the world,
if men had not fallen from God.

By thy wrath are we troubled - Pain, disease, and sickness are so many
proofs of our defection from original rectitude. The anger and wrath of
God are moved against all sinners. Even in protracted life we consume
away, and only seem to live in order to die.

"Our wasting lives grow shorter still,As days and months increase;

And every beating pulse we tellLeaves but the number less."

[Psalms 90:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 90:8</span></span>

Thou hast set our iniquities before thee - Every one of our
transgressions is set before thee; noted and minuted down in thy awful
register!

Our secret sins - Those committed in darkness and privacy are easily
discovered by thee, being shown by the splendours of thy face shining
upon them. Thus we light a candle, and bring it into a dark place to
discover its contents. O, what can be hidden from the allseeing eye of
God? Darkness is no darkness to him; wherever he comes there is a
profusion of light - for God is light!

[Psalms 90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 90:9</span></span>

We spend our years as a tale - The Vulgate has: Anni nostri sicut aranea
meditabuntur; "Our years pass away like those of the spider." Our plans
and operations are like the spider's web; life is as frail, and the
thread of it as brittle, as one of those that constitute the
well-wrought and curious, but fragile, habitation of that insect. All
the Versions have the word spider; but it neither appears in the Hebrew,
nor in any of its MSS. which have been collated.

My old Psalter has a curious paraphrase here: "Als the iran (spider)
makes vayne webs for to take flese (flies) with gile, swa our yeres ere
ockupide in ydel and swikel castes about erthly thynges; and passes with
outen frute of gude werks, and waste in ydel thynkyns." This is too true
a picture of most lives.

But the Hebrew is different from all the Versions. "We consume our years
(כמו הגה kemo hegeh) like a groan." We live a dying, whining,
complaining life, and at last a groan is its termination! How amazingly
expressive!

[Psalms 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 90:10</span></span>

Threescore years and ten - See the note on the title of this Psalm 90
(note). This Psalm could not have been written by Moses, because the
term of human life was much more extended when he flourished than eighty
years at the most. Even in David's time many lived one hundred years,
and the author of Ecclesiasticus, who lived after the captivity, fixed
this term at one hundred years at the most (Sirach 18:9); but this was
merely a general average, for even in our country we have many who
exceed a hundred years.

Yet is their strength labor and sorrow - This refers to the infirmities
of old age, which, to those well advanced in life, produce labor and
sorrow.

It is soon cut of - It - the body, is soon cut off.

And we fly away - The immortal spirit wings its way into the eternal
world.

[Psalms 90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 90:11</span></span>

Who knoweth the power of thine angers - The afflictions of this life are
not to be compared to the miseries which await them who live and die
without being reconciled to God, and saved from their sins.

[Psalms 90:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 90:12</span></span>

So teach us to number our days - Let us deeply consider our own frailty,
and the shortness and uncertainty of life, that we may live for
eternity, acquaint ourselves with thee and be at peace; that we may die
in thy favor and live and reign with thee eternally.

[Psalms 90:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 90:13</span></span>

Return, O Lord, how long? - Wilt thou continue angry with us for ever?

Let it repent thee - הנחם hinnachem, be comforted, rejoice over them to
do them good. Be glorified rather in our salvation than in our
destruction.

[Psalms 90:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 90:14</span></span>

O satisfy us early - Let us have thy mercy soon, (literally, in the
morning). Let it now shine upon us, and it shall seem as the morning of
our days, and we shall exult in thee all the days of our life.

[Psalms 90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 90:15</span></span>

Make us glad according to the days - Let thy people have as many years
of prosperity as they have had of adversity. We have now suffered
seventy years of a most distressful captivity.

[Psalms 90:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 90:16</span></span>

Let thy work appear unto thy servants - That thou art working for us we
know; but O, let thy work appear! Let us now see, in our deliverance,
that thy thoughts towards us were mercy and love.

And thy Glory - Thy pure worship be established among our children for
ever.

[Psalms 90:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 90:17</span></span>

And let the beauty of the Lord - Let us have thy presence, blessing, and
approbation, as our fathers had.

Establish thou the work of our hands - This is supposed, we have already
seen, to relate to their rebuilding the temple, which the surrounding
heathens and Samaritans wished to hinder. We have begun, do not let them
demolish our work; let the top-stone be brought on with shouting, Grace,
grace unto it.

Yea, the work of our hands - This repetition is wanting in three of
Kennicott's MSS., in the Targum, in the Septuagint, and in the Ethiopic.
If the repetition be genuine, it may be considered as marking great
earnestness; and this earnestness was to get the temple of God rebuilt,
and his pure worship restored. The pious Jews had this more at heart
than their own restoration; it was their highest grief that the temple
was destroyed and God's ordinances suspended; that his enemies insulted
them, and blasphemed the worthy name by which they were called. Every
truly pious man feels more for God's glory than his own temporal
felicity, and rejoices more in the prosperity of God's work than in the
increase of his own worldly goods.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 91](psa091.md)

</div>
