<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa088)  [Next](psa090) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 89](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 89:0</span></span>

The psalmist shows God's great mercy to the house of David, and the
promises which he had given to it of support and perpetuity, vv. 1-37;
complains that, notwithstanding these promises, the kingdom of Judah is
overthrown, and the royal family nearly ruined, [Psa
89:38-45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038); and earnestly prays for
their restoration, [Psa 89:46-52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046).

It is most probable that this Psalm was composed during the captivity.
Of Ethan and Heman we have already seen something in the introduction to
the preceding Psalm; see also the parallel places in the margin. The
title should probably be translated, - To give instruction to Ethan the
Ezrahite. The Chaldee has, "A good instruction, delivered by Abraham,
who came from the east country." The Septuagint and Ethiopic have Nathan
the Israelite; the Arabic has Nathan the Israelite.

The Psalm divides itself into two grand parts; the first extends, verses
1-37, in which the psalmist shows God's mercy to the house of David, and
the promises which he has given to it of support and perpetuity. The
second part begins with [Psa 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038),
and ends with the Psalm; and in it the author complains that
notwithstanding these promises, the kingdom of Judah is overthrown and
the royal family ruined; and he entreats the Lord to remember his
covenant made with that family, and restore them from their captivity.

[Psalms 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 89:1</span></span>

I will sing of the mercies of the Lord - I will celebrate the mercy of
God to the house of Jacob; the mercy that has been shown to our fathers
from time immemorial.

To all generations - What I say concerning thy mercy and goodness, being
inspired by thy Spirit, is not only true, but shall be preserved by the
Divine providence for ever.

[Psalms 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 89:2</span></span>

Mercy shall be built up for ever - God's goodness is the foundation on
which his mercy rests; and from that source, and on that foundation,
acts of mercy shall flow and be built up for ever and ever.

Thy faithfulness shalt thou establish - What thou hast promised to do to
the children of men on earth, thou dost register in heaven, and thy
promise shall never fail.

[Psalms 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 89:3</span></span>

I have made a covenant with my chosen - I have made a covenant with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and renewed it with Moses and Joshua in
reference to the Israelites in general: but I have made one with David
in especial relation to himself and posterity, of whom, according to the
flesh, the Christ is to come. And this is the covenant with David: -

[Psalms 89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 89:4</span></span>

Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all
generations - And this covenant had most incontestably Jesus Christ in
view. This is the seed, or posterity, that should sit on the throne, and
reign for ever and ever. David and his family are long since become
extinct; none of his race has sat on the Jewish throne for more than two
thousand years: but the Christ has reigned invariably since that time,
and will reign till all his enemies are put under his feet; and to this
the psalmist says Selah. It will be so, it is so; and it cannot be
otherwise; for the Lord hath sworn that he shall have an euerlasting
kingdom, as he has an everlasting priesthood.

[Psalms 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 89:5</span></span>

The heavens shall praise thy wonders - The works that shall be wrought
by this descendant of David shall be so plainly miraculous as shall
prove their origin to be Divine: and both saints and angels shall join
to celebrate his praises.

Thy faithfulness also - All thy promises shall be fulfilled; and
particularly and supereminently those which respect the congregation of
the saints - the assemblies of Christian believers.

[Psalms 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 89:6</span></span>

For who in the heaven - שחק shachak signifies the ethereal regions, all
visible or unbounded space; the universe. Who is like Jesus? given in
his human nature none of the sons of the mighty can be compared with
him. He atones for the sin of the world, and saves to the uttermost all
who come unto God through him.

This may also be considered a reproof to idolaters. Is there any among
the heavenly hosts like to God? Even the most glorious of them were made
by his hands. Can the stars, or the more distant planets, or the moon,
or the sun, be likened unto God most high?

Who among the sons of the mighty - Instead of אלים elim, mighty ones,
four of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. have איל eil, strength: - sons
of strength, strong persons. Several of the Versions seem to have read
אלהים Elohim, God, instead of אלים elim, strong ones. So my old Psalter,
following the Vulgate - For wha in the clowdes sal be evened to Lorde;
like sal be to God in sons of God! which it paraphrases thus: "Emang al
haly men nane may be evened to Ihu Crist: and nane may be like to hym in
God's sons: for he is God's son be kynde, and thai thrugh grace."

[Psalms 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 89:7</span></span>

God is greatly to be feared - In all religious assemblies the deepest
reverence for God should rest upon the people. Where this does not
prevail, there is no true worship. While some come with a proper
Scriptural boldness to the throne of grace, there are others who come
into the presence of God with a reprehensible, if not sinful, boldness.

[Psalms 89:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 89:8</span></span>

O Lord God of hosts - Thou who hast all armies at thy command, and canst
serve thyself by every part of thy creation, whether animate or
inanimate.

Who is a strong Lord - See [Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006).

Thy faithfulness round about thee? - Or, more properly, thy faithfulness
is round about thee. Thou still keepest thy promises in view. God's
truth leads him to fulfill his promises: they stand round his throne as
the faithful servants of an eastern monarch stand round their master,
waiting for the moment of their dismission to perform his will.

[Psalms 89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 89:9</span></span>

Thou rulest the raging of the sea - Whoever has seen the sea in a storm,
when its waves run what is called mountain high, must acknowledge that
nothing but omnipotent power could rule its raging.

When the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them - Thou governest both
its flux and reflux. Thou art the Author of storms and calms. There may
be a reference here to the passage of the Red Sea, and the strong wind
that agitated its waves at that time; as the next verse seems to
indicate.

[Psalms 89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 89:10</span></span>

Thou hast broken Rahab - Thou hast destroyed the power of Egypt, having
overthrown the king and its people when they endeavored to prevent thy
people from regaining their liberty.

As one that is slain - The whole clause in the original is, אתה דכאת
כחלל רהב attah dikkitha kechalal Rahab, "Thou, like a hero, hast broken
down Egypt." Dr. Kennicott has largely proved that חלל chalal, which we
render wounded, slain, etc., means a soldier, warrior, hero; and it is
certain that this sense agrees better with it than the other in a great
number of places. Mr. Berlin translates, Tu contrivisti ut cadaver
Aegyptum; "Thou hast bruised down Egypt like a dead carcass." The whole
strength of Egypt could avail nothing against thee. Thou didst trample
them down as easily as if they had all been dead carcasses.

[Psalms 89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 89:11</span></span>

The heavens are thine - Thou art the Governor of all things, and the
Disposer of all events.

The world - The terraqueous globe.

And the fullness - All the generations of men. Thou hast founded them -
thou hast made them, and dost sustain them.

After this verse, the Editio Princeps of the Hebrew Bible, printed at
Soncini, 1488, adds: -

לילה לך אף יום לך lailah lecha aph yom lecha

ושמש מאור הכינות אתה vashamesh maor hachinotha attah To thee is the day;
also to thee is the night:

Thou hast prepared the light and the sun.

But these same words are found in [Psa
74:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#016).

[Psalms 89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 89:12</span></span>

The north and the south - It is generally supposed that by these four
terms all the four quarters of the globe are intended. Tabor, a mountain
of Galilee, was on the west of Mount Hermon, which was beyond Jordan, to
the east of the source of that river.

[Psalms 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 89:14</span></span>

Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne - The throne - the
government, of God, is founded in righteousness and judgment. He knows
what is right; he sees what is right; he does what is right; and his
judgments are ever according to righteousness. His decisions are all
oracles, no one of them is ever reversed.

Mercy and truth shall go before thy face - These shall be the heralds
that shall announce the coming of the Judge. His truth binds him to
fulfill all his declarations; and his mercy shall be shown to all those
who have fled for refuge to the hope that is set before them in the
Gospel. See the notes on [Psa 85:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#010),
[Psa 85:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011).

[Psalms 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 89:15</span></span>

Blessed is the people - "O the blessednesses of that people (אשרי העם(
elp ashrey haam) that know the joyful sound;" that are spared to hear
the sound of the trumpet on the morning of the jubilee, which proclaims
deliverance to the captives, and the restoration of all their forfeited
estates. "They shall walk vigorously (יהלכון yehallechun) in the light
of thy countenance" (באור פניך beor paneycha) - the full persuasion of
the approbation of God their Father, Redeemer, and Sanctifier.

[Psalms 89:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 89:16</span></span>

In thy name shall they rejoice - Or, "greatly exult," יגילון yegilun;
"all that day," היום haiyom, the jubilee, referred to above.

And in thy righteousness - In the declaration of thy righteousness for
the remission of sins that are past, [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025), [Rom
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026).

Shall they be exalted - They shall be justified freely from all things,
be purified from all unrighteousness, grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ here below, and at last be exalted to his
right hand to reign with him for ever. The jubilee was a type of the
Gospel, and under that type the psalmist here speaks of the glorious
advent of the Lord Jesus, and the great happiness of believers in him.
Let it be observed that the letters in the above Hebrew words called
paragogic, as nun in יהלכון yehallechun, and יגילון yegilun, always
increase and deepen the meaning of the words to which they are attached.

[Psalms 89:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 89:17</span></span>

For thou art the glory of their strength - They are strong in faith, and
give glory to thee, because they know that their strength cometh from
the Lord of hosts.

And in thy favor our horn shall be exalted - Instead of תרום tarum,
"shall be exalted," תרים tarim, "thou shalt exalt," is the reading of
several MSS.: but תרום tarum, "shall be exalted," is supported by
forty-four of Kennicott's MSS., and sixty of De Rossi's, as well as by
several ancient editions, with the Septuagint, Syriac, Vulgate, and
Arabic Versions. In the enjoyment of the Divine favor they shall grow
more wise, more holy, more powerful, and, consequently, more happy.

[Psalms 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 89:19</span></span>

Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one - Instead of חסידך
chasidecha, "thy holy one," חסידיך chasideycha, "thy holy ones," is the
reading of sisty-three of Kennicott's and seventy-one of De Rossi's
MSS., and a great number of editions besides.

If we take it in the singular, it most probably means Samuel, and refers
to the revelation God gave to him relative to his appointment of David
to be king in the stead of Saul. If we take it in the plural, it may
mean not only Samuel, but also Nathan and Gad.

For what God revealed to Samuel relative to David, see [Sa2
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#005), etc.; [Ch1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#002), [Ch1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#003); and for what he said to Nathan
on the same subject, see [Ch1 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#003),
[Ch1 17:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#007). All the Versions have
the word in the plural.

[Psalms 89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 89:20</span></span>

I have found David my servant - This is the sum of what God had said in
prophetic visions to his saints or holy persons, Samuel, Nathan, and
Gad; see [Sa1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001), [Sa1
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012). Here the psalmist begins to
reason with God relative to David, his posterity, and the perpetuity of
his kingdom; which promises appear now to have utterly failed, as the
throne had been overturned, and all the people carried into captivity.
But all these things may have reference to Christ and his kingdom; for
we are assured that David was a type of the Messiah.

[Psalms 89:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 89:22</span></span>

The enemy shall not exact upon him - None of his enemies shall be able
to prevail against him. It is worthy of remark that David was never
overthrown; he finally conquered every foe that rose up against him.
Saul's persecution, Absalom's revolt, Sheba's conspiracy, and the
struggle made by the partisans of the house of Saul after his death,
only tended to call forth David's skill, courage, and prowess, and to
seat him more firmly on his throne. The Philistines, the Ammonites, the
Syrians, etc., united all their forces to crush him, but in vain: "God
beat down all his foes before his face," and variously plagued those who
opposed him, [Psa 89:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#023).

[Psalms 89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 89:25</span></span>

I will set his hand also in the sea - This was literally fulfilled in
David. Hand signifies power or authority; he set his hand on the sea in
conquering the Philistines, and extending his empire along the coast of
the Mediterranean Sea, from Tyre to Pelusium. All the coasts of the Red
Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the Arabic Ocean, might be said to have been
under his government, for they all paid tribute to him or his son
Solomon.

His right hand in the rivers - First, the Euphrates: he subjected all
Syria, and even a part of Mesopotamia; [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003); [Ch1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#003). He also took Damascus, and
consequently had his hand or authority over the river Chrysorrhoes, or
Baraddi; and in his conquest of all Syria his hand must have been on the
Orontes and other rivers in that region. But if this be considered as
referring to the typical David, we see that He was never conquered; he
never lost a battle; the hosts of hell pursued him in vain. Satan was
discomfited, and all his enemies bruised under his feet. Even over death
he triumphed; and as to his dominion, it has spread and is spreading
over all the isles of the sea, and the continents of the world.

[Psalms 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 89:27</span></span>

I will make him my first-born - I will deal with him as a father by his
first-born son, to whom a double portion of possessions and honors
belong. First-born. is not always to be understood literally in
Scripture. It often signifies simply a well-beloved, or best-beloved
son; one preferred to all the rest, and distinguished by some eminent
prerogative. Thus God calls Israel his son, his first-born, [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022). See also Sirach 36:12. And even
Ephraim is called God's first-born, [Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009). In the same sense it is
sometimes applied even to Jesus Christ himself, to signify his
supereminent dignity; not the eternal Sonship of his Divine nature, as
inveterate prejudice and superficial thinking have supposed.

[Psalms 89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 89:29</span></span>

His seed also will I make to endure for ever - This ean apply only to
the spiritual David. The posterity of David are long since extinct, or
so blended with the remaining Jews as to be utterly indiscernible; but
Jesus ever liveth, and his seed (Christians) are spread, and are
spreading over all nations; and his throne is eternal. As to his
manhood, he is of the house and lineage of David; the government is upon
his shoulders, and of its increase there shall be no end, upon the
throne of David and on his kingdom to order it and to establish it with
judgment and justice, from henceforth even for ever. [Isa
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007).

[Psalms 89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 89:30</span></span>

If his children forsake my law - See the notes on [Sa2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013), where this and some of the
following verses are explained.

[Psalms 89:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 89:34</span></span>

My covenant will I not break - My determination to establish a spiritual
kingdom, the head of which shall be Jesus, the son of David, shall never
fail. My prophets have declared this, and I will not alter the thing
that is gone out of my mouth.

[Psalms 89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 89:35</span></span>

Once have I sworn - I have made one determination on this head, and have
bound myself by my holiness; it is impossible that I should change, and
there needs no second oath, the one already made is of endless
obligation.

[Psalms 89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 89:36</span></span>

His throne as the son - Splendid and glorious! dispensing light, heat,
life, and salvation to all mankind.

[Psalms 89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">psa 89:37</span></span>

As the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven - That is, as long as
the sun and moon shall endure, as long as time shall last, his kingdom
shall last among men. The moon appears to be termed a faithful witness
here, because by her particularly time is measured. Her decrease and
increase are especially observed by every nation, and by these time is
generally estimated, especially among the eastern nations. So many moons
is a man old; so many moons since such an event happened; and even their
years are reckoned by lunations. This is the case with the Mohammedans
to the present day. Or the rainbow may be intended; that sign which God
has established in the cloud; that faithful witness of his that the
earth shall no more be destroyed by water. As long therefore as the sun,
the moon, and the rainbow appear in the heavens, so long shall the
spiritual David reign, and his seed prosper and increase.

Selah - It is confirmed; it shall not fail.

[Psalms 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 89:38</span></span>

But thou hast cast off - Hitherto the psalmist has spoken of the
covenant of God with David and his family, which led them to expect all
manner of prosperity, and a perpetuity of the Jewish throne; now he
shews what appears to him a failure of the promise, and what he calls in
the next verse the making void the covenant of his servant. God cannot
lie to David; how is it then that his crown is profaned, that it is cast
down to the ground; the land being possessed by strangers, and the
twelve tribes in the most disgraceful and oppressive captivity?

[Psalms 89:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 89:40</span></span>

Thou hast broken down all his hedges - Thou hart permitted the land to
be stripped of all defense; there is not even one strong place in the
hands of thy people.

[Psalms 89:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 89:41</span></span>

All that pass bay the way spoil him - The land is in the condition of a
vineyard, the hedge of which is broken down, so that they who pass by
may pull the grapes, and dismantle or tear down the vines. The Chaldeans
and the Assyrians began the ravage; the Samaritans on the one hand, and
the Idumeans on the other, have completed it.

[Psalms 89:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">psa 89:42</span></span>

Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries - Thou hast given
them that strength which thou didst formerly give to thy own people;
therefore these are depressed, those exalted.

[Psalms 89:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">psa 89:43</span></span>

Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword - The arms and military
prowess of thy people are no longer of any use to them; Thou art against
them, and therefore they are fallen. In what a perilous and hopeless
situation must that soldier be who, while defending his life against his
mortal foe, has his sword broken, or its edge turned; or, in modern
warfare, whose gun misses fire! The Gauls, when invaded by the Romans,
had no method of hardening iron; at every blow their swords bended, so
that they were obliged, before they could strike again, to put them
under their foot or over their knee, to straighten them; and in most
cases, before this could be done, their better armed foe had taken away
their life! The edge of their sword was turned, so that they could not
stand in battle; and hence the Gauls were conquered by the Romans.

[Psalms 89:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">psa 89:44</span></span>

Thou hast made his glory to cease - The kingly dignity is destroyed, and
there is neither king nor throne remaining.

[Psalms 89:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">psa 89:45</span></span>

The days of his youth hast thou shortened - Our kings have not reigned
half their days, nor lived out half their lives. The four last kings of
Judea reigned but a short time, and either died by the sword or in
captivity.

Jehoahaz reigned only three months, and was led captive to Egypt, where
he died. Jehoiakim reigned only eleven years, and was tributary to the
Chaldeans, who pat him to death, and cast his body into the common
sewer. Jehoiachin reigned three months and ten days, and was led captive
to Babylon, where he continued in prison to the time of Evilmerodach,
who, though he loosed him from prison, never invested him with any
power. Zedekiah, the last of all, had reigned only eleven years when he
was taken, his eyes put out, was loaded with chains, and thus carried to
Babylon. Most of these kings died a violent and premature death. Thus
the days of their youth - of their power, dignity, and iife, were
shortened, and they themselves covered with shame. Selah; so it most
incontestably is.

[Psalms 89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">psa 89:46</span></span>

How long, Lord? - The promise cannot utterly fail. When then, O Lord,
wilt thou restore the kingdom to Israel?

[Psalms 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">psa 89:47</span></span>

How short my time is - If thou deliver not speedily, none of the present
generations shall see thy salvation. Are all the remnants of our tribes
created in vain? shall they never see happiness?

[Psalms 89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">psa 89:48</span></span>

What man is he that liveth - All men are mortal, and death is uncertain
and no man, by wisdom, might, or riches, can deliver his life from the
hand - the power, of death and the grave.

[Psalms 89:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 89:49</span></span>

Lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses - Wilt thou not deal with us
as thou didst with our fathers? Didst thou not swear unto David that
thou wouldst distinguish him as thou didst them?

[Psalms 89:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">psa 89:50</span></span>

I do bear in my bosom - Our enemies, knowing our confidence, having
often heard our boast in thee, and now seeing our low and hopeless
estate, mock us for our confidence, and blaspheme thee. This wounds my
soul; I cannot bear to hear thy name blasphemed among the heathen. All
these mighty people blaspheme the God of Jacob.

[Psalms 89:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">psa 89:51</span></span>

They have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed - They search into
the whole history of thy people; they trace it up to the earliest times;
and they find we have been disobedient and rebellious; and on this
account we suffer much, alas, deserved reproach. The Chaldee gives this
clause a singular turn: "Thy enemies have reproached the slowness of the
footsteps of the feet of thy Messiah, O Lord. We have trusted in him as
our great Deliverer, and have been daily in expectation of his coming:
but there is no deliverer, and our enemies mock our confidence." This
expectation seems now wholly abandoned by the Jews: they have rejected
the true Messiah, and the ground of their expectation of another is now
cut off. When will they turn unto the Lord? When shall the veil be taken
away from their hearts?

"Bend by thy grace, O bend or break

The iron sinew in their neck!"

[Psalms 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">psa 89:52</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord for evermore - Let him treat us as he will, his name
deserves eternal praises: our affliction, though great, is less than we
have deserved.

This verse concludes the Third Book of the Psalter; and, I think, has
been added by a later hand, in order to make this distinction, as every
Masoretic Bible has something of this kind at the end of each book. The
verse is wanting in one of Kennicott's and one of De Rossi's MSS.; in
another it is written without points, to show that it does not belong to
the text, and in three others it is written separately from the text. It
is found, however, in all the ancient Versions. The Chaldee finishes
thus: "Blessed be the name of the Lord in this world. Amen and Amen.
Blessed be the name of the Lord in the world to come. Amen and Amen."
And the reader will find no difficulty to subscribe his Amen, so be it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 90](psa090)

</div>
