<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa017)  [Next](psa019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 18:0</span></span>

David's address of thanks to Jehovah, [Psa
18:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001). A relation of sufferings
undergone, and prayers made for assistance, [Psa
18:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004). A magnificent description of
Divine interposition in behalf of the sufferer, [Psa
18:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007); and of the deliverance
wrought for him, [Psa 18:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016). That
this deliverance was in consideration of his righteousness, [Psa
18:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020); and according to the tenor
of God's equitable proceedings, [Psa
18:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025). To Jehovah is ascribed the
glory of the victory, [Psa 18:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#029);
which ts represented as complete by the destruction of all his
opponents, [Psa 18:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#037). On these
events the heathen submit, [Psa
18:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043). And for all these things God
is glorified, [Psa 18:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046).

The title: "To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, the servant of the
Lord, who spake unto the Lord the words of this song in the day that the
Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand
of Saul."

Except the first clause, this title is taken from [Sa2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001). The reader is requested to turn
to the notes on [Sa2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001), for some
curious information on this Psalm, particularly what is extracted from
Dr. Kennicott. This learned writer supposes the whole to be a song of
the Messiah, and divides it into five parts, which he thus introduces: -

"The Messiah's sublime thanksgivings, composed by David when his wars
were at an end, towards the conclusion of his life. And in this sacred
song the goodness of God is celebrated,

1\. For Messiah's resurrection from the dead, with the wonders attending
that awful event, and soon following it.

2\. For the punishment inflicted on the Jews; particularly by the
destruction of Jerusalem. And,

3\. For the obedience of the Gentile nations. See [Rom
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009); [Heb
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013); and [Mat
28:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#002); with [Mat
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007), [Mat
24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)."

And that the title now prefixed to this hymn here and in [Sa2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001), describes only the time of its
composition, seems evident; for who can ascribe to David himself as the
subject, [Sa2 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005), [Sa2
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#006), [Sa2
22:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#008), [Sa2
22:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021), [Sa2
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#030), [Sa2
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#042), [Sa2
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044), etc.?

In Dr. Kennicott's remarks there is a new translation of the whole
Psalm, p. 178, etc.

The strong current of commentators and critics apply this Psalm to
Christ; and to oppose a whole host of both ancients and moderns would
argue great self-confidence. In the main I am of the same mind; and on
this principle chiefly I shall proceed to its illustration; still
however considering that there are many things in it which concern
David, and him only. Drs. Chandler and Delaney have been very successful
in their illustration of various passages in it; all the best critics
have brought their strongest powers to bear on it; and most of the
commentators have labored it with great success; and Bishop Horne has
applied the whole of it to Christ. My old Psalter speaks highly in its
praise: "This Psalme contenes the sacrement of al chosyn men, the qwilk
doand the law of God thurgh the seven fald grace of the Haly Gast fra al
temptaciouns, and the pouste of dede and of the devel lesid: this sang
thai syng til God; and thankes him and says, I sal luf the Lord, noght a
day or twa, bot ever mare: my strength, thurgh quam I am stalworth in
thoght."

[Psalms 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 18:1</span></span>

I will love thee - Love always subsists on motive and reason. The verb
רחם racham signifies to love with all the tender feelinys of nature.
"From my inmost bowels will I love thee, O Lord!" Why should he love
Jehovah? Not merely because he was infinitely great and good, possessed
of all possible perfections, but because he was good to him: and he here
enumerates some of the many blessings he received from him.

My strength -

1\. Thou who hast given me power over my adversaries, and hast enabled
me to avoid evil and do good.

[Psalms 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 18:2</span></span>

The Lord is my rock -

2\. I stand on him as my foundation, and derive every good from him who
is the source of good. The word סלע sela signifies those craggy
precipices which afford shelter to men and wild animals; where the bees
often made their nests, and whence honey was collected in great
abundance. "He made him to suck honey out of the rock," [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013).

3\. He was his fortress; a place of strength and safety, fortified by
nature and art, where he could be safe from his enemies. He refers to
those inaccessible heights in the rocky, mountainous country of Judea,
where he had often found refuge from the pursuit of Saul. What these
have been to my body, such has the Lord been to my soul.

Deliverer -

4\. מפלתי mephalleti, he who causes me to escape. This refers to his
preservation in straits and difficulties. He was often almost surrounded
and taken, but still the Lord made a way for his escape - made a way out
as his enemies got in; so that, while they got in at one side of his
strong hold, he got out of the other, and so escaped with his life.
These escapes were so narrow and so unlikely that he plainly saw the
hand of the Lord was in them.

5\. My God, אלי ,doG Eli, my strong God, not only the object of my
adoration, but he who puts strength in my soul.

6\. My strength, צורי tsuri. This is a different word from that in the
first verse.

Rabbi Maimon has observed that צור tsur, when applied to God, signifies
fountain, source, origin, etc. God is not only the source whence my
being was derived, but he is the fountain whence I derive all my good;
in whom, says David, I will trust. And why? Because he knew him to be an
eternal and inexhaustible fountain of goodness. This fine idea is lost
in our translation; for we render two Hebrew words of widely different
meaning, by the same term in English, strength.

7\. My buckler, מגני maginni, my shield, my defender, he who covers my
head and my heart, so that I am neither slain nor wounded by the darts
of my adversaries.

8\. Horn of my salvation. Horn was the emblem of power, and power in
exercise. This has been already explained; see on [Sa1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001) (note). The horn of salvation
means a powerful, an efficient salvation.

9\. My high tourer; not only a place of defense, but one from which I
can discern the country round about, and always be able to discover
danger before it approaches me.

[Psalms 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 18:3</span></span>

I will call upon the Lord - When he was conscious that the object of his
worship was such as he has pointed out in the above nine particulars, it
is no wonder that he resolves to call upon him; and no wonder that he
expects, in consequence, to be saved from his enemies; for who can
destroy him whom such a God undertakes to save?

[Psalms 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 18:4</span></span>

The sorrows of death compassed me - חבלי מות chebley maveth, the cables
or cords of death. He was almost taken in those nets or stratagems by
which, if he had been entangled, he would have lost his life. The
stratagems to which he refers were those that were intended for his
destruction; hence called the cables or cords of death.

The floods of ungodly men - Troops of wicked men were rushing upon him
like an irresistible torrent; or like the waves of the sea, one
impelling another forward in successive ranks; so that, thinking he must
be overwhelmed by them, he was for the moment affrighted; but God turned
the torrent aside, and he escaped.

[Psalms 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 18:5</span></span>

The sorrows of hell - חבלי שאול chebley sheol, the cables or cords of
the grave. Is not this a reference to the cords or ropes with which they
lowered the corpse into the grave? or the bandages by which the dead
were swathed? He was as good as dead.

The snares of death prevented me - I was just on the point of dropping
into the pit which they had digged for me. In short, I was all but a
dead man; and nothing less than the immediate interference of God could
have saved my life.

[Psalms 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 18:6</span></span>

In my distress I called - His enemies had no hope of his destruction
unless God should abandon him. They hoped that this was the case, and
that therefore they should prevail. But God heard his cry and came down
to his help; and this interference is most majestically described in the
[Psa 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007) and following verses. Dr.
Dodd has collected some excellent observations on these verses from
Chandler, Delaney, and others, which I shall transcribe, as I know not
that any thing better can be offered on the subject.

[Psalms 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 18:7</span></span>

Then the earth shook and trembled - "In this and the following verses
David describes, by the sublimest expressions and grandest terms, the
majesty of God, and the awful manner in which he came to his assistance.
The representation of the storm in these verses must be allowed by all
skillful and impartial judges to be truly sublime and noble, and in the
genuine spirit of poetry. The majesty of God, and the manner in which he
is represented as coming to the aid of his favourite king, surrounded
with all the powers of nature as his attendants and ministers, and
arming (as it were) heaven and earth to fight his battles, and execute
his vengeance, is described in the loftiest and most striking terms. The
shaking of the earth; the trembling of the mountains and pillars of
heaven; the smoke that drove out of his nostrils; the flames of
devouring fire that flashed from his mouth; the heavens bending down to
convey him to the battle; his riding upon a cherub, and rapidly flying
on the wings of a whirlwind; his concealing his majesty in the thick
clouds of heaven; the bursting of the lightnings from the horrid
darkness; the uttering of his voice in peals of thunder; the storm of
fiery hail; the melting of the heavens, and their dissolving into floods
of tempestuous rain; the cleaving of the earth, and disclosing of the
bottom of the hills, and the subterraneous channels or torrents of
water, by the very breath of the nostrils of the Almighty; are all of
them circumstances which create admiration, excite a kind of horror, and
exceed every thing of this nature that is to be found in any of the
remains of heathen antiquity. See Longinus on the Sublime, sec. 9, and
Hesiod's description of Jupiter fighting against the Titans, which is
one of the grandest things in all pagan antiquity; though upon
comparison it will be found infinitely short of this description of the
psalmist's; throughout the whole of which God is represented as a mighty
warrior going forth to fight the battles of David, and highly incensed
at the opposition his enemies made to his power and authority.

"When he descended to the engagement the very heavens bowed down to
render his descent more awful, his military tent was substantial
darkness; the voice of his thunder was the warlike alarm which sounded
to the battle; the chariot in which he rode was the thick clouds of
heaven, conducted by cherubs, and carried on by the irresistible force
and rapid wings of an impetuous tempest; and the darts and weapons he
employed were thunderbolts, lightnings, fiery hail, deluging rains, and
stormy winds!

"No wonder that when God thus arose, all his enemies should be
scattered, and those who hated him should flee before him.

"It does not appear from any part of David's history that there was any
such storm as is here described, which proved destructive to his
enemies, and salutary to himself. There might, indeed, have been such a
one, though there is no particular mention of it: unless it may be
thought that something of this nature is intimated in the account given
of David's second battle with the Philistines, [Sa2
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#023), [Sa2
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024). It is undoubted, however, that
the storm is represented as real; though David, in describing it, has
heightened and embellished it with all the ornaments of poetry. See
Chandler, Delaney, and Lowth's ninth Prelection.

[Psalms 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 18:8</span></span>

There went up a smoke out of his nostrils - Or, 'There ascended into his
nostrils a smoke,' as the words, literally rendered, signify. The
ancients placed the seat of anger in the nose, or nostrils; because when
the passions are warm and violent, it discovers itself by the heated
vehement breath which proceeds from them. Hence the physiognomists
considered open wide nostrils as a sign of an angry, fiery disposition.

"This description of a smoke arising into and a fire breaking forth from
the nostrils of God, denotes, by a poetical figure, the greatness of his
anger and indignation.

"Fire out of his mouth devoured - means that consuming fire issued out
of his mouth. Coals were kind led by it, thus we render the next clause;
but the words do not mean that fire proceeding from God kindled coals,
but that burning coals issued from his mouth; and it should be rendered
'living coals from his mouth burned, and consumed around him.' -
Chandler.

[Psalms 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 18:9</span></span>

He bowed the heavens also, and came down - He made the heavens bend
under him when he descended to take vengeance on his enemies. The
psalmist seems here to express the appearance of the Divine majesty in a
glorious cloud, descending from heaven, which underneath was
substantially dark, but above, bright, and shining with exceeding
lustre; and which, by its gradual approach to the earth, would appear as
though the heavens themselves were bending down and approaching towards
us.

[Psalms 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 18:10</span></span>

He rode upon a cherub, and did fly - That is, as it is immediately
explained, Yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind. God was in the
storm, and by the ministry of angels guided the course of it, and drove
it on with such an impetuous force as nothing could withstand. He 'rides
in the whirlwind and directs the storm.' Angels are in a peculiar sense
the attendants and messengers of the Almighty, whom he employs as his
ministers in effecting many of those great events which take place in
the administration of his providence; and particularly such as manifest
his immediate interposition in the extraordinary judgments which he
inflicts for the punishment of sinful nations. See [Psa
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020); [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004). The cherub is particularly
mentioned as an emblem of the Divine presence, and especially as
employed in supporting and conveying the chariot of the Almighty, when
he is represented as riding in his majesty through the firmament of
heaven: -

\- Forth rush'd with whirlwind sound

The chariot of paternal Deity;

Flashing thick flames, wheel within wheel undrawn,

Itself instinct with spirit, but convey'd

By four cherubic shapes.

Par. Lost, lib. vi.

This seems to be the image intended to be conveyed in the place before
us. "He rode upon a cherub, and did fly; he flew on the wings of the
wind," i.e., the cherub supported and led on the tempest, in which the
Almighty rode as in his chariot. This is agreeable to the office
elsewhere ascribed to the cherubim. Thus they supported the mercy-seat,
which was peculiarly the throne of God under the Jewish economy. God is
expressly said to "make the clouds his chariot," [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003); and to "ride upon a swift
cloud," [Isa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001) : so that "riding
upon a cherub," and "riding upon a swift cloud," is riding in the cloud
as his chariot, supported and guided by the ministry of the cherubim.
The next clause in the parallel place of Samuel is, "He was seen on the
wings of the wind;" ירא yera, he was seen, being used for ידא yede, he
flew, ד daleth being changed into ר resh. Either of them may be the true
reading, for the MSS. are greatly divided on these places; but on the
whole וירא vaiyera appears to be the better reading: "And he was seen on
the wings of the wind."

As the original has been supposed by adequate judges to exhibit a fine
specimen of that poetry which, in the choice of its terms, conveys both
sense and sound, I will again lay it before the reader, as I have done
in the parallel place, [Sa2 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002). The
words in italic to be read from right to left.

ויעף כרוב על וירכב vaiyaoph kerub al vayirkab And he rode upon a cherub,
and did fly!

רוח כנפי על וידא ruach canphey al waiyede Yea, he flew on the wings of
the wind! The word רוח ruach, in the last line, should be pronounced,
not ruak, which is no Hebrew word: but as a Scottish man would pronounce
it, were it written ruagh. With this observation, how astonishingly is
the rushing of the wind heard in the last word of each hemistich!
Sternhold and Hopkins have succeeded in their version of this place, not
only beyond all they ever did, but beyond every ancient and modern poet
on a similar subject: -

"On cherub and on cherubinFull royally he rode;

And on the wings of mighty windsCame flying all abroad."

Even the old Anglo-Scottish Psalter has not done amiss: -

And he steygh aboven cherubyn and he flow;

He flow aboven the fethers of wyndes.

[Psalms 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 18:11</span></span>

He made darkness his secret place - God is represented as dwelling in
the thick darkness, [Deu 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#011); [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002). This representation in the place
before us is peculiarly proper; as thick heavy clouds deeply charged,
and with lowering aspects, are always the forerunners and attendants of
a tempest, and greatly heighten the horrors of the appearance: and the
representation of them, spread about the Almighty as a tent, is truly
grand and poetic.

Dark waters - The vapors strongly condensed into clouds; which, by the
stroke of the lightning, are about to be precipitated in torrents of
rain. See the next verse.

[Psalms 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 18:12</span></span>

At the brightness that was before him his thick clouds passed - The word
נגה nogah signifies the lightning. This goes before him: the flash is
seen before the thunder is heard, and before the rain descends; and then
the thick cloud passes. Its contents are precipitated on the earth, and
the cloud is entirely dissipated.

Hail-stones and coals of fire - This was the storm that followed the
flash and the peal; for it is immediately added: -

[Psalms 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 18:13</span></span>

The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest gave his voice -
And then followed the hail and coals of fire. The former verse mentioned
the lightning, with its effects; this gives us the report of the
thunder, and the increasing storm of hail and fire that attended it.
Some think the words hail-stones and coals of fire are entered here by
some careless transcribers from the preceding verse; and it is true that
they are wanting in the Septuagint and the Arabic, in the parallel place
in 2 Samuel, and in five of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS. I should
rather, with Bishop Horsley, suppose them to be an interpolation in the
preceding verse: or in that to have been borrowed from this; for this
most certainly is their true place.

[Psalms 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 18:14</span></span>

Be sent out his arrows - he shot out lightning - I believe the latter
clause to be an illustration of the former. He sent out his arrows -
that is, he shot out lightning; for lightnings are the arrows of the
Lord, and there is something very like the arrowhead apparent in the
zigzag lightning. Sense and sound are wonderfully combined in the Hebrew
of this last clause: וברכים רב ויהמם uberakim rab vaihummem, "and
thunderings he multiplied and confounded them." Who does not hear the
bursting, brattling, and pounding of thunder in these words? See
Delaney?

[Psalms 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 18:15</span></span>

The channels of water were seen - This must refer to an earthquake; for
in such cases, the ground being rent, water frequently gushes out at the
fissures, and often rises to a tremendous height. Whole rivers were
poured out of the chasms made by the earthquake in Jamaica, A. D. 1694;
and new lakes of water were formed, covering a thousand acres of land!

[Psalms 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 18:16</span></span>

He drew me out of many waters - Here the allusion is still carried on.
The waters thus poured out were sweeping the people away; but God, by a
miraculous interference, sent and drew David out. Sometimes waters are
used to denote multitudes of people; and here the word may have that
reference; multitudes were gathered together against David, but God
delivered him from them all. This seems to be countenanced by the
following verse.

[Psalms 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 18:17</span></span>

He delivered me from my strong enemy - Does not this refer to his
conflict with Ishbi-benob? "And Ishbi-benob, which was of the sons of
the giant - thought to have slain David. But Abishai the son of Zeruiah
succoured him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of
David sware unto him, saying, Thou shalt go no more out with us to
battle, that thou quench not the light of Israel;" [Sa2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#016), [Sa2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017). It appears that at this time he
was in the most imminent danger of his life, and that he must have
fallen by the hands of the giant, if God had not sent Abishai to his
assistance. They were too strong for me. He was nearly overpowered by
the Philistines; and his escape was such as evidently to show it to be
supernatural.

[Psalms 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 18:18</span></span>

They prevented me in the day of my calamity - They took advantage of the
time in which I was least able to make head against them, and their
attack was sudden and powerful. I should have been overthrown, but the
Lord was my stay. He had been nearly exhausted by the fatigue of the
day, when the giant availed himself of this advantage.

[Psalms 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 18:19</span></span>

He brought me forth also into a large place - He enabled me to clear the
country of my foes, who had before cooped me up in holes and corners.
This appears to be the allusion.

[Psalms 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 18:20</span></span>

The Lord rewarded me - David proceeds to give the reasons why God had so
marvellously interposed in his behalf.

According to my righteousness - Instead of being an enemy to Saul, I was
his friend. I dealt righteously with him while he dealt unrighteously
with me.

[Psalms 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 18:21</span></span>

I have kept the ways of the Lord - I was neither an infidel nor a
profligate; I trusted in God, and carefully observed all the ordinances
of his religion.

[Psalms 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 18:22</span></span>

All his judgments were before me - I kept his law before my eyes, that I
might see my duty and know how to walk and please God.

[Psalms 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 18:23</span></span>

I was also upright - The times in which David was most afflicted were
the times of his greatest uprightness. Adversity was always to him a
time of spiritual prosperity.

Mine iniquity - Probably meaning what is generally termed the
easily-besetting sin; the sin of his constitution, or that to which the
temperament of his body most powerfully disposed him. What this was, is
a subject of useless conjecture.

[Psalms 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 18:25</span></span>

With the merciful thou wilt show thyself merciful - Thou wilt deal with
men as they deal with each other. This is the general tenor of God's
providential conduct towards mankind; well expressed by Mr. Pope in his
universal prayer: -

"Teach me to feel another's wo;To hide the fault I see:

The mercy I to others show,That mercy show to me."

It is in reference to this that our Lord teaches us to pray: "Forgive us
our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us." If we act
feelingly and mercifully towards our fellow creatures, God will act
tenderly and compassionately towards us. The merciful, the upright, and
the pure, will ever have the God of mercy, uprightness, and purity, to
defend and support them.

[Psalms 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 18:26</span></span>

With the froward - עקש ikkesh, the perverse man; he that is crooked in
his tempers and ways.

Thou wilt show thyself froward - תתפתל tithpattal, thou wilt set thyself
to twist, twine, and wrestle. If he contend, thou wilt contend with him.
Thou wilt follow him through all his windings; thou wilt trace him
through all his crooked ways; untwist him in all his cunning wiles; and
defeat all his schemes of stubbornness, fraud, overreaching, and deceit.

My old Psalter has, With the wiked thow sal be wike. Here the term
wicked is taken in its true original sense, crooked, or perverse. With
the wiked, the perverse, thou wilt show thyself wike, i.e., perverse;
from to draw back, to slide. As he draws back from thee, thou wilt draw
back from him. It may, as before intimated, come from to seek for
enchantments; leaving God, and going to devils; to act like a witch: but
here it must mean as above. The plain import is, "If thou perversely
oppose thy Maker, he will oppose thee: no work or project shall prosper
that is not begun in his name, and conducted in his fear."

[Psalms 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 18:27</span></span>

For thou wilt save the afflicted - The afflicted are the humble; and
those thou hast ever befriended.

[Psalms 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 18:28</span></span>

For thou wilt light my candle - Thou wilt restore me to prosperity, and
give me a happy issue out of all my afflictions. By the lamp of David
the Messiah may be meant: thou wilt not suffer my family to become
extinct, nor the kingdom which thou hast promised me utterly to fail.

[Psalms 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 18:29</span></span>

I have run through a troop - This may relate to some remarkable victory,
and the taking of some fortified place, possibly Zion, from the
Jebusites. See the account [Sa2 5:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)
(note).

[Psalms 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 18:30</span></span>

God, his way is perfect - His conduct is like his nature, absolutely
pure.

The word of the Lord is tried - Literally tried in the fire. It has
stood all tests; and has never failed those who pleaded it before its
author.

He is a buckler - A sure protection to every simple believing soul. We
cannot believe his word too implicity; nor trust too confidently in him.

[Psalms 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 18:31</span></span>

For who is God save the Lord? - "For who is Eloah, except Jehovah?" None
is worthy of adoration but the self-existent, eternal, infinitely
perfect, and all-merciful Being.

Or who is a rock - A fountain emitting continual supplies of grace and
goodness.

[Psalms 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 18:32</span></span>

God - girdeth me with strength - The girdle was a necessary part of the
Eastern dress; it strengthened and supported the loins; served to
confine the garments close to the body; and in it they tucked them up
when journeying. The strength of God was to his soul what the girdle was
to the body. I need not add, that the girdle was also an ornamental part
of the dress, and from it the sword was suspended.

And maketh my way perfect - He directs me so that I do not go astray; he
blesses me in my undertakings; and by him the issue of my labors is
crowned with prosperity.

[Psalms 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 18:33</span></span>

My feet like hinds' feet - Swiftness, or speed of foot, was a necessary
qualification of an ancient hero. This was of great advantage in
pursuing, combating, or escaping from a fallen foe. Ποδας ωκυς Αχιλλευς,
"the swiftfooted Achilles," is frequently given by Homer as a most
honorable qualification of his hero.

Upon my high places - In allusion to the hinds, antelopes, mountain
goats, etc., which frequented such places, and in which they found both
food and safety. God frequently preserved the life of David by means of
these.

[Psalms 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 18:34</span></span>

He teacheth my hands to war - The success which I have had in my
military exercises I owe to the Divine help. How few of the conquerors
of mankind can say so! And how few among those who call themselves
Christian warriors dare to say so! War is as contrary to the spirit of
Christianity as murder. Nothing can justify Christian nations in
shedding each other's blood! All men should live in peace; all men might
live in peace; and the nation that is first to break it is under a heavy
curse.

A bow of steel is broken by mine arms - All the versions render this:
"Thou hast made my arm like a brazen bow." A bow of steel is out of the
question. In the days of David it is not likely that the method of
making steel was known. The method of making brass out of copper was
known at a very early period of the world; and the ancients had the art
of hardening it, so as to work it into the most efficient swords. From
his own account David was swift, courageous, and strong.

[Psalms 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 18:35</span></span>

The shield of thy salvation - In all battles and dangers God defended
him. He was constantly safe because he possessed the salvation of God.
Everywhere God protected him. Thy gentleness, ענותך anvathecha, thy
meekness or humility. Thou hast enabled me to bear and forbear; to
behave with courage in adversity, and with humility in prosperity; and
thus I am become great. By these means thou hast multiplied me. The
Vulgate reads, Disciplina tua ipsa me docebit; "And thy discipline
itself shall teach me." In this sense it was understood by most of the
versions. The old Psalter paraphrases thus: Thi chastying suffers me
noght to erre fra the end to com.

[Psalms 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 18:36</span></span>

Enlarged my steps - See on [Psa 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019)
(note). From the hand of God he had continual prosperity; and while he
walked with God no enemy was able to prevail against him. He details his
successes in the following verses.

[Psalms 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 18:40</span></span>

The necks of mine enemies - Thou hast made me a complete conqueror.
Treading on the neck of an enemy was the triumph of the conqueror, and
the utmost disgrace of the vanquished.

[Psalms 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 18:41</span></span>

They cited - The Philistines called upon their gods, but there was none
to save them.

Even unto the Lord - Such as Saul, Ishbosheth, Absalom, etc., who,
professing to worship the true God, called on him while in their
opposition to David; but God no more heard them than their idols heard
the Philistines.

[Psalms 18:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">psa 18:42</span></span>

Then did I beat them - God was with him, and they had only an arm of
flesh. No wonder then that his enemies were destroyed.

Small as the dust before the wind - This well expresses the manner in
which he treated the Moabites, Ammonites, and the people of Rabbah: "He
put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron;
and made them pass through the brick-kiln," etc. See [Sa2
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031) (note), and the notes there.

[Psalms 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">psa 18:43</span></span>

The strivings of the people - Disaffections and insurrections among my
own subjects, as in the revolt of Absalom, the civil war of Abner in
favor of Ish-bosheth, etc.

The head of the heathen - ראש גוים rosh goyim, "the chief," or
"governor, of the nations;" all the circumjacent heathen people; all
these were subdued by David, and brought under tribute.

A people whom I have not known - The people whom he knew were those of
the twelve tribes; those whom he did not know were the Syrians,
Philistines, Idumeans, etc. All these served him, that is, paid him
tribute.

[Psalms 18:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">psa 18:44</span></span>

As soon as they hear of me - His victories were so rapid and splendid
over powerful enemies, that they struck a general terror among the
people, and several submitted without a contest.

Strangers shall submit themselves unto me - Some translate this: "The
children of the foreign woman have lied unto me." This has been
understood two ways: My own people, who have sworn fealty to me, have
broken their obligation, and followed my rebellious son. Or, The
heathens, who have been brought under my yoke, have promised the most
cordial obedience, and flattered me with their tongues, while their
hearts felt enmity against me and my government. Nevertheless, even in
this unwilling subjection I was secure, my police being so efficient,
and my kingdom so strong.

[Psalms 18:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">psa 18:45</span></span>

The strangers shall fade away - בני נכר beney nechar, the same persons
mentioned above. They shall not be able to effect any thing against me;
יבלו yibbolu, "they shall fall as the leaves fall off the trees in
winter."

And be afraid out of their close places - Those who have formed
themselves into banditti, and have taken possession of rocks and
fortified places, shall be so afraid when they hear of my successes,
that they shall surrender at discretion, without standing a siege.
Perhaps all these verbs should be understood in the perfect tense, for
David is here evidently speaking of a kingdom at rest, all enemies
having been subdued; or, as the title is, when the Lord Had delivered
him from all his enemies.

[Psalms 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">psa 18:46</span></span>

The Lord liveth - By him alone I have gained all my victories; and he
continueth, and will be my Rock, the Source whence I may at all times
derive help and salvation. May his name be blessed! May his kingdom be
exalted!

[Psalms 18:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">psa 18:47</span></span>

God that avengeth me - The way that I took was after his own heart;
therefore he sustained me in it, and did me justice over my enemies.

Subdueth the people under me - He keeps down the spirits of the
disaffected, and weakens their hands. They are subdued, and they
continue under me; and this is the Lord's doing.

[Psalms 18:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">psa 18:48</span></span>

He delivereth me - That is, he hath delivered me, and continues to
deliver me, from all that rise up against me.

The violent man - Saul; this applies particularly to him.

[Psalms 18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 18:49</span></span>

WilI I give thanks unto thee - among the heathen - Quoted by St. Paul,
[Rom 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009), to prove that the calling
of the Gentiles was predicted, and that what then took place was the
fulfillment of that prediction.

But there is a sense in which it applies particularly to David, well
observed by Theodoret: "We see," says he, "evidently the fulfillment of
this prophecy; for even to the present day David praises the Lord among
the Gentiles by the mouth of true believers; seeing there is not a town,
village, hamlet, country, nor even a desert, where Christians dwell, in
which God is not praised by their singing the Psalms of David."

[Psalms 18:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">psa 18:50</span></span>

Great deliverance giveth he to his king - David was a king of God's
appointment, and was peculiarly favored by him. Literally, He is
magnifying the salvations of his king. He not only delivers, but follows
up those deliverances with innumerable blessings.

Showeth mercy - to David - I have no claim upon his bounty. I deserve
nothing from him, but he continues to show mercy.

To his seed - His posterity. So the words זרע zera and σπερμα, in the
Old and New Testament, should be universally translated. The common
translation is totally improper, and now more so than formerly, when
anatomy was less understood.

For evermore - עד עולם ad olam, for ever; through all duration of
created worlds. And more - the eternity that is beyond time. This shows
that another David is meant, with another kind of posterity, and another
sort of kingdom. From the family of David came the man Christ Jesus; his
posterity are the genuine Christians; his kingdom, in which they are
subjects, is spiritual. This government shall last through all time, for
Christianity will continue to prevail till the end of the world: and it
will be extended through eternity; for that is the kingdom of glory in
which Jesus reigns on the throne of his Father, and in which his
followers shall reign with him for ever and ever.

It has already been remarked that this whole Psalm has been understood
as relating to the passion and victories of Christ, and the success of
the Gospel in the earth. In this way Bishop Horne has understood and
paraphrased it; and in the same way it is considered by the ancient
Psalter, so often mentioned. Many of the primitive fathers and modern
interpreters have taken the same view of it. Those passages which I
judged to have this meaning I have pointed out, and have only to add
that, as David was a type of Christ, many things spoken of him
primarily, refer to our Lord ultimately; but much judgment and caution
are required in their application. To apply the whole Psalm in this way
appears to me very injudicious, and often derogatory from the majesty of
Christ. Let this be my excuse for not following the same track in which
many of my predecessors have gone.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 19](psa019)

</div>
