<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa058)  [Next](psa060) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 59](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 59:0</span></span>

The psalmist prays for deliverance from his enemies, whose desperate
wickedness he describes, [Psa 59:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001);
professes strong confidence in God, [Psa
59:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008); speaks of the destruction of
his enemies, [Psa 59:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011); praises
God for benefits already received; and determines to trust in him, [Psa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016), [Psa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017).

The title, "To the chief Musician, Al-taschith, Michtam of David," has
already occurred: and perhaps means no more than that the present Psalm
is to be sung as [Psa 57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001), the
first which bears this title. But there is here added the supposed
occasion on which David made this Psalm: it was, "when Saul sent, and
they watched the house to kill him." When the reader considers the whole
of this Psalm carefully, he will be convinced that the title does not
correspond to the contents. There is scarcely any thing in it that can
apply to the circumstances of Saul's sending his guards by night to keep
the avenues to the house of David, that when the morning came they might
seize and slay him; and of his being saved through the information given
him by his wife Michal, in consequence of which he was let down through
a window, and so escaped. See [Sa1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#010), [Sa1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#011). There is not in the whole Psalm
any positive allusion to this history; and there are many things in it
which show it to be utterly inconsistent with the facts of that history.
The Psalm most evidently agrees to the time of Nehemiah, when he was
endeavoring to rebuild the walls of Jerusalem, when the enterprise was
first mocked; then opposed by Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the
Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, who watched day and night that they
might cause the work to cease; and laid ambuscades for the life of
Nehemiah himself. Every part of the Psalm agrees to this: and I am
therefore of Calmet's opinion, that the Psalm was composed in that time,
and probably by Nehemiah, or by Esdras.

[Psalms 59:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 59:1</span></span>

Deliver me from mine enernies, O my God - A very proper prayer in the
mouth of Nehemiah, when resisted in his attempts to rebuild the walls of
Jerusalem by Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem, who opposed the work, and
endeavored to take away the life of the person whom God had raised up to
restore and rebuild Jerusalem. I conceive the Psalm to have been made on
this occasion; and on this hypothesis alone I think it capable of
consistent explanation.

[Psalms 59:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 59:2</span></span>

The workers of iniquity - Principally Sanballat the Horonite, Tobiah the
Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian; who were the chief enemies of the poor
returned captives.

Bloody men - The above, who sought the destruction of the Israelites;
and particularly, that of Nehemiah, whom four several times they
endeavored to bring into an ambush, that they might take away his life.
See [Neh 6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001).

[Psalms 59:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 59:3</span></span>

For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul - For my life. See the passages
referred to above.

[Psalms 59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 59:4</span></span>

They run and prepare themselves - They leave no stone unturned that they
may effect my destruction and prevent the building.

[Psalms 59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 59:5</span></span>

O Lord God of hosts - This was a proper view to take of God. when
Israel, a handful of poor distressed captives were surrounded and
oppressed by the heathen chiefs above mentioned, and their several
tribes. But Jehovah God of hosts, was the God of Israel; and hence
Israel had little to fear.

Be not merciful to any wicked transgressors - Do not favor the cause of
these wicked men. They are בגדי און bogedey aven, "changers of
iniquity:" they go through the whole round of evil; find out and
exercise themselves in all the varieties of transgression. How exactly
does this apply to Nehemiah's foes! They sought, by open attack, wiles,
flattery, foul speeches, fair speeches, threats, and ambuscades, to take
away his life. Do not show them favor, that they may not succeed in
their wicked designs. The prayer here is exactly the same in sentiment
with that of Nehemiah, [Neh 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#004), [Neh
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#005). Hear, our God, for we are
despised; turn their reproach upon their own heads; - cover not their
iniquity, "and let not their sin be blotted out."

[Psalms 59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 59:6</span></span>

They return at evening - When the beasts of prey leave their dens, and
go prowling about the cities and villages to get offal, and entrap
domestic animals, these come about the city to see if they may get an
entrance, destroy the work, and those engaged in it.

[Psalms 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 59:7</span></span>

They belch out with their mouth - They use the lowest insult, the basest
abuse. They deal in sarcasm, ridicule, slander, and lies.

[Psalms 59:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 59:8</span></span>

Thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them - They have mocked us; God will turn
them and their schemes into ridicule and contempt: "Thou shalt have all
these heathenish nations in derision."

[Psalms 59:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 59:9</span></span>

Because of his strength will I wait upon thee - With this reading, I can
make no sense of the passage. But instead of עזו uzzo, "his strength,"
עזי uzzi, "my strength," is the reading of fourteen of Kennicott's and
De Rossi's MSS., of the Vulgate, Septuagint, Chaldee, and, in effect, of
the Aethiopia, Syriac, and Arabic; and also of the Anglo-Saxon. To thee
I commit all my strength; all I have I derive from thee, and all the
good I possess I attribute to thee. The old Psalter translates, My
strenght I shall kepe till the, for myn uptaker thou art. See on [Psa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017) (note).

[Psalms 59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 59:10</span></span>

The God of my mercy shall prevent me - The mercy of God shall go before
me, and thus help me in all my doings.

God shall let me see my desire - The sentence is short. God will let me
see concerning my enemies, i.e., how he will treat them.

[Psalms 59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 59:11</span></span>

Slay them not, lest my people forget - I believe the Chaldee gives the
true sense of this verse: "Do not slay them suddenly, lest my people
should forget. Drive them from their habitations by thy power, and
reduce them to poverty by the loss of their property." Preserve them
long in a state of chastisement that Israel may see thou hast undertaken
for them: that thy hand is on the wicked for evil and on them for good.
The Canaanites were not suddenly destroyed; they were left to be pricks
in the eyes and thorns in the sides of the Israelites. It is in a sense
somewhat similar that the words are used here.

[Psalms 59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 59:12</span></span>

For the sin of their mouth - This verse has puzzled all the
commentators. If we take חטאת chattath for sin-offering instead of sin,
we shall get a better sense. Some of Nehemiah's enemies made a
profession of the Jewish religion. Tobiah and his son were allied by
marriage to the Jews; for Eliashib the priest had married his grandson
to the daughter of Sanballat; and this produced a connection with
Tobiah, the fast friend of Sanballat. Besides this very priest had given
Tobiah one of the great chambers in the house of the Lord, where
formerly the meat-offerings, the frankincense, the vessels, and the
tithe of the corn and wine and oil were kept; [Neh
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#004), [Neh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#005), [Neh
13:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007). And there were children of
Tobiah (probably the same family) who professed to be of the Levites,
Nethinim, or children of Solomon's servants; but as they could not show
their father's house and their seed, whether they were of Israel; these,
and others which were children of the priests, were put out of the
priesthood, and out of the sacred service, as polluted; as having sprung
from intermarriages with heathens. See [Ezr
2:59-62](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#059). Tobiah was expelled from the
house of the Lord by Nehemiah, and all his household stuff thrown out of
doors: [Neh 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007), [Neh
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#008). And this was doubtless one
ground of the enmity of Tobiah to Nehemiah; and in this verse of the
Psalm he may allude particularly to his occupancy of the chamber of
offerings, which offerings, instead of being given to the Levites, were
consumed by Tobiah and his household. This may be fairly gathered from
[Neh 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006), [Neh
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#010), [Neh
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#011). Here then we have the sin of
their mouth; their eating the offerings that belonged to the Levites; so
that the temple service was deserted, the Levites being obliged to go
and till the ground in order to obtain the means of life. And if we take
חטאת chattath for sin-offering, it may refer to promises of sacrifice
and offering which Tobiah and his family made, but never performed. They
ate instead of offering them; and here was the sin of their mouth, in
connection with the words of their lips, and their cursing and lying
which they spake, for which the psalmist calls upon the Lord to consume
them, that they may not be, [Psa
59:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#013).

[Psalms 59:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 59:14</span></span>

At evening let them return - He had mentioned before, [Psa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#006) that these persons came like
beasts of prey round the city striving to get in, that they might take
possession. Now, being fully assured of God's protection and that they
shall soon be made a public example, he says, Let them return and make a
noise like a dog, etc., like dogs, jackals, and other famished
creatures, who come howling about the city-walls for something to eat,
and wander up and down for meat, grumbling because they are not
satisfied, [Psa 59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015). Nehemiah had
made up all the breaches; and had the city guarded so well day and
night, by watches who continually relieved each other, that there was no
longer any fear of being taken by surprise: and now they must feel like
the hungry beasts who were disappointed of their prey.

[Psalms 59:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 59:16</span></span>

I will sing of thy power - For it was because thy hand was upon me for
good, that I have thus succeeded in my enterprises.

Yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy - I shall publish abroad what thou
hast done; and done not for my worthiness, nor for the worthiness of the
people; but for thy own mercy's sake.

In the day of my trouble - When I came with small means and feeble help,
and had the force and fraud of many enemies to contend with, besides the
corruption and unfaithfulness of my own people; thou wast then my
defense; and in all attacks, whether open or covered, my sure refuge. I
will, therefore, sing of thy mercy in the morning - I will hasten to
acquit myself of a duty I owe to thee for such singular interpositions
of mercy and power.

[Psalms 59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 59:17</span></span>

Unto thee, O my strength - A similar sentiment to that expressed, [Psa
59:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#009). But the words are very emphatic:
God is my strength; God is my elevation. My God is my mercy. I have
nothing good but what I have from God. And all springs from his dwelling
in me. God, therefore, shall have all the glory, both now and for ever.

As many persons may still think that the inscription to this Psalm is
correct, the following analysis may be applied in that way; or
considered as containing a general resolution of the Psalm, without
referring it to any particular occasion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 60](psa060)

</div>
