<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa045)  [Next](psa047.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 46:0</span></span>

The confidence of believers in God, [Psa
46:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001.md). The privileges of the Church,
[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004.md), [Psa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005.md); her enemies, and her helper,
[Psa 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006.md), [Psa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007.md). God's judgments tn the earth,
[Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008.md), [Psa
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009.md). He will be exalted among the
heathen, and throughout the earth, [Psa
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010.md), [Psa
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#011.md).

The title in the Hebrew is, "To the chief musician for the sons of
Korah; an ode upon Alamoth, or concerning the virgins:" possibly meaning
a choir of singing girls. Some translate the word secrets or mysteries;
and explain it accordingly. Calmet thinks it was composed by the
descendants of Korah, on their return from the Babylonian captivity,
when they had once more got peaceably settled in Jerusalem; and that the
disturbances to which it refers were those which took place in the
Persian empire after the death of Cambyses, when the Magi usurped the
government. Many other interpretations and conjectures are given of the
occasion of this fine ode. Houbigant thinks it was made on occasion of
an earthquake, which he supposes took place on the night that all
Sennacherib's army was destroyed, Dr. Kennicott thinks that alamoth
means a musical instrument. All I can pretend to say about it is, that
it is a very sublime ode; contains much consolation for the Church of
God; and was given by the inspiration of his Holy Spirit.

[Psalms 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 46:1</span></span>

God is our refuge - It begins abruptly, but nobly; ye may trust in whom
and in what ye please: but God (Elohim) is our refuge and strength.

A very present help - A help found to be very powerful and effectual in
straits and difficulties. The words are very emphatic: עזרה בצרות נמצא
מאד ezerah betsaroth nimtsa meod, "He is found an exceeding, or
superlative help in difficulties." Such we have found him, and therefore
celebrate his praise.

[Psalms 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 46:2</span></span>

Therefore will not we fear - Let what commotions will take place in the
earth, we will trust in the all-powerful arm of God. Probably the
earthquake referred to, here means political commotions, such as those
mentioned under the title; and by mountains, kings or secular states may
be intended.

[Psalms 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 46:3</span></span>

Though the waters thereof roar - Waters, in prophetic language, signify
people; and, generally, people in a state of political commotion, here
signified by the term roar. And by these strong agitations of the
people, the mountains - the secular rulers, shake with the swelling
thereof - tremble, for fear that these popular tumults should terminate
in the subversion of the state. This very people had seen all Asia in a
state of war. The Persians had overturned Asia Minor, and destroyed the
Babylonian empire: they had seen Babylon itself sacked and entered by
the Persians; and Cyrus, its conqueror, had behaved to them as a father
and deliverer. While their oppressors were destroyed, themselves were
preserved, and permitted to return to their own land.

[Psalms 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 46:4</span></span>

There is a river, the streams whereof - The Chaldee understands the
river, and its streams or divisions, as pointing out various peoples who
should be converted to the faith and thus make glad the city of God,
Jerusalem by their flowing together to the worship of the true God.

But the river may refer to the vast Medo-Persian army and its divisions:
those branches which took Babylon; and, instead of ruining and
destroying the poor Jews, preserved them alive, and gave them their
liberty; and thus the city of God, and the tabernacle of the Most High,
were gladdened.

[Psalms 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 46:5</span></span>

God is in the midst of her - God will not abandon them that trust in
him; he will maintain his own cause; and, if his Church should at any
time be attacked, he will help her and that right early - with the
utmost speed. As soon as the onset is made, God is there to resist. As
by the day-break the shadows and darkness are dissipated; so by the
bright rising of Jehovah, the darkness of adversity shall be scattered.

[Psalms 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 46:6</span></span>

The heathen raged - There had been terrible wars on all hands, and
mighty states were crushed, when the poor Jews were, by the especial
favor of God, kept in peace and safety. Kingdoms were moved while they
were preserved.

He uttered his voice - These words seem to refer to thunder, lightning,
and earthquake. The expressions, however, may be figurative, and refer
to the wars and desolations already mentioned. God gave the command; and
one empire was cast down, and another was raised up.

[Psalms 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 46:7</span></span>

The Lord of hosts is with us - We, feeble Jesvs, were but a handful of
men; but the Lord of hosts - the God of armies, was on our side. Him
none could attack with hope of success, and his legions could not be
over-thrown.

The God of Jacob - The God who appeared to Jacob in his distress, and
saved him out of all his troubles, appeared also for us his descendants,
and has amply proved to us that he has not forgotten his covenant.

[Psalms 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 46:8</span></span>

Come, behold the works of the Lord - See empires destroyed and
regenerated; and in such a way as to show that a supernatural agency has
been at work. By the hand of God alone could these great changes be
effected.

[Psalms 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 46:9</span></span>

He maketh wars to cease - By the death of Cambyses, and setting Darius,
son of Hystaspes, upon the Persian throne, he has tranquillized the
whole empire. That same God who for our unfaithfulness has delivered us
into the hands of our enemies, and subjected us to a long and grievous
captivity and affliction, has now turned our captivity, and raised us up
the most powerful friends and protectors in the very place in which we
have been enduring so great a fight of afflictions.

He breaketh the bow - He has rendered useless all the implements of war;
and so profound and secure is the general tranquillity, that the bow may
be safely broken, the spear snapped asunder, and the chariot burnt in
the fire.

[Psalms 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 46:10</span></span>

Be still, and know that I am God - הרפו harpu, Cease from your
provocations of the Divine justice; cease from murmuring against the
dispensations of his providence; cease from your labor for a season,
that ye may deeply reflect on the severity and goodness of God -
severity to those who are brought down and destroyed; goodness to you
who are raised up and exalted: - cease from sin and rebellion against
your God; let that disgrace you no more, that we may no more be brought
into distress and desolation.

Know that I am God - Understand that I am the Fountain of power, wisdom,
justice, goodness, and truth.

I will be exalted among the heathen - By the dispensation of
punishments, the heathen shall know me to be the God of justice; by the
publication of my Gospel among them, they shall know me to be the God of
goodness.

I will be exalted in the earth - I will have my salvation proclaimed in
every nation, among every people, and in every tongue.

[Psalms 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 46:11</span></span>

The Lord of hosts is with us - Having heard these declarations of God,
the people cry out with joy and exultation, The Lord of hosts, the God
of armies, is with us; we will not fear what man can do unto us.

The God of Jacob is our refuge - He who saved our fathers will save us,
and will never abandon his people in distress.

Selah - This is a firm, lasting, unshaken, well-tried truth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 47](psa047.md)

</div>
