<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa055)  [Next](psa057.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 56](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 56:0</span></span>

David prays for support against his enemies, whose wickedness he
describes, [Psa 56:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001.md); and foretells
their destruction, [Psa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#007.md);
expresses his confidence in God's mercy, expects deliverance, and
promises thanksgiving and obedience, [Psa
56:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008.md).

The title of this Psalm is very long: "To the conqueror, concerning the
dumb dove in foreign places: golden Psalm of David." The Vulgate
translates the original thus: "to the end. For the people who were afar
off from holy things." "This inscription David placed here for a title
when the Philistines - took him in Gath;" so the Septuagint and
Ethiopic. The Chaldee is profuse: "To praise, for the congregation of
Israel, which are compared to the silence of a dove, when they were afar
off from their cities but being returned, they praise the Lord of the
world, like David, contrite and upright, when the Philistines kept him
in Gath." The Syriac: "A thanksgiving of the righteous man, because he
was delivered from his enemy, and from the hand of Saul. Also concerning
the Jews and Christ." Bochart translates, "To the tune of the dove in
the remote woods."

If the title be at all authentic, David may mean himself and his
companions by it, when he escaped from the hands of the Philistines;
particularly from the hands of Achish, king of Gath. אלם elem signifies
to compress or bind together; also, a small band or body of men: and
יונת yonath, from ינה yanah, to oppress or afflict, is properly applied
to the dove, because of its being so defenseless, and often becoming the
prey of ravenous birds. It is possible, therefore, that the title may
imply no more than - "A prayer to God in behalf of himself and the
oppressed band that followed him, and shared his misfortunes in distant
places." Others will have it to mean a simple direction "To the master
of the band, to be sung to the time of a well-known ode, called 'The
dumb dove, in distant places.'" There is no end to conjectures, and all
the titles in the whole book are not worth one hour's labor. Perhaps
there is not one of them authentic. They may have been notices that such
a Psalm was to be sung to such and such a tune; giving the catch-words
of some well-known song or ode: a custom that prevails much among us in
songs and hymns, and is to be found even among the Asiatics.

[Psalms 56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 56:1</span></span>

Be merciful unto me - I am assailed both at home and abroad. I can go
nowhere without meeting with enemies: unless thou who art the Fountain
of mercy and the Most High, stand up in my behalf, my enemies will most
undoubtedly prevail against me. They fight against me continually, and I
am in the utmost danger of being swallowed up by them.

[Psalms 56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 56:2</span></span>

O thou Most High - מרום marom. I do not think that this word expresses
any attribute of God, or indeed is at all addressed to him. It
signifies, literally, from on high, or froen a high or elevated place:
"For the multitudes fight against me from the high or elevated place;"
the place of authority - the court and cabinet of Saul.

Most of the Versions begin the next verse with this word: "From the
light of the day, though I fear, yet will I trust in thee." From the
time that persecution waxes hot against me, though I often am seized
with fear, yet I am enabled to maintain my trust in thee. Dr. Kennicott
thinks there is a corruption here, and proposes to read: "I look upwards
all the day long."

[Psalms 56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 56:4</span></span>

In God I will praise his word - באלהים belohim may mean here, through
God, or by the help of God, I will praise his word. And, that he should
have cause to do it, he says, "In God I have put my trust," and
therefore he says, "I will not fear what flesh can do unto me." Man is
but Flesh, weak and perishing; God is an infinite Spirit, almighty and
eternal. He repeats this sentiment in the tenth and eleventh verses.

[Psalms 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 56:5</span></span>

Every day they wrest my words - They have been spies on my conduct
continually; they collected all my sayings, and wrested my words out of
their proper sense and meaning, to make them, by inuendos, speak treason
against Saul. They are full of evil purposes against me.

[Psalms 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 56:6</span></span>

They gather themselves together - They form cabals; have secret meetings
and consultations how they may most effectually destroy me, under the
pretense of justice and safety to the state.

They hide themselves - They do all secretly.

They mark my steps - They are constantly at my heels.

They wait for my soul - They lie in wait for my life. Our translators
have missed the meaning of נפש nephesh and ψυχε, - which generally
signify the animal life, not the immortal spirit, - more than any other
words in the Old or New Testament.

[Psalms 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 56:7</span></span>

Shall they escape by iniquity? - Shall such conduct go unpunished? Shall
their address, their dexterity in working iniquity, be the means of
their escape? No. "In anger, O God, wilt thou cast down the people."

[Psalms 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 56:8</span></span>

Thou tellest my wanderings - Thou seest how often I am obliged to shift
the place of my retreat. I am hunted every where; but thou numberest all
my hiding-places, and seest how often I am in danger of losing my life.

Put thou my tears into thy bottle - Here is an allusion to a very
ancient custom, which we know long obtained among the Greeks and Romans,
of putting the tears which were shed for the death of any person into
small phials, called lacrymatories or urns lacrymales and offering them
on the tomb of the deceased. Some of these were of glass, some of
pottery, and some of agate, sardonyx, etc. A small one in my own
collection is of hard baked clay.

Are they not in thy book? - Thou hast taken an exact account of all the
tears I have shed in relation to this business; and thou wilt call my
enemies to account for every tear.

[Psalms 56:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 56:9</span></span>

When I cry unto thee, then shall mine enemies turn back - As soon as
they know that I call upon thee, then, knowing that thou wilt hear and
save, my enemies will immediately take flight. The cry of faith and
prayer to God is more dreadful to our spiritual foes than the war-whoop
of the Indian is to his surprised brother savages.

This I know - I have often had experience of the Divine interposition;
and I know it will be so now, for God is with me. He who has God With
him need not fear the face of any adversary.

[Psalms 56:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 56:10</span></span>

, [Psa 56:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#011.md)

See on [Psa 56:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004) (note.md), where the
same words occur.

[Psalms 56:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 56:12</span></span>

Thy vows are upon me - I have promised in the most solemn manner to be
thy servant; to give my whole life to thee; and to offer for my
preservation sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving.

Reader, what hast thou vowed to God? To renounce the devil and all his
works, the pomps and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful
desires of the flesh; to keep God's holy word and commandment, and to
walk before him all the days of thy life. These things hast thou vowed;
and these vows are upon thee. Wilt thou pay them?

[Psalms 56:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 56:13</span></span>

Thou hast delivered my soul from death - My life from the grave, and my
soul from endless perdition.

My feet from falling - Thou hast preserved me from taking any false way,
and keepest me steady in my godly course; and so supportest me that I
may continue to walk before thee in the light of the living, ever
avoiding that which is evil, and moving towards that which is good;
letting my light shine before men, that they may see my good works, and
glorify my Father which is in heaven. To walk before God is to please
him; the light of the living signifies the whole course of human life,
with all its comforts and advantages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 57](psa057.md)

</div>
