<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa140)  [Next](psa142.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 141](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 141:0</span></span>

The psalmist prays that his devotions may be accepted, [Psa
141:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001.md), [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002.md). That he may be enabled so to
watch that he do not offend with his tongue; and that he may be
preserved from wickedness, [Psa 141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003.md),
[Psa 141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004.md). His willingness to receive
reproof, [Psa 141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005.md). He complains of
disasters, [Psa 141:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#006.md), [Psa
141:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#007.md). His trust in God, and prayer
against his enemies, [Psa 141:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008.md).

This Psalm is generally attributed to David, and considered to have been
composed during his persecution by Saul. Some suppose that he made it at
the time that he formed the resolution to go to Achish, king of Gath;
see 1 Samuel 26: It is generally thought to be an evening prayer, and
has long been used as such in the service of the Greek Church. It is in
several places very obscure.

[Psalms 141:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 141:1</span></span>

Lord, I cry unto thee - Many of David's Psalms begin with complaints;
but they are not those of habitual plaint and peevishness. He was in
frequent troubles and difficulties, and he always sought help in God. He
ever appears in earnest; at no time is there any evidence that the
devotion of David was formal. He prayed, meditated, supplicated,
groaned, cried, and even roared, as he tells us, for the disquietude of
his soul. He had speedy answers; for he had much faith, and was always
in earnest.

[Psalms 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 141:2</span></span>

As incense - Incense was offered every morning and evening before the
Lord, on the golden altar, before the veil of the sanctuary. [Exo
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039.md), and [Num
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#004.md).

As the evening sacrifice - This was a burnt-offering, accompanied with
flour and salt. But it does not appear that David refers to any
sacrifice, for he uses not זבח zebach, which is almost universally used
for a slaughtered animal; but מנחה minchah, which is generally taken for
a gratitude-offering or unbloody sacrifice. The literal translation of
the passage is, "Let my prayer be established for incense before thy
faces; and the lifting up of my hands for the evening oblation." The
psalmist appears to have been at this time at a distance from the
sanctuary, and therefore could not perform the Divine worship in the way
prescribed by the law. What could he do? Why, as he could not worship
according to the letter of the law, he will worship God according to the
spirit; then prayer is accepted in the place of incense; and the lifting
up of his hands, in gratitude and self-dedication to God, is accepted in
the place of the evening minchah or oblation. Who can deplore the
necessity that obliged the psalmist to worship God in this way?

[Psalms 141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 141:3</span></span>

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth - While there are so many spies on
my actions and words, I have need to be doubly guarded, that my enemies
may have no advantage against me. Some think the prayer is against
impatience; but if he were now going to Gath, it is more natural to
suppose that he was praying to be preserved from dishonoring the truth,
and from making sinful concessions in a heathen land; and at a court
where, from his circumstances, it was natural to suppose he might be
tempted to apostasy by the heathen party. The following verse seems to
support this opinion.

[Psalms 141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 141:4</span></span>

Let me eat not of their dainties - This may refer either to eating
things forbidden by the law; or to the partaking in banquets or feasts
in honor of idols.

[Psalms 141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 141:5</span></span>

Let the righteous smite me - This verse is extremely difficult in the
original. The following translation, in which the Syriac, Vulgate,
Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic nearly agree, appears to me to be the
best: "Let the righteous chastise me in mercy, and instruct me: but let
not the oil of the wicked anoint my head. It shall not adorn (יני yani,
from נוה navah) my head; for still my prayer shall be against their
wicked works."

The oil of the wicked may here mean his smooth flattering speeches; and
the psalmist intimates that he would rather suffer the cutting reproof
of the righteous than the oily talk of the flatterer. If this were the
case, how few are there now-a-days of his mind! On referring to Bishop
Horsley, I find his translation is something similar to my own: -

Let the just one smite me, let the pious remove me.

Let not the ointment of the impious anoint my head.

But still I will intrude in their calamities.

[Psalms 141:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 141:6</span></span>

When their judges are overthrown in stony places - בידי סלע biyedey
sela, "In the hands of the rock." Does this rock signify a strong or
fortified place; and its hands the garrison which have occupied it, by
whom these judges were overthrown? If we knew the occasion on which this
Psalm was made, we might be the better able to understand the allusions
in the text.

They shall hear my words; for they are sweet - Some think there is here
an allusion to David's generous treatment of Saul in the cave of
En-gedi, and afterwards at the hill of Hachilah, in this verse, which
might be translated: "Their judges have been dismissed in the rocky
places; and have heard my words, that they were sweet." Or perhaps there
may be a reference to the death of Saul and his sons, and the very
disastrous defeat of the Israelites at Gilboa. If so, the seventh verse
will lose its chief difficulty, Our bones are scattered at the grave's
mouth; but if we take them as referring to the slaughter of the priests
at Nob, then, in stead of translating לפי שאול lephi sheol, at the
grave's mouth, we may translate at the command of Saul; and then the
verse will point out the manner in which those servants of the Lord were
massacred; Doeg cut them in pieces; hewed them down as one cleaveth
wood. Some understand all this of the cruel usage of the captives in
Babylon. I could add other conjectures, and contend for my own; but they
are all too vague to form a just ground for decided opinion.

[Psalms 141:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 141:8</span></span>

But mine eyes are unto thee - In all times, in all places, on all
occasions, I will cleave unto the Lord, and put my whole confidence in
him.

[Psalms 141:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 141:10</span></span>

Let the wicked fall into their own nets - This is generally the case;
those who lay snares for others fall into them themselves. Harm watch,
harm catch, says the old adage. How many cases have occurred where the
spring guns that have been set for thieves have shot some of the family!
I have known some dismal cases of this kind, where some of the most
amiable lives have been sacrificed to this accursed machine.

Whilst - I withal escape - They alone are guilty; they alone spread the
nets and gins; I am innocent, and God will cause me to escape.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 142](psa142.md)

</div>
