<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa101)  [Next](psa103.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 102](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 102:0</span></span>

The complaint and miserable state of the poor captives, [Psa
102:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001.md); the expectation of
deliverance, [Psa 102:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#012.md); the
conversion of the heathen, [Psa
102:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#015.md); the termination of the
captivity, [Psa 102:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019.md); the great
frailty of man, [Psa 102:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#023.md), [Psa
102:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024.md); the unchangeableness of God,
[Psa 102:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025.md); the permanence of the
Church, [Psa 102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028.md).

The Hebrew, and nearly all the Versions, give the following title to
this Psalm: A prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours
out his sighing before the Lord. There seems to be little doubt that
this is the prayer of the captives in Babylon, when, towards the end of
the captivity, they were almost worn out with oppression, cruelty, and
distress. The Psalm has been attributed to Daniel, to Jeremiah, to
Nehemiah, or to some of the other prophets who flourished during the
time of the captivity. The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews has
applied the twenty-fifth, twenty sixth, and twenty seventh verses to our
Lord, and the perpetuity of his kingdom.

[Psalms 102:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 102:1</span></span>

Hear my prayer - The chief parts of the Psalm answer well to the title:
it is the language of the deepest distress, and well directed to Him
from whom alone help can come.

[Psalms 102:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 102:3</span></span>

My days are consumed like smoke - He represents himself (for the
psalmist speaks in the name of the people) under the notion of a pile of
combustible matter, placed upon a fire, which soon consumes it; part
flying away in smoke, and the residue lying on the hearth in the form of
charred coal and ashes. The Chaldeans were the fire, and the captive
Jews the fuel, thus converted into smoke and ashes.

[Psalms 102:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 102:4</span></span>

My heart is smitten, and withered like grass - The metaphor here is
taken from grass cut down in the meadow. It is first smitten with the
scythe, and then withered by the sun. Thus the Jews were smitten with
the judgments of God; and they are now withered under the fire of the
Chaldeans.

[Psalms 102:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 102:6</span></span>

I am like a pelican of the wilderness - It may be the pelican or the
bittern. The original, קאת kaath, is mentioned [Lev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#018) (note.md), and is there described.
See the note.

Owl of the desert - כוש cos, some species of owl; probably the night
raven. See the notes referred to above.

[Psalms 102:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 102:7</span></span>

As a sparrow alone - צפור tsippor, seems to be often used for any small
bird, such as the swallow, sparrow, or the like. Bochart supposes the
screech owl is intended.

[Psalms 102:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 102:8</span></span>

They that are mad against me are sworn against me - The Chaldeans are
determined to destroy us; and they have bound themselves by oath to do
it. See a similar case related [Act
23:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012.md), where a number of Jews had
bound themselves by an oath neither to eat nor drink till they had slain
Paul.

[Psalms 102:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 102:9</span></span>

I have eaten ashes like bread - Fearful of what they might do, we all
humbled ourselves before thee, and sought thy protection; well knowing
that, unless we were supernaturally assisted, we must all have perished;
our enemies having sworn our destruction.

[Psalms 102:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 102:10</span></span>

For thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down - Thou hast lifted me on
high, that thou mightest dash me down with the greater force.

We were exalted in thy favor beyond any people, and now thou hast made
us the lowest and most abject of the children of men.

[Psalms 102:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 102:11</span></span>

My days are like a shadow that declineth - Or rather, My days decline
like the shadow. I have passed my meridian, and the sun of my prosperity
is about to set for ever. There may be here an allusion to the
declination of the sun towards the south, which, by shortening their
days, would greatly lengthen their nights. Similar to the exclamation of
a contemporary prophet, [Jer 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#020.md) :
"The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved." There
is now scarcely any human hope of our deliverance.

[Psalms 102:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 102:12</span></span>

But thou, O Lord, shalt endure for ever - Our life is a shadow; we can
scarcely be called beings when compared with thee, for thou art eternal.
Have mercy upon us, creatures of a day, and thy kindness shall be a
memorial in all our generations.

[Psalms 102:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 102:13</span></span>

Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion - While he is humbled at the
footstool of mercy, and earnestly praying for mercy, an answer of peace
is given; he is assured, not only that they shall be delivered, but that
the time of deliverance is at hand. The set time - the seventy years
predicted by Jeremiah, was ended; and God gave him to see that he was
ever mindful of his promises.

[Psalms 102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 102:14</span></span>

Thy servants take pleasure in her stones - Though Jerusalem was at this
time in a heap of ruins, yet even her rubbish was sacred in the eyes of
the pious; for this had been the city of the great King.

[Psalms 102:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 102:15</span></span>

So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord - It is granted that
after the edict of Cyrus to restore and rebuild Jerusalem which was
about four hundred and ninety years before Christ, the name of the true
God was more generally known among the heathen; and the translating the
Sacred Writings into Greek, by the command of Ptolemy Philadelphus, king
of Egypt, about two hundred and eighty-five years before the Christian
era, spread a measure of the light of God in the Gentile world which
they had not before seen. Add to this the disperson of the Jews into
different parts of the Roman empire, after Judea became a Roman
province, which took place about sixty years before the advent of our
Lord; and we may consider these as so many preparatory steps to the
conversion of the heathen by the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. And to
this last general illumination of the Gentile world the psalmist must
allude here, when he speaks of "the heathen fearing God's name, and all
the kings of the earth his glory."

[Psalms 102:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 102:16</span></span>

When the Lord shall build up Zion - It is such a difficult thing, so
wholly improbable, so far out of the reach of human power, that when God
does it, he must manifest his power and glory in a most extraordinary
manner.

[Psalms 102:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 102:17</span></span>

The prayer of the destitute - הערער haarar of him who is laid in utter
ruin, who is entirely wasted.

[Psalms 102:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 102:18</span></span>

The people which shall be created - "The Gentiles, who shall be brought
to the knowledge of salvation by Christ," as the Syriac states in its
inscription to this Psalm: how often the conversion of the soul to God
is represented as a new creation, no reader of the New Testament need be
told. See [Eph 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010.md); [Eph
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md); [Co2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017.md); [Gal
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015.md). Even the publication of the
Gospel, and its influence among men, is represented under the notion of
"creating a new heaven and a new earth," [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017.md), [Isa
65:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#018.md).

[Psalms 102:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 102:19</span></span>

For he hath looked down - This, with the three following verses, seems
to me to contain a glorious prophecy of the incarnation of Christ, and
the gathering in of the Jews and the Gentiles to him. The Lord looks
down from heaven, and sees the whole earth groaning and travailing in
pain; his eye affects his heart, and he purposes their salvation.

[Psalms 102:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 102:20</span></span>

To hear the groaning - By sin, all the inhabitants of the earth are
miserable. They have broken the Divine laws, are under the arrest of
judgment, and all cast into prison, They have been tried, found guilty,
and appointed to die; they groan under their chains, are alarmed at the
prospect of death, and implore mercy.

[Psalms 102:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 102:21</span></span>

To declare the name of the Lord - To publish that Messenger of the
Covenant in whom the name of the Lord is, that Messiah in whom the
fullness of the Godhead dwelt; and to commence at Jerusalem, that the
first offers of mercy might be made to the Jews, from whom the word of
reconciliation was to go out to all the ends of the earth.

[Psalms 102:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 102:22</span></span>

When the people are gathered together - When all the Gentiles are
enlightened, and the kings of the earth brought to pay homage to the
King of kings.

[Psalms 102:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 102:23</span></span>

He weakened my strength in the way - We are brought so low in our
captivity by oppression, by every species of hard usage, and by death,
that there is now no hope of our restoration by any efforts of our own.

[Psalms 102:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 102:24</span></span>

I said, O my God - This and the following verses seem to be the form of
prayer which the captives used previously to their deliverance.

Thy years are throughout all generations - This was a frequent argument
used to induce God to hear prayer. We are frail and perishing; thou art
everlasting: deliver us, and we will glorify thee.

[Psalms 102:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 102:25</span></span>

Of old hast thou laid the foundation - None taught of God ever imagined
the world to have been eternal. Of old, לפנים lephanim, before there
were any faces or appearances, thou didst lay the foundations of the
earth. It was created by thee; it did not grow by accretion or
aggregation from a pre-existent nucleus. There was nothing; and thou
didst produce being - substance or matter. Out of that created matter
thou didst make the earth and the heavens.

[Psalms 102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 102:26</span></span>

They shall perish - Nothing can be eternal a parte ante, or a parte
post, but thyself. Even that which thou hast created, because not
necessarily eternal, must be perishable; necessary duration belongs to
God only; and it is by his will and energy alone that universal nature
is preserved in existence, and preserved from running into speedy
disorder, decay, and ruin.

Yea, all of them shall wax old - Every thing must deteriorate, unless
preserved by thy renewing and invigorating energy. Even the heavens and
the earth are subject to this law; for that which is not, from the
infinite perfection of its own nature, Eternal, must be perishable;
therefore the heavens and the earth must necessarily come to an end.
They contain the seeds of their own dissolution. It is true that in
sublunary things, the vicissitudes of seasons is a sort of check to the
principle of dissolution; but it only partially corrects this tendency.
Even the productions of the earth wear out or deteriorate. Plant the
same seed or grain for several years consecutively, and it degenerates
so as at last not to be worth the labor of tillage, however expensively
the soil may be manured in which it is planted. I may instance in wheat
and in the potatoe, the two grand supporters of life in European
countries. All other seeds and plants, as far as they have fallen under
my observation, are subject to the same law.

[Psalms 102:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 102:27</span></span>

But thou art the same - ואתה הוא veattah Hu, but thou art He, that is,
The Eternal; and, consequently, he who only has immortality.

Thy years shall have no end - לא יתמו lo yittammu, "they shall not be
completed." Every thing has its revolution - its conception, growth,
perfection, decay, dissolution, and death, or corruption. It may be said
that regeneration restores all these substances; and so it does in a
measure, but not without deterioration. The breed of animals, as well as
vegetables, wears out; but God's eternal round has no completion. I
repeat it, - what is necessarily eternal is unchangeable and
imperishable; all created beings are perishable and mutable, because not
eternal. God alone is eternal; therefore God alone is imperishable and
immutable.

[Psalms 102:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 102:28</span></span>

The children of thy servants shall continue - Thy Church shall be
permanent, because founded on thee, it shall live throughout all the
revolutions of time. And as thy followers are made partakers of the
Divine nature they shall live in union with God in the other world,
deriving eternal duration from the inexhaustible Fountain of being.
Nothing can be permanent but by God's supporting and renewing influence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 103](psa103.md)

</div>
