<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa115)  [Next](psa117) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 116](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 116:0</span></span>

The psalmist praises God for his deliverance from thraldom, which he
compares to death and the grave, [Psa
116:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001). The exercises through which
he had passed, [Psa 116:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010), [Psa
116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011). His gratitude for these
mercies, and resolution to live to God's glory, [Psa
116:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012).

This Psalm is also without a title, and its author is unknown. It
appears to have been written after the captivity, and to be a
thanksgiving to God for that glorious event. The psalmist compares this
captivity to death and the grave; and shows the happy return to the
promised land, called here The land of the living. The people recollect
the vows of God which were upon them, and purpose to fulfill them. They
exhult at being enabled to worship God in the temple at Jerusalem.

The Syriac, which abounds in conjectural prefaces, supposes this Psalm
to have been written on the occasion of Saul coming to the mouth of the
cave in which David lay hidden; but spiritually taken, it relates to the
bringing of a new people, the Gentiles, to the Christian faith. In a few
MSS. this Psalm is joined to the preceding. Many think it relates wholly
to the passion, death, and triumph of Christ. Most of the fathers were
of this opinion.

[Psalms 116:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 116:1</span></span>

I love the Lord because he hath heard - How vain and foolish is the
talk, "To love God for his benefits to us is mercenary, and cannot be
pure love!" Whether pure or impure, there is no other love that can flow
from the heart of the creature to its Creator. We love him, said the
holiest of Christ's disciples, because he first loved us; and the
increase of our love and filial obedience is in proportion to the
increased sense we have of our obligation to him. We love him for the
benefits bestowed on us. Love begets love.

[Psalms 116:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 116:2</span></span>

Because he hath inclined his ear - The psalmist represents himself to be
so sick and weak, that he could scarcely speak. The Lord, in
condescension to this weakness, is here considered as bowing down his
ear to the mouth of the feeble suppliant, that he may receive every word
of his prayer.

Therefore will I call upon him - I have had such blessed success in my
application to him, that I purpose to invoke him as long as I shall
live. He that prays much will be emboldened to pray more, because none
can supplicate the throne of grace in vain.

[Psalms 116:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 116:3</span></span>

The sorrows of death - חבלי מות chebley maveth, the cables or cords of
death; alluding to their bonds and fetters during their captivity; or to
the cords by which a criminal is bound who is about to be led out to
execution; or to the bandages in which the dead were enveloped, when
head, arms, body, and limbs were all laced down together.

The pains of hell - מצרי שאול metsarey sheol the straitnesses of the
grave. So little expectation was there of life, that he speaks as if he
were condemned, executed, and closed up in the tomb. Or, he may refer
here to the small niches in cemeteries, where the coffins of the dead
were placed.

Because this Psalm has been used in the thanksgiving of women after safe
delivery, it has been supposed that the pain suffered in the act of
parturition was equal for the time to the torments of the damned. But
this supposition is shockingly absurd; the utmost power of human nature
could not, for a moment, endure the wrath of God, the deathless worm,
and the unquenchable fire. The body must die, be decomposed, and be
built up on indestructible principles, before this punishment can be
borne.

[Psalms 116:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 116:5</span></span>

Gracious is the Lord - In his own nature.

And righteous - In all his dealings with men.

Our God is merciful - Of tender compassion to all penitents.

[Psalms 116:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 116:6</span></span>

The Lord preserved the simple - פתאים pethaim, which all the Versions
render little ones. Those who are meek and lowly of heart, who feel the
spirit of little children, these he preserves, as he does little
children; and he mentions this circumstance, because the Lord has a
peculiar regard for these young ones, and gives his angels charge
concerning them. Were it otherwise, children are exposed to so many
dangers and deaths, that most of them would fall victims to accidents in
their infancy.

[Psalms 116:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 116:7</span></span>

Return unto thy rest, O my soul - God is the center to which all
immortal spirits tend, and in connection with which alone they can find
rest. Every thing separated from its center is in a state of violence;
and, if intelligent, cannot be happy. All human souls, while separated
from God by sin, are in a state of violence, agitation, and misery. From
God all spirits come; to him all must return, in order to be finally
happy. This is true in the general case; though, probably, the rest
spoken of here means the promised land, into which they were now
returning.

A proof of the late origin of this Psalm is exhibited in this verse, in
the words למנוחיכי limenuchaichi, "to thy rest," and עליכי alaichi, "to
thee," which are both Chaldaisms.

[Psalms 116:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 116:8</span></span>

Thou hast delivered my soul from death - Thou hast rescued my life from
the destruction to which it was exposed.

Mine eyes from tears - Thou hast turned my sorrow into joy.

My feet from falling - Thou hast taken me out of the land of snares and
pitfalls, and brought me into a plain path. How very near does our
ancient mother tongue come to this: For thou he nerode sawle mine of
deathe, eapan mine of tearum; fet mine of slide. And this language is
but a little improved in the old Psalter: -

For he toke my saule fra dede; my eghen fra teres; my fete fra slippyng.

[Psalms 116:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 116:9</span></span>

I will walk before the Lord - אתהלך ethhallech, I will set myself to
walk. I am determined to walk; my eyes are now bright ened, so that I
can see; my feet are strengthened, so that I can walk; and my soul is
alive, so that I can walk with the living.

The Vulgate, the Septuagint, the Ethiopic, the Arabic, and the
Anglo-Saxon end this Psalm here, which is numbered the cxivth; and begin
with the tenth verse another Psalm, which they number cxvth; but this
division is not acknowledged by the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Syriac.

[Psalms 116:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 116:10</span></span>

I believed, therefere have I spoken - Distressed and afflicted as I was,
I ever believed thy promises to be true; but I had great struggles to
maintain my confidence; for my afflictions were great, oppressive, and
of long standing.

It is scarcely worth observing that the letters called heemantic by the
Hebrew grammarians, and which are used in forming the derivatives from
the roots, are taken from the first word in this verse, האמנתי heemanti,
"I have believed;" as the prefixes in that language are found in the
technical words משה וכלב Mosheh vecaleb, "Moses and Caleb;" and the
formatives of the future are found in the word איתן eythan, "strength."

[Psalms 116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 116:11</span></span>

I said in my haste - This is variously translated: I said in my Light,
Chaldee. In my excess, or ecstasy, Vulgate. In my ecstasy, εκστασει,
Septuagint. fi tahayury, in my giddiness, Arabic. In my fear or tremor,
Syriac. I quoth in outgoing mine, when I was beside myself, Anglo-Saxon.
In myn oute passyng, old Psalter. When passion got the better of my
reason, when I looked not at God, but at my afflictions, and the
impossibility of human relief.

All men are liars - כל האדם כזב col haadam cozeb, "the whole of man is a
lie." Falsity is diffused through his nature; deception proceeds from
his tongue; his actions are often counterfeit. He is imposed on by
others, and imposes in his turn; and on none is there any dependence
till God converts their heart.

"O what a thing were man, if his attires

Should alter with his mind,

And, like a dolphin's skin,

His clothes combine with his desires!

Surely if each one saw another's heart,

There would be no commerce;

All would disperse, And live apart."

Hebert.

To the same purpose I shall give the following Italian proverb: -

Con arte e con inganno,

Si vive mezzo l'anno.

Con inganno e con arte

Si vive l' altro parti.

"Men live half the year by deceit and by art;

By art and deceit men live the other part."

Who gives this bad character of mankind? Man.

[Psalms 116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 116:12</span></span>

What shall I render - מה אשיב mah ashib, "What shall I return?"

For his benefits - תגמולוהי tagmulohi, "His retributions," the returns
he had made to my prayers and faith.

[Psalms 116:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 116:13</span></span>

I will take the cup of salvation - Literally, The cup of salvation, or
deliverance, will I lift up. Alluding to the action in taking the cup of
blessing among the Jews, which, when the person or master of the family
lifted up, he said these words, "Blessed be the Lord, the Maker of the
world, who has created the fruit of the vine!"

But it may probably allude to the libation-offering, [Num
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#007); for the three last verses seem
to intimate that the psalmist was now at the temple, offering the
meat-offering, drink-offering, and sacrifices to the Lord. Cup is often
used by the Hebrews to denote plenty or abundance. So, the cup of
trembling, an abundance of misery; the cup of salvation, an abundance of
happiness.

And call upon the name of the Lord - I will invoke his name, that I may
get more of the same blessings; for the only return that God requires
is, that we ask for more. Who is like God? One reason why we should
never more come to a fellow-mortal for a favor is, we have received so
many already. A strong reason why we should claim the utmost salvation
of God is, because we are already so much in debt to his mercy. Now this
is the only way we have of discharging our debts to God; and yet,
strange to tell, every such attempt to discharge the debt only serves to
increase it! Yet, notwithstanding, the debtor and creditor are
represented as both pleased, both profited, and both happy in each
other! Reader, pray to him, invoke his name; receive the cup - accept
the abundance of salvation which he has provided thee, that thou mayest
love and serve him with a perfect heart.

[Psalms 116:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 116:14</span></span>

I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people -
He was probably now bringing his offering to the temple. These words are
repeated, [Psa 116:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#018).

[Psalms 116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 116:15</span></span>

Precious in the sight of the Lord - Many have understood this verse as
meaning, "the saints are too precious in the Lord's sight, lightly to
give them over to death:" and this, Calmet contends, is the true sense
of the text. Though they have many enemies, their lives are precious in
his sight, and their foes shall not prevail against them.

[Psalms 116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 116:16</span></span>

I am thy servant - Thou hast preserved me alive. I live with, for, and
to Thee. I am thy willing domestic, the son of thine handmaid - like one
born in thy house of a woman already thy property. I am a servant, son
of thy servant, made free by thy kindness; but, refusing to go out, I
have had my ear bored to thy door-post, and am to continue by free
choice in thy house for ever. He alludes here to the case of the servant
who, in the year of jubilee being entitled to his liberty, refused to
leave his master's house; and suffered his ear to be bored to the
door-post, as a proof that by his own consent he agreed to continue in
his master's house for ever.

[Psalms 116:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 116:17</span></span>

I will offer to thee - As it is most probable that this Psalm celebrates
the deliverance from Babylon, it is no wonder that we find the psalmist
so intent on performing the rites of his religion in the temple at
Jerusalem, which had been burnt with fire, and was now reviving out of
its ruins, the temple service having been wholly interrupted for nearly
four-score years.

[Psalms 116:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 116:19</span></span>

In the midst of thee, O Jerusalem - He speaks as if present in the city,
offering his vowed sacrifices in the temple to the Lord.

Most of this Psalm has been applied to our Lord and his Church; and in
this way it has been considered as prophetic; and, taken thus, it is
innocently accommodated, and is very edifying. This is the
interpretation given of the whole by the old Psalter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 117](psa117)

</div>
