<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa117)  [Next](psa119) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 118:0</span></span>

A general exhortation to praise God for his mercy, [Psa
118:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001). The psalmist, by his own
experience, encourages the people to trust in God, and shows them the
advantage of it, [Psa 118:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005); then
describes his enemies, and shows how God enabled him to destroy them,
[Psa 118:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010). The people rejoice on
the account, [Psa 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015), [Psa
118:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016). He speaks again of the help he
received from the Lord; and desires admission into the temple, that he
may enter and praise the Lord, [Psa
118:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017). The gate is opened, [Psa
118:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#020). He offers praise, 21. The
priests, etc., acknowledge the hand of the Lord in the deliverance
wrought, [Psa 118:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022). The psalmist
prays for prosperity, [Psa 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025). The
priest performs his office, blesses the people, and all join in praise,
[Psa 118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026), [Psa
118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027). The psalmist expresses his
confidence, [Psa 118:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#028). The general
doxology, or chorus, [Psa 118:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#029).

Most probably David was the author of this Psalm, though many think it
was written after the captivity. It partakes of David's spirit, and
every where shows the hand of a master. The style is grand and noble;
the subject, majestic.

Dr. Kennicott, who joins this and the hundred and seventeenth Psalm
together, considers the whole as a dialogue, and divides it accordingly.
The whole of the hundred and seventeenth he gives to the psalmist as
part the first, with the first four verses of the hundred and
eighteenth. The second part, which is from the fifth verse to the
twenty-first inclusive, he gives to the Messiah. The third part, from
the twenty-second verse to the twenty-seventh, he gives to the chorus.
And the fourth part, the twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth verses, he gives
to the psalmist. Of the whole he has given an improved version.

Bishop Horsley is still different. He considers the hundred and
seventeenth Psalm as only the exordium of this. The whole poem, he
states, is a triumphant processional song. The scene passes at the front
gate of the temple. A conqueror with his train appears before it; he
demands admittance to return thanks for his deliverance and final
success, in an expedition of great difficulty and danger. The conqueror
and his train sing the hundred and seventeenth Psalm, and the first four
verses of the hundred and eighteenth, as they advance to the gate of the
temple, in this manner - The hundred and seventeenth Psalm, Chorus of
the whole procession. The first verse of the hundred and eighteenth
Psalm, A single voice. The second, Another single voice. The third, A
third single voice. The fourth, Chorus of the whole procession. Arrived
at the temple gate, the conqueror alone sings the fifth, sixth, and
seventh verses. The eighth and ninth are sung by his train in chorus.
The conqueror, again alone, sings the tenth, eleventh, twelfth,
thirteenth, and fourteenth verses. His train, in chorus, sing the
fifteenth and sixteenth. The conqueror alone sings the seventeenth,
eighteenth, and nineteenth verses. The twentieth is sung by the priests
and Levites within, in chorus. The twenty-fifth by the conqueror alone
within the gates. The twenty-sixth, by the priests and Levites in
chorus. The twenty-seventh, by the conqueror's train in chorus. The
twenty-eighth, by the conqueror alone. The twenty-ninth, by the united
chorus of priests and Levites, and the conqueror's train, all within the
gates. "Now," the learned bishop adds, "the Jewish temple was a type of
heaven; the priests within represent the angelic host attending round
the throne of God in heaven; the Conqueror is Messiah; and his train,
the redeemed." On this distribution the bishop has given a new version.
The simple distribution into parts, which I have given in the contents,
is, in my opinion, the best. Ingenious as Dr. Kennicott and Bishop
Horsley are, they seem to me too mechanical. This is the last of those
Psalms which form the great hallel, which the Jews sung at the end of
the passover.

[Psalms 118:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 118:2</span></span>

Let Israel now say - Seeing the hand of the Lord so visibly, and the
deliverance gained, that God's mercy endureth for ever.

[Psalms 118:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 118:3</span></span>

The house of Aaron - The priesthood is still preserved, and the temple
worship restored.

[Psalms 118:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 118:4</span></span>

That fear the Lord - All sincere penitents and genuine believers. See
the notes on [Psa 115:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#009) (note).

[Psalms 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 118:5</span></span>

I called upon the Lord - I am a standing proof and living witness of
God's mercy. Take encouragement from me.

[Psalms 118:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 118:7</span></span>

The Lord taketh my part with them that help me - Literally, The Lord is
to me among my helpers. Therefore shall I see my desire upon them that
hate me. Literally, And I shall look among them that hate me. As God is
on my side, I fear not to look the whole of them in the face. I shall
see them defeated.

[Psalms 118:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 118:8</span></span>

Better to trust in the Lord - Man is feeble, ignorant, fickle, and
capricious; it is better to trust in Jehovah than in such.

[Psalms 118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 118:9</span></span>

In princes - Men of high estate are generally proud, vainglorious,
self-confident, and rash: it is better to trust in God than in them.
Often they cannot deliver, and often they will not when they can.
However, in the concerns of our salvation, and in matters which belong
to Providence, they can do nothing.

[Psalms 118:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 118:10</span></span>

All nations compassed me about - This is by some supposed to relate to
David, at the commencement of his reign, when all the neighboring
Philistine nations endeavored to prevent him from establishing himself
in the kingdom. Others suppose it may refer to the Samaritans, Idumeans,
Ammonites, and others, who endeavored to prevent the Jews from
rebuilding their city and their temple after their return from captivity
in Babylon.

But in the name of the Lord will I destroy them - Dr. Kennicott renders
אמילם amilam, "I shall disappoint them;" Bishop Horsley, "I cut them to
pieces;" Mr. N. Berlin, repuli eas, "I have repelled them." "I will cut
them off;" Chaldee. Ultus sum in eos, "I am avenged on them;" Vulgate.
So the Septuagint.

[Psalms 118:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 118:12</span></span>

They compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire of
thorns - I shall refer to Dr. Delaney's note on this passage. The reader
has here in miniature two of the finest images in Homer; which, if his
curiosity demands to be gratified, he will find illustrated and
enlarged, Iliad ii., ver. 86.

\- Επεσσευοντο δε λαοι.

Ηΰτε εθνεα εισι μελισσαων αδιναων,

Πετρης εκ γλαφυρης αιει νεον ερχομεναων,

Βοτρυδον δε πετονται επ' ανθεσιν ειαρινοισιν,

Αἱ μεν τ' ενθα ἁλις πεποτηαται, αἱ δε τε ανθα

Ὡς των εθνεα πολλα νεων απο και κλισιαων

Ηΐονος προπαροιθε βαθειης εστιχοωντο

Ιλαδον εις αγορην.

\- The following host,

Poured forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.

As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees,

Clustering in heaps on heaps, the driving bees,

Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,

With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms:

Dusky they spread a close embodied crowd,

And o'er the vale descends the living cloud;

So from the tents and ships a lengthening train

Spreads all the beach, and wide o'ershades the plain;

Along the region runs a deafening sound;

Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground.

Pope

The other image, the fire consuming the thorns, we find in the same
book, ver. 455: -

Ηΰτε πυρ αΐδηλον επιφλεγει ασπετον ὑλην,

Ουρεος εν κορυφης· ἑκαθεν δε τε φαινεται αυγη·

Ὡς των ερχομενων, απο χαλκου θεσπεσιοιο

Αιγλη παμφανοωσα δι' αιθερος ουρανον ἱκεν.

As on some mountain, through the lofty grove,

The crackling flames ascend and blaze above;

The fires expanding, as the winds arise,

Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies;

So, from the polished arms, and brazen shields,

A gleamy splendor flashed along the fields.

Pope.

The arms resembling a gleaming fire is common both to the psalmist and
Homer; but the idea of that fire being quenched when the army was
conquered, is peculiar to the psalmist.

[Psalms 118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 118:13</span></span>

Thou hast thrust sore at me - In pushing thou hast pushed me that I
might fall.

But the Lord helped me - Though he possessed skill, courage, and
strength, yet these could not have prevailed had not God been his
helper; and to him he gives the glory of the victory.

[Psalms 118:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 118:15</span></span>

The voice of rejoicing - Formerly there was nothing but wailings; but
now there is universal joy because of the salvation - the deliverance,
which God has wrought for us.

[Psalms 118:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 118:16</span></span>

The right hand of the Lord is exalted - Jehovah lifted up his right
hand, and with it performed prodigies of power.

[Psalms 118:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 118:17</span></span>

I shall not die - I was nigh unto death; but I am preserved, - preserved
to publish the wondrous works of the Lord.

[Psalms 118:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 118:19</span></span>

Open to me the gates - Throw open the doors of the temple, that I may
enter and perform my vows unto the Lord.

[Psalms 118:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 118:20</span></span>

This gate of the Lord - Supposed to be the answer of the Levites to the
request of the king.

[Psalms 118:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 118:21</span></span>

I will praise thee - He is now got within the gates, and breaks out into
thanksgivings for the mercies he had received. He is become my salvation
- he himself hath saved me from all mine enemies.

[Psalms 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 118:22</span></span>

, [Psa 118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023)

The stone which the builders refused - See a full elucidation of these
two verses in the notes on [Mat 21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042)
(note).

[Psalms 118:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 118:24</span></span>

This is the day which the Lord hath made - As the Lord hath called me to
triumph, this is the day which he hath appointed for that purpose. This
is a gracious opportunity; I will improve it to his glory.

[Psalms 118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 118:25</span></span>

Save now, I beseech thee - These words were sung by the Jews on the
feast of tabernacles, when carrying green branches in their hands; and
from the הושיעה נא hoshiah nna, we have the word hosanna. This was sung
by the Jewish children when Christ made his public entry into Jerusalem.
See [Mat 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009) (note), and see the note
there, in which the word and the circumstance are both explained.

[Psalms 118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 118:26</span></span>

We have blessed you - The answer of the Levities to the king.

[Psalms 118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 118:27</span></span>

God is the Lord - Rather אל יהוה El Yehovah, the strong God Jehovah.

Which hath showed us light - ויאר לנו vaiyaer lanu, "And he will
illuminate us." Perhaps at this time a Divine splendor shone upon the
whole procession; a proof of God's approbation.

Bind the sacrifice with cords - The Chaldee paraphrases this verse thus:
"Samuel the prophet said, Bind the little one with chains for a solemn
sacrifice, until ye have sacrificed him and sprinkled his blood on the
horns of the altar." It is supposed that the words refer to the feast of
tabernacles, and חג chag here means the festival victim. Several
translate the original "keep the festival with thick boughs of the horns
of the altar." In this sense the Vulgate and Septuagint understood the
passage. David in this entry into the temple was a type of our blessed
Lord, who made a similar entry, as related [Mat
21:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#008).

[Psalms 118:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 118:29</span></span>

O give thanks unto the Lord - This is the general doxology or chorus.
All join in thanksgiving, and they end as they began: "His mercy
endureth for ever." It began at the creation of man; it will continue
till the earth is burnt up.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 119](psa119)

</div>
