<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa103)  [Next](psa105) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 104](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 104:0</span></span>

The majesty and power of God manifested in the creation of the heavens
and the atmosphere, [Psa 104:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001); of
the earth and sea, [Psa 104:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004); of
the springs, fountains, and rivers, [Psa
104:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010); of vegetables and trees,
[Psa 104:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014); of the sun and moon,
[Psa 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019); of day and night, and
their uses, [Psa 104:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020); of the
riches of the earth, [Psa 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024); of
the sea, its inhabitants, and its uses, [Psa
104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025), [Psa
104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026); of God's general providence in
providing food for all kinds of animals, [Psa
104:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027); of earthquakes and
volcanoes, [Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032). God is praised
for his majesty, and the instruction which his works afford, [Psa
104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033), [Psa
104:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#034). Sinners shall be destroyed,
[Psa 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035).

This Psalm has no title either in the Hebrew or Chaldee; but it is
attributed to David by the Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, Arabic, and
Syriac. It has the following title in the Septuagint, as it stands in
the Complutensian Polyglot: Ψαλμος τῳ Δαυιδ ὑπερ της του κοσμου
συστασεως "A Psalm of David concerning the formation of the world." The
Syriac says it is "A Psalm of David when he went with the priests to
adore the Lord before the ark." It seems a continuation of the preceding
Psalm; and it is written as a part of it in nine of Kennicott's and De
Rossi's MSS. It is properly a poem on the works of God in the creation
and government of the world; and some have considered it a sort of
epitome of the history of the creation, as given in the book of Genesis.

[Psalms 104:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 104:1</span></span>

O Lord my God, thou art very great - The works of God, which are the
subject of this Psalm, particularly show the grandeur and majesty of
God. The strongest proofs of the being of God, for common
understandings, are derived from the works of creation, their magnitude,
variety, number, economy, and use. And a proper consideration of those
works presents a greater number of the attributes of the Divine nature
than we can learn from any other source. Revelation alone is superior.

[Psalms 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 104:2</span></span>

Who coverest thyself with light - Light, insufferable splendor, is the
robe of the Divine Majesty. Light and fire are generally the
accompaniments of the Supreme Being, when he manifests his presence to
his creatures. He appeared thus to Abraham when he made a covenant with
him, [Gen 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017); and to Moses when he
appointed him to bring the people out of Egypt, [Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002); and when he gave him his law on
Sinai, [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018). Moses calls God a
consuming fire, [Deu 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024). When Christ
was transfigured on the mount, his face shone like the sun, and his
garment was white as the light, [Mat
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002). And when the Lord manifests
himself to the prophets, he is always surrounded with fire, and the most
brilliant light.

Bishop Lowth has some fine remarks on the imagery and metaphors of this
Psalm. The exordium, says he, is peculiarly magnificent, wherein the
majesty of God is described, so far as we can investigate and comprehend
it, from the admirable construction of nature; in which passage, as it
was for the most part necessary to use translatitious images, the sacred
poet has principally applied those which would be esteemed by the
Hebrews the most elevated, and worthy such an argument; for they all, as
it seems to me, are taken from the tabernacle. We will give these
passages verbally, with a short illustration: -

הוד והדר לבשת hod vehadar labashta.

"Thou hast put on honor and majesty."

The original, לבשת, is frequently used when speaking of the clothing or
dress of the priests.

[Psa 104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)

עטה אור כשלמה oteh or cassalmah.

"Covering thyself with light as with a garment."

A manifest symbol of the Divine Presence; the light conspicuous in the
holiest is pointed out under the same idea; and from this single example
a simile is educed to express the ineffable glory of God generally and
universally.

נוטה שמים כיריעה noteh shamayim kayeriah.

"Stretching out the heavens like a curtain."

The word יריעה, rendered here curtain, is that which denotes the
curtains or uncovering of the whole tabernacle. This may also be an
allusion to those curtains or awnings, stretched over an area, under
which companies sit at weddings, feasts, religious festivals, curiously
painted under, to give them the appearance of the visible heavens in the
night-season.

[Psalms 104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 104:3</span></span>

המקרה במים עליותיו hamekareh bammayim aliyothaiv.

"Laying the beams of his chambers in the waters."

The sacred writer expresses the wonderful nature of the air aptly, and
regularly constructed, from various and flux elements, into one
continued and stable series, by a metaphor drawn from the singular
formation of the tabernacle, which, consisting of many and different
parts, and easily reparable when there was need, was kept together by a
perpetual juncture and contignation of them all together. The poet goes
on: -

השם עבים רכובו hassem abim rechubo,

המהלך על כנפי רוה hamehallech al canphey ruach.

"Making the clouds his chariot,

Walking upon the wings of the wind."

He had first expressed an image of the Divine Majesty, such as it
resided in the holy of holies, discernible by a certain investiture of
the most splendid light; he now denotes the same from that light of
itself which the Divine Majesty exhibited, when it moved together with
the ark, sitting on a circumambient cloud, and carried on high through
the air. That seat of the Divine Presence is even called by the sacred
historians, as its proper name, המרכבה hammercabah, The Chariot.

[Psalms 104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 104:4</span></span>

עשה מלאכיו רחות oseh rnalachaiv ruchoth,

משרתיו אש להט mesharethaiv esh lohet.

The elements are described as prompt and expedite to perform the Divine
commands, like angels or ministers serving in the tabernacle; the Hebrew
word משרתיו mesharethaiv being a word most common in the sacred
ministrations.

[Psalms 104:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 104:5</span></span>

יסד ארץ על מכוניה yasad erets al mechonepha,

בל תמוט עולם ועד bal tammot olam vaed.

"Laying the earth upon its foundations,

That it should not be shaken for evermore."

This image Bishop Lowth thinks evidently taken from the tabernacle,
which was so laid upon its foundations that nothing could move it, and
the dispensation to which it was attached, till the end purposed by the
secret counsel of God was accomplished: and thus the earth is
established, till the end of its creation shall be fully answered; and
then it and its works shall be burnt up. On the above ground, the
stability of the sanctuary and the stability of the earth are sometimes
mentioned in the same words.

[Psalms 104:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 104:6</span></span>

Thou coveredst it with the deep - This seems to be spoken in allusion to
the creation of the earth, when it was without form and void, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep, and the waters invested the
whole, till God separated the dry land from them; thus forming the seas
and the terraqueous globe.

The poet Ovid has nearly the same idea: -

Densior his tellus, elementaque grandia traxit,

Et pressa est gravitate sua; circumfluus humor

Ultima possedit, solidumque coercuit orbem.

Met. lib. i., ver. 29.

Earth sinks beneath, and draws a numerous throng

Of ponderous, thick, unwieldy seeds along:

About her coasts unruly waters roar;

And, rising on a ridge, insult the shore.

Dryden.

[Psalms 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 104:7</span></span>

At thy rebuke they fled - When God separated the waters which were above
the firmament from those below, and caused the dry land to appear. He
commanded the separation to take place; and the waters, as if instinct
with life, hastened to obey.

At the voice of thy thunder - It is very likely God employed the
electric fluid as an agent in this separation.

[Psalms 104:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 104:8</span></span>

They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys - Taking the
words as they stand here, springs seem to be what are intended. But it
is difficult to conceive how the water could ascend, through the
fissures of mountains, to their tops, and then come down their sides so
as to form rivulets to water the valleys. Most probably all the springs
in mountains and hills are formed from waters which fall on their tops
in the form of rain, or from clouds that, passing over them, are
arrested, and precipitate their contents, which, sinking down, are
stopped by some solid strata, till, forcing their way at some aperture
at their sides, they form springs and fountains. Possibly, however,
vapours and exhalations are understood; these by evaporation ascend to
the tops of mountains, where they are condensed and precipitated. Thus
the vapours ascend, and then come down to the valleys, forming fountains
and rivulets in those places which the providence of God has allotted
them; that is, continuous valleys, with such a degree of inclination as
determines their waters to run in that direction till they reach another
river, or fall into the ocean.

Some have thought there is a reference to the breaking up on the
fountains of the great deep, at the time of the flood; while the
protrusion of the waters would raise the circumambient crust, so as to
form mountains, the other parts, falling in to fill up the vacuum
occasioned by the waters which were thrown up from the central abyss,
would constitute valleys.

Ovid seems to paraphrase this verse: -

Jussit et extendi campos, subsidere valles,

Fronde tegi sylvas, lapidosos surgere montes.

Met. lib. i., ver. 43.

"He shades the woods, the valleys he restrains

With rocky mountains, and extends the plains."

Dryden.

[Psalms 104:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 104:9</span></span>

Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass - And what is this bound?
The flux and reflux of the sea, occasioned by the solar and lunar
attraction, the rotation of the earth on its own axis, and the
gravitation of the waters to the center of the earth. And what is the
cause of all these? The will and energy of God. Thus the sea is
prevented from drowning the earth equally where there are flat shores as
where the sea seems hemmed in by huge mounds of land and mountains. The
above, not these, are the bounds which it cannot pass, so that they
cannot turn again to cover the earth.

[Psalms 104:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 104:10</span></span>

He sendeth the springs into the valleys - Evaporation is guided and
regulated by Divine Providence. The sun has a certain power to raise a
certain portion of vapours from a given space. God has apportioned the
aqueous to the terrene surface, and the solar attraction to both. There
is just as much aqueous surface as affords a sufficiency of vapours to
be raised by the solar attraction to water the earthy surface.
Experiments have been instituted which prove that it requires a given
space of aqueous surface to provide vapours for a given space of terrene
surface; and the proportion appears ordinarily to be seventeen of water
to three of earth; and this is the proportion that the aqueous bears to
the terrene surface of the globe. See Ray's three Physico-theological
Discourses.

[Psalms 104:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 104:11</span></span>

The wild asses quench their thirst - The פרא pere, onager or wild ass,
differs in nothing from the tame ass, only it has not a broken spirit,
and is consequently more lively and active. It is so very swift that no
horse except the Arab barb can overtake it. It is a gregarious animal,
and they go in troops to feed and to drink. It is very timid, or rather
jealous of its liberty, and therefore retires deep into the desert; yet
even there the providence of God regards it; springs are provided, and
it has the instinct to find them out.

[Psalms 104:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 104:12</span></span>

By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation - All fowls
love verdure, and have their residence where they can find wood and
water.

[Psalms 104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 104:13</span></span>

From his chambers - The clouds, as in [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003).

The earth is satisfied - The inhabitants of it.

[Psalms 104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 104:14</span></span>

He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle - Doth God care for oxen?
Yes, and there is not a beast of the field that does not share his
merciful regards.

And herb for the serviee of man - Plants, esculent herbs, and nutritive
grain in general; and thus he brings forth food (לחם lechem, bread) out
of the earth. In the germination and growth of a grain of wheat there is
a profusion of miracles. God takes care of man, and of all those animals
which are so necessary to the convenience and comfort of man.

[Psalms 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 104:15</span></span>

And wine - Wine, in moderate quantity, has a wondrous tendency to revive
and invigorate the human being. Ardent spirits exhilarate, but they
exhaust the strength; and every dose leaves man the worse. Unadulterated
wine, on the contrary, exhilarates and invigorates: it makes him
cheerful, and provides for the continuance of that cheerfulness by
strengthening the muscles, and bracing the nerves. This is its use.
Those who continue drinking till wine inflames them, abase this mercy of
God.

Oil to make his face to shine - That is, to anoint the body; and
particularly those parts most exposed to the sun and weather. This is of
high importance in all arid lands and sultry climates. By it the pores
are kept open, and perspiration maintained.

Bread which strengtheneth man's heart - In hunger not only the strength
is prostrated, but the natural courage is also abated. Hunger has no
enterprise, emulation, nor courage. But when, in such circumstances, a
little bread is received into the stomach, even before concoction can
have time to prepare it for nutriment, the strength is restored, and the
spirits revived. This is a surprising effect; and it has not yet been
satisfactorily accounted for.

Three of the choicest and most important articles of life are here
mentioned: Wine, for the support of the vital and intellectual spirits;
Bread, for the support of the nervous and muscular system; and Oil, as a
seasoner of food, and for those unctions so necessary for the
maintenance of health. Where wine, oil, and bread can be had in
sufficient quantities, there animal food, ardent spirits, and all
high-seasoned aliments, may be well dispensed with. Heavy taxes on these
necessaries of life are taxes on life, itself; and infallibly lead to
adulteration of the articles themselves; especially wine and oil, which,
in countries where they are highly taxed, are no longer to be found
pure.

[Psalms 104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 104:16</span></span>

The trees of the Lord are full of sap - ישבעו yisbeu, "are saturated."

The cedars of Lebanon - God's providence not only extends to then and
cattle, but also to the trees of the field and forest. Many of these are
not only sustained, but planted by his providence. Who ever planted the
seeds of the cedars of Lebanon, or of the thousands of woods and forests
on the globe? God himself sowed those seeds, and they have sprung up and
flourished without the care of man.

[Psalms 104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 104:17</span></span>

Where the birds make their nests - צפרים tsipporim signifies swallows,
sparrows, and small birds in general; here opposed to the חסידה chasidah
or stork. Perhaps the heron may be understood, which is said to be the
first of all birds to build her nest, and she builds it on the very
highest trees. The general meaning is, that God has provided shelter and
support for the greatest and smallest birds; they are all objects of his
providential regard.

[Psalms 104:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 104:18</span></span>

The high hills are a refuge - The barren tops of the highest hills, and
the craggy abrupt precipices of the most stupendous rocks, are not
without their uses: they afford protection, refuge, and food, for
creatures whose dispositions and habits are suited to such places; and
thus no part of the creation is useless. The creatures who are their
inhabitants are necessary links in the great chain of animated beings,
and show the wisdom and providence of God.

For a description of the covey, see [Lev
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005). The יעל yael, translated here
the wild goat, is no doubt a creature of the stag or deer kind; the
ibex, chamois, antelope, etc.

[Psalms 104:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 104:19</span></span>

He appointed the moon for seasons - The heathens thought that the sun
and moon were gods, and worshipped them as such. The psalmist shows, 1.
That they are creatures dependent on God for their being and
continuance; and, 2. That they were made for the use of man. See what
has been said on these luminaries in the notes on [Gen
1:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014) (note).

[Psalms 104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 104:20</span></span>

Thou makest darkness - It is not the design of God that there should be
either constant darkness or constant light. That man may labor, he gives
him, by means of the sun, the light of the day; and that he may rest
from his labor, and get his strength recruited, he gives him night, and
comparative darkness. And as it would not be convenient for man and the
wild beasts of the forest to collect their food at the same time, he has
given the night to them as the proper time to procure their prey, and
the day to rest in. When Man labors, They rest; when Man rests, They
labor.

[Psalms 104:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 104:21</span></span>

The young lions roar after their prey - It is said of the lion, that his
roaring is so terrible as to astonish and quite unnerve the beast which
he pursues; so that, though fleeter than himself, it falls down and
becomes an easy prey.

[Psalms 104:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 104:22</span></span>

The sun ariseth - The dawn of day is the warning for man to arise and
betake himself to his work; and is the warning to them to retire to
their dens.

[Psalms 104:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 104:24</span></span>

O Lord, how manifold are thy works - In this verse there are three
propositions:

1\. The works of the Lord are multitudinous and varied.

2\. They are so constructed as to show the most consummate wisdom in
their design, and in the end for which they are formed.

3\. They are all God's property, and should be used only in reference to
the end for which they were created.

All abuse and waste of God's creatures are spoil and robbery on the
property of the Creator. On this verse Mr. Ray has published an
excellent work, entitled, "The Wisdom of God in the Creation," which the
reader will do well, not only to consult, but carefully to read over and
study.

[Psalms 104:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 104:25</span></span>

This great and wide sea - The original is very emphatic: זה הים גדול
ורחב ידים zeh haiyam gadol urechab yadayim, "This very sea, great and
extensive of hands." Its waters, like arms, encompassing all the terrene
parts of the globe. I suppose the psalmist was within sight of the
Mediterranean when he wrote these words.

[Psalms 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 104:26</span></span>

There go the ships - By means of navigation, countries the most remote
are connected, and all the inhabitants of the earth become known to each
other. He appears at this time to have seen the ships under sail.

That leviathan - This may mean the whale, or any of the large marine
animals. The Septuagint and Vulgate call it dragon. Sometimes the
crocodile is intended by the original word.

To play therein - Dreadful and tempestuous as the sea may appear, and
uncontrollable in its billows and surges, it is only the field of sport,
the play-ground, the bowling-green to those huge marine monsters.

[Psalms 104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 104:27</span></span>

These wait all upon thee - The innumerable fry of the smaller aquatic
animals, as well as whales, dolphins, porpoises, and sharks, all have
their meat from God. He has in his gracious providence furnished that
sort of food which is suitable to all. And this provision is various;
not only for every kind of fish does God provide food, but a different
kind of aliment for each in its different periods of growth. Here are
displayed the goodness and infinitely varied providence of God: "He
giveth them their meat in due season."

[Psalms 104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 104:28</span></span>

That thou givest them they gather - All creatures are formed with such
and such digestive organs, and the food proper for them is provided.
Infinitely varied as are living creatures in their habits and internal
economy, so are the aliments which God has caused the air, the earth,
and the waters to produce.

Thou openest thine hand - An allusion to the act of scattering grain
among fowls.

[Psalms 104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 104:29</span></span>

Thou hidest thy face - If thou bring dearth or famine on the land,
contagion in the air, or any destruction on the provision made by the
waters, then beasts, fowl, and fish die, and are dissolved.

[Psalms 104:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 104:30</span></span>

Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created - יבראון yibbareun,
"They are created again."

And thou renewest the face of the earth - Do not these words plainly
imply a resurrection of the bodies which have died, been dissolved, or
turned to dust? And is not the brute creation principally intended here?
Is it not on this account it is said, [Psa
104:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#031), "the glory of the Lord shall
endure for ever, (לעולם leolam)," to be manifest in those times which
are secret, when Jehovah himself shall rejoice in his works; when the
brute creation shall be delivered from the bondage of its corruption?
See the notes on [Rom 8:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019) (note).

[Psalms 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 104:32</span></span>

He looketh on the earth - Even the look of God terrifies all created
nature!

He toucheth the hills - So easy is it for God to burn up the earth and
the worlds thereof, that even his touch kindles the mountains into
flames! See Etna, Vesuvius, Stromboli, etc.; these are ignited by the
touch of God. How majestic are these figures!

The renewal of the earth, and re-creation of deceased animals, shall
take place when he shall shake terribly the heavens and the earth; when
they shall be wrapped together as a scroll, and the earth and its works
be dissolved, that is, after the general convulsion and conflagration of
the world.

[Psalms 104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 104:33</span></span>

I will sing unto the Lord - The psalmist exulting in the glorious
prospect of the renovation of all things, breaks out in triumphant
anticipation of the great event, and says, I will sing unto the Lord
בחיי bechaiyai, with my lives, the life that I now have, and the life
that I shall have hereafter.

I will sing praise to my God - בעודי beodi, "in my eternity;" my going
on, my endless progression. What astonishing ideas! But then, how shall
this great work be brought about? and how shall the new earth be
inhabited with righteous spirits only? The answer is,

[Psalms 104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 104:35</span></span>

Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no
more - Or, He shall consume the wicked and ungodly, till no more of them
be found. Then the wicked shall be turned into hell, with all the
nations that forget God. No wonder, with these prospects before his
eyes, he cries out, "Bless Jehovah, O my soul! Hallelujah!" And ye that
hear of these things, bless the Lord also.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 105](psa105)

</div>
