<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa118)  [Next](psa120) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 119:0</span></span>

The various excellencies and important uses of the law or revelation of
God.

This is another of the alphabetical or acrostic Psalms. It is divided
into twenty-two parts, answering to the number of letters in the Hebrew
alphabet. Every part is divided into eight verses; and each verse begins
with that letter of the alphabet which forms the title of the part,
e.g.: The eight first verses have א aleph prefixed, the second eight ב
beth, each of the eight verses beginning with that letter; and so of the
rest. All connection, as might be naturally expected, is sacrificed to
this artificial and methodical arrangement.

It is not easy to give any general Analysis of this Psalm; it is enough
to say that it treats in general on the privileges and happiness of
those who observe the law of the Lord. That law is exhibited by various
names and epithets tending to show its various excellences. Earnest
prayers are offered to God for wisdom to understand it, and for grace to
observe it faithfully. These particulars may be collected from the whole
composition, and appear less or more in every part.

The words which express that revelation which God had then given to men,
or some particular characteristic of it, are generally reckoned to be
the ten following:

1\. Testimonies;

2\. Commandments,

3\. Precepts;

4\. Word;

5\. Law;

6\. Ways;

7\. Truth;

8\. Judgments;

9\. Righteousness;

10\. Statutes.

To these some add the following:

1\. Faithfulness,

2\. Judgment;

3\. Name; but these are not used in the sense of the other ten words.

I believe it is almost universally asserted that in every verse of this
Psalm one or other of those ten words is used, except in [Psa
119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122); but on a closer inspection we
shall find that none of them is used in the above sense in [Psa
119:84](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#084) (note), [Psa
119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090) (note), [Psa
119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121) (note), [Psa
119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122) (note), [Psa
119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132) (note).

To save myself unnecessary repetition, and the reader time and trouble,
I shall here, once for all, explain the above words, which the reader
will do well to keep in remembrance.

I. The Law, תורה Torah, from ירה yarah, to direct, guide, teach, make
straight, or even, point forward; because it gutdes, directs, and
instructs in the way of righteousness; makes our path straight, shows
what is even and right, and points us onward to peace, truth, and
happiness. It is even our school master to bring us to Christ, that we
may be justified through faith; and by it is the knowledge of sin.

II\. Statutes, חקים Chukkim, from חק chak, to mark, trace out, describe,
and ordain; because they mark out our way describe the line of conduct
we are to pursue and order or ordain what we are to observe.

III\. Precepts, פקודים Pikkudim, from פקד pakad, to take notice or care
of a thing, to attend, have respect to, to appoint, to visit; because
they take notice of our way, have respect to the whole of our life and
conversation, superintend, overlook, and visit us in all the concerns
and duties of life.

IV\. Commandments, מצות Mitsvoth, from צוה tassah to command, order,
ordain; because they show us what we should do, and what we should leave
undone, and exact our obedience.

V. Testimonies, עדות Edoth, from עד ad, denoting beyond, farther, all
along, to bear witness, or testimony. The rites and ceremonies of the
law; because they point out matters beyond themselves, being types and
representations of the good things that were to come.

VI\. Judgments, משפטים Mishpatim, from שפט shaphat, to judge, determine,
regulate, order, and discern, because they judge concerning our words
and works; show the roses by which they should be regulated; and cause
us to discern what is right and wrong, and decide accordingly.

VII\. Truth, אמונה Emunah, from אמן aman, to make steady, constant, to
settle, trust, believe. The law that is established steady, confirmed,
and ordered in all things, and sure; which should be believed on the
authority of God, and trusted to as an infallible testimony from Him who
cannot lie nor deceive.

VIII\. Word, דבר dabar, from the same root, to discourse, utter one's
sentiments, speak consecutively and intelligibly; in which it appears to
differ from מלל malal, to utter articulate sounds. Any prophecy or
immediate communication from heaven, as well as the whole body of Divine
revelation, is emphatically called דבר יהוה debar Yehovah, the word of
Jehovah. On the same ground we call the whole Old and New Testament The
Word of the Lord, as we term the volume in which they are contained The
Bible-The Book. In his revelation God speaks to man; shows him, in a
clear, concise, intelligible, and rational way, his interest, his duty,
his privileges; and, in a word, the reasonable service that he requires
of him.

IX\. Way, דרך Debech, from the same root, to proceed, go on, walk,
tread. The way in which God goes in order to instruct and save man; the
way in which man must tread in order to be safe, holy, and happy. God's
manner of acting or proceeding in providence and grace; and the way that
man should take in order to answer the end of his creation and
redemption.

X. Righteousness, צדקה Tsedakah from צדק tsadak, to do justice, to give
full weight. That which teaches a man to give to all their due; to give
God his due, Man his due, and Himself his due; for every man has duties
to God, his neighbor, and himself, to perform. This word is applied to
God's judgments, testimonies, and commandments; they are all righteous,
give to all their due, and require what is due from every one.

The three words, which some add here, are,

The first is Faithfulness, אמונה Emunah: but see this under No. VII.,
nor does it appear in [Psa 119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090),
where it occurs, to be used as a characteristic of God's law, but rather
his exact fulfillment of his promises to man.

The second is Judgment, משפט mishpat. See this under No. VI.: it occurs
in [Psa 119:84](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#084) and [Psa
119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121) : "When wilt thou execute
judgment," etc.; but is not used in those places as one of the ten
words.

The third is Name, שם shem, see [Psa
119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132) : but this is no
characteristic of God's law; it refers here simply to himself. Those
that love thy Name is the same as those that love Thee. Bishop Nicholson
inserts promises among the ten words: but this occurs no where in the
Psalm.

We might, and with much more propriety, add a fourth, אמרה Imrah, from
אמר amar, to branch out, spread, or diffuse itself, as the branches of a
tree, and which is often used for a word spoken, a speech. This often
occurs in the Psalm: and we regularly translate it word, and put no
difference or distinction between it and דבר dabar, No. VIII.: but it is
not exactly the sane; דבר dabar may apply more properly to history,
relation, description and such like; while, אמרתך imrathecha, thy word,
may mean an immediate oracle, delivered solemnly from God to his prophet
for the instruction of men. But the two words appear often indifferently
used; and it would not be easy to ascertain the different shades of
meaning between these two roots.

Having thus far introduced the Psalm to the reader's attention, I should
probably speak at large of the elegance of its composition, and the
importance and utility of its matter. Like all other portions of Divine
revelation, it is elegant, important, and useful; and while I admire the
fecundity of the psalmist's genius, the unabating flow of his poetic
vein, his numerous synonyms, and his copia verborum, by which he is
enabled to expand, diversify, and illustrate the same idea; presenting
it to his reader in all possible points of view, so as to render it
pleasing, instructive, and impressive; I cannot rob the rest of the book
of its just praise by setting this, as many have done, above all the
pieces it contains. It is by far the largest, the most artificial, and
most diversified; yet, in proportion to its length, it contains the
fewest ideas of any Psalm in the Book.

Several of the ancients, particularly the Greek fathers, have considered
it as an abridgement of David's life; in which he expresses all the
states through which he had passed; the trials, persecutions, succours,
and encouragements he had received. The Latin fathers perceive in it all
the morality of the Gospel, and rules for a man's conduct in every
situation of life. Cassiodorus asserts that it contains the sentiments
of the prophets, apostles, martyrs, and all the saints. In the
introduction to the Book of Psalms I have conjectured that many of them
were composed from notes taken at different times, and in widely
different circumstances; hence the different states described in the
same Psalm, which could not have been at one and the same time the
experience of the same person. It is most likely that this Psalm was
composed in this way, and this, as well as its acrostical arrangement,
will account for its general want of connection.

Though the most judicious interpreters assign it to the times of the
Babylonish captivity; yet there are so many things in it descriptive of
David's state, experience, and affairs, that I am led to think it might
have come from his pen; or if composed at or under the captivity, was
formed out of his notes and memoranda.

I shall now make short remarks on the principal subjects in each part;
and, at the end of each, endeavor by the Analysts to show the connection
which the eight verses of each have among themselves, and the use which
the reader should make of them. In all the Versions except the Chaldee
this Psalm is numbered 118.

[Psalms 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 119:1</span></span>

Blessed are the undefiled in the way - אשרי תמימי דרך ashrey temimey
darech, "O the blessedness of the perfect ones in the way." This Psalm
begins something like the first, where see the notes [Psa
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) (note). By the perfect, which is
the proper meaning of the original word, we are to undertsand those who
sincerely believe what God has spoken, religiously observe all the rules
and ceremonies of his religion, and have their lives and hearts
regulated by the spirit of love, fear, and obedience. This is farther
stated in the second verse.

[Psalms 119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 119:3</span></span>

They also do no iniquity - They avoid all idolatry, injustice, and
wrong; and they walk in God's ways, not in those ways to which an evil
heart might entice them, nor those in which the thoughtless and the
profligate tread.

[Psalms 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 119:4</span></span>

Thy precepts diligently - מאד meod, "superlatively, to the uttermost."
God has never given a commandment, the observance of which he knew to be
impossible. And to whatsoever he has commanded he requires obedience;
and his grace is sufficient for us. We must not trifle with God.

[Psalms 119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 119:5</span></span>

O that my ways were directed - "I wish that my way may be confirmed to
keep thy statutes." Without thee I can do nothing; my soul is unstable
and fickle; and it will continue weak and uncertain till thou strengthen
and establish it.

[Psalms 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 119:6</span></span>

Then shall I not be ashamed - Every act of transgression in the wicked
man tends to harden his heart; and render it callous. If a man who fears
God is so unhappy as to fall into sin, his conscience reproaches him,
and he is ashamed before God and man. This is a full proof that God's
Spirit has not utterly departed from him, and that he may repent,
believe and be healed.

Unto all thy commandments - God requires universal obedience, and all
things are possible to him whom Christ strengthens; and all things are
possible to him that believes. Allow that any of God's commandments may
be transgressed, and we shall soon have the whole decalogue set aside.

[Psalms 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 119:8</span></span>

O forsake me not utterly - עד מאד ad meod, "to utter dereliction;" never
leave me to my own strength, nor to my own heart!

[Psalms 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 119:9</span></span>

A young man cleanse his way - ארח orach, which we translate way here,
signifies a track, a rut, such as is made by the wheel of a cart or
chariot. A young sinner has no broad beaten path; he has his private
ways of offense, his secret pollutions: and how shall he be cleansed
from these? how can he be saved from what will destroy mind, body, and
soul? Let him hear what follows; the description is from God.

1\. He is to consider that his way is impure; and how abominable this
must make him appear in the sight of God.

2\. He must examine it according to God's word, and carefully hear what
God has said concerning him and it.

3\. He must take heed to it, לשמר lishmor, to keep guard, and preserve
his way - his general course of life, from all defilement.

[Psalms 119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 119:10</span></span>

With my whole heart have I sought thee -

4\. He must seek God, make earnest prayer and supplication to him for
Divine light, for a tender conscience, and for strength to walk
uprightly.

5\. His whole heart; all his affections must be engaged here, or he
cannot succeed. If he keep any affection for the idol or abomination; if
his heart do not give it before the Lord, he may make many prayers, but
God will answer none of them.

6\. He must take care to keep in the path of duty, of abstinence and
self-denial; not permitting either his eye, his hand, or his heart to
wander from the commandments of his Maker.

[Psalms 119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 119:11</span></span>

Thy word have I hid in my heart -

7\. He must treasure up those portions of God's word in his mind and
heart which speak against uncleanness of every kind; and that recommend
purity, chastity, and holiness. The word of Christ should dwell richly
in him. If God's word be only in his Bible, and not also in his heart,
he may soon and easily be surprised into his besetting sin.

[Psalms 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 119:12</span></span>

Blessed art thou -

8\. He must acknowledge the mercy of God, in so far preserving him from
all the consequences of his sin.

9\. He should beg of him to become his teacher that his heart and
conscience might be instructed in the spirituality of his statutes.

[Psalms 119:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 119:13</span></span>

With my lips have I declared -

10\. He should declare to his own heart, and to all his companions in
iniquity, God's judgments against himself and them; that if his
longsuffering merely have not made a proper impression on their hearts,
they may tremble at his approaching judgments.

[Psalms 119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 119:14</span></span>

I have rejoiced -

11\. He must consider it his chief happiness to be found in the path of
obedience, giving his whole heart and strength to God; and when enabled
to do it, he should rejoice more in it than if he had gained thousands
of gold and silver. O how great is the treasure of a tender and
approving conscience!

[Psalms 119:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 119:15</span></span>

I will meditate -

12\. He should encourage self-examination and reflection; and meditate
frequently on God's words, works, and ways - and especially on his
gracious dealings towards him.

13\. He should keep his eye upon God's steps; setting the example of his
Savior before his eyes, going where he would go, and nowhere else; doing
what he would do, and nothing else; keeping the company that he would
keep, and none else; and doing every thing in reference to the final
judgment.

[Psalms 119:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 119:16</span></span>

I will delight myself - The word is very emphatical: אשתעשע eshtaasha, I
will skip about and jump for joy.

14\. He must exult in God's word as his treasure, live in the spirit of
obedience as his work, and ever glory in God, who has called him to such
a state of salvation.

15\. He must never forget what God has done for him, done in him, and
promised farther to do; and he must not forget the promises he had made,
and the vows of the Lord that are upon him. Any young man who attends to
these fifteen particulars will get his impure way cleansed; victory over
his sin; and, if he abide faithful to the Lord that bought him, an
eternal heaven at last among them that are sanctified.

[Psalms 119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 119:17</span></span>

Deal bountifully - גמל gemol, reward thy servant. Let him have the
return of his faith and prayers, that the Divine life may be preserved
in his soul! Then he will keep thy word. From גמל gamal, to reward,
etc., comes the name of ג gimel, the third letter in the Hebrew
alphabet, which is prefixed to every verse in this part, and commences
it with its own name. This is a stroke of the psalmist's art and
ingenuity.

[Psalms 119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 119:18</span></span>

Open thou mine eyes - גל עיני gal eynai, reveal my eyes, illuminate my
understanding, take away the veil that is on my heart, and then shall I
see wonders in thy law. The Holy Scriptures are plain enough; but the
heart of man is darkened by sin. The Bible does not so much need a
comment, as the soul does the light of the Holy Spirit. Were it not for
the darkness of the human intellect, the things relative to salvation
would be easily apprehended.

[Psalms 119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 119:19</span></span>

I am a stranger in the earth - In the land. Being obliged to wander
about from place to place, I am like a stranger even in my own country.
If it refer to the captives in Babylon, it may mean that they felt
themselves there as in a state of exile; for, although they had been
seventy years in it, they still felt it as a strange land, because they
considered Palestine their home.

[Psalms 119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 119:20</span></span>

My soul breaketh - We have a similar expression: It broke my heart, That
is heart-breaking, She died of a broken heart. It expresses excessive
longing, grievous disappointment, hopeless love, accumulated sorrow. By
this we may see the hungering and thirsting which the psalmist had after
righteousness, often mingled with much despondency.

[Psalms 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 119:21</span></span>

Thou hast rebuked the proud - This was done often in the case of David;
and was true also in reference to the Babylonians, who held the
Israelites in subjection, and whose kings were among the proudest of
human beings. Instead of זדים zedim, the proud, some MSS. read זרים
zarim, strangers, and one reads גוים goyim, the heathen; and so the
Syriac.

[Psalms 119:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 119:22</span></span>

Remove from me reproach and contempt - Of these the captives in Babylon
had a more than ordinary load.

[Psalms 119:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 119:23</span></span>

Princes also did sit - It is very likely that the nobles of Babylon did
often, by wicked misrepresentations, render the minds of the kings of
the empire evil affected towards the Jews.

[Psalms 119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 119:24</span></span>

Thy testimonies also are - my counsellors - אנשי עצתי anshey atsathi,
"the men of my counsel." I sit with them; and I consider every testimony
thou hast given as a particular counsellor; one whose advice I
especially need.

The Analysis will farther explain the particular uses of this part.

[Psalms 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 119:25</span></span>

My soul cleaveth unto the dust - It would be best to translate נפשי
naphshi, my life; and then cleaving to the dust may imply an
apprehension of approaching death; and this agrees best with the
petition.

Quicken thou me - חיני chaiyeni, "make me alive." Keep me from going
down into the dust.

[Psalms 119:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 119:26</span></span>

I have declared my ways - ספרתי sipparti, "I have numbered my ways," I
have searched them out; I have investigated them. And that he had
earnestly prayed for pardon of what was wrong in them, is evident; for
he adds, "Thou heardest me."

[Psalms 119:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 119:28</span></span>

My soul melteth - דלף dalaph sigifies to distil, to drop as tears from
the eye. As my distresses cause the tears to distil from my eyes, so the
overwhelming load of my afflictions causes my life to ebb and leak out.

[Psalms 119:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 119:29</span></span>

The way of lying - The propensity to falsity and prevarication,
whatsoever is contrary to truth. Remove me from its solicitations, and
remove it from me. "Grant me thy law graciously;" give it to me as a
rule of moral conduct; but give it to me graciously through the gospel,
and then it will not be the letter that killeth, but will be sanctified
to me, so as to become to me holy, just, and Good.

[Psalms 119:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 119:30</span></span>

I have chosen the way of truth - And that I may continue in its "remove
from me the way of lying." See above.

[Psalms 119:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 119:31</span></span>

I have stuck - דבקתי dabakti, I have cleaved to, been glued to, them:
the same word as in [Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025). My
soul cleaves as much to thy testimonies, as my life has cleaved to the
dust.

O Lord, put me not to shame - Let my sins and follies be blotted out by
thy mercy; and so hide and cover them that they shall never appear,
either in this or the coming world, to my shame and confusion! How many
need to be importunate with God in this prayer!

[Psalms 119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 119:32</span></span>

I will run - The particle כי elci, which we translate when, should be
translated because: Because thou shalt enlarge, or dilate, my heart;
make plain my path by cleansing me from my impurity, and taking the
hinderances out of my way. I will then run without dread of stumbling,
and every day make sensible progress.

[Psalms 119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 119:33</span></span>

Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes - To understand the spiritual
reference of all the statutes, etc, under the law, required a teaching
which could only come from God.

I shall keep it unto the end - Here is a good thing asked for a good
end. He wishes for heavenly teaching; not to make a parade of it, but to
enable him to discern his duty, that he might act accordingly.

[Psalms 119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 119:34</span></span>

With my whole heart - I will not trifle with my God, I will not divide
my affections with the world; God shall have all.

[Psalms 119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 119:36</span></span>

Not to covetousness - Let me have no inordinate love for gain of any
kind, nor for any thing that may grieve thy Spirit, or induce me to seek
my happiness here below.

[Psalms 119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">psa 119:37</span></span>

From beholding vanity - An idol, worldly pleasure, beauty, finery; any
thing that is vain, empty, or transitory. Let me not behold it; let me
not dwell upon it. Let me remember Achan: he saw, - he coveted, - he
took, - he hid his theft, and was slain for his sin.

[Psalms 119:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 119:38</span></span>

Stablish thy word - Fulfil the promises thou hast made to me.

[Psalms 119:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">psa 119:39</span></span>

Turn away my reproach, which I fear - This may be understood of the
reproach which a man may meet with in consequence of living a godly
life, for such a life was never fashionable in any time or country. But
I have found the following note on the passage: "I have done a secret
evil; my soul is sorry for it: if it become public, it will be a heavy
reproach to me. O God, turn it away, and let it never meet the eye of
man!" - Anon.

[Psalms 119:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 119:40</span></span>

Behold, I have longed - Thou searchest the heart; thou knowest that I
have long desired thy salvation; thou seest that this desire still
remains. Behold it! it is thy work; and through thy mercy I breathe
after thy mercy.

Quicken me - I am dying; O give me the spirit of life in Christ Jesus!

[Psalms 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 119:41</span></span>

Let thy mercies come - Let me speedily see the accomplishment of all my
prayers! Let me have thy salvation - such a deliverance as it becomes
thy greatness and goodness to impart. Let it be according to thy word -
thy exceeding great and precious promises.

[Psalms 119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">psa 119:42</span></span>

So shall I have wherewith to answer - Many say, "My hope in thy mercy is
vain;" but when thou fulfillest thy promises to me, then shall I answer
to the confusion of their infidelity.

[Psalms 119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">psa 119:43</span></span>

Take not the word of truth - Grant that the assurances which thy
prophets have given to the people of approaching deliverance may not
fall to the ground; let it appear that they have spoken thy mind, and
that thou hast fulfilled their word.

[Psalms 119:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">psa 119:45</span></span>

I will walk at liberty - When freed from the present bondage, we shall
rejoice in obedience to thy testimonies; we shall delight to keep all
thy ordinances.

[Psalms 119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">psa 119:46</span></span>

I will speak - before kings - Dr. Delaney supposes that this is spoken
in reference to Achish, king of Gath, whom David had instructed in the
Jewish religion; but we have already seen that it is most likely that
the Psalm was compiled under the Babylonish captivity. But the words may
with more propriety be referred to the case of Daniel, and other bold
and faithful Israelites, who spoke courageously before Nebuchadnezzar,
Belshazzar, and Darius. See the books of Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah.

[Psalms 119:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">psa 119:47</span></span>

Thy commandments, which I have loved - O shame to Christians who feel so
little affection to the Gospel of Christ, when we see such cordial,
conscientious, and inviolate attachment in a Jew to the laws and
ordinances of Moses, that did not afford a thousandth part of the
privileges!

[Psalms 119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">psa 119:48</span></span>

My hands also will I lift up - I will present every victim and sacrifice
which the law requires. I will make prayer and supplication before thee,
lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting.

[Psalms 119:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 119:49</span></span>

Remember the word - Thou hast promised to redeem us from our captivity;
on that word we have built our hope. Remember that thou hast thus
promised, and see that we thus hope.

[Psalms 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">psa 119:50</span></span>

This is my comfort - While enduring our harsh captivity, we anticipated
our enlargement; and thy word of promise was the means of keeping our
souls alive.

[Psalms 119:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">psa 119:51</span></span>

The proud have had me - We have been treated, not only with oppressive
cruelty, but also with contempt, because we still professed to trust in
thee, the living God, who because of our transgressions hadst been
greatly displeased with us; jet we have not declined from thy law.

[Psalms 119:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">psa 119:52</span></span>

I remembered thy judgments of old - The word judgments is here taken for
providential dealing; and indeed kind treatment; that which God showed
to the Hebrews in bearing with and blessing them. And it was the
recollection of these judgments that caused him to comfort himself.

[Psalms 119:53](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">psa 119:53</span></span>

Horror hath taken hold upon me - The word זלעפה zilaphah, which we
render horror, is thought to signify the pestilential burning wind
called by the Arabs simoom. Here it strongly marks the idea that the
psalmist had of the destructive nature of sin; it is pestilential; it is
corrupting, mortal.

[Psalms 119:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">psa 119:54</span></span>

Thy statutes have been my songs - During our captivity all our
consolation was derived from singing thy praises, and chanting among our
fellow-captives portions of thy law, and the precepts it contains.

[Psalms 119:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">psa 119:55</span></span>

I have remembered thy name - Thou art Jehovah; and as our God thou hast
made thyself known unto us. In the deepest night of our affliction this
has consoled me.

[Psalms 119:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">psa 119:56</span></span>

This I had, because I kept thy precepts - Though thou didst leave us
under the power of our enemies, yet thou hast not left us without the
consolations of thy Spirit.

[Psalms 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">psa 119:57</span></span>

Thou art my portion, O Lord - From the fifty-seventh to the sixtieth
verse may be seen the progress of the work of grace on the human heart,
from the first dawn of heavenly light till the soul is filled with the
fullness of God. But as I consider this Psalm as notes selected from
diaries of past experience, formed at different times; and that the
author has been obliged, for the support of his acrostic plan, to
interchange circumstances, putting that sometimes behind which in the
order of grace comes before; because, to put it in its right place, the
letters would not accord with the alphabetical arrangement; I shall
therefore follow what I conceive to be its order in the connection of
grace, and not in the order in which the words are here laid down.

[Psalms 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">psa 119:59</span></span>

First. I thought on my ways - חשבתי chashabti, I deeply pondered them; I
turned them upside down; I viewed my conduct on all sides. The word, as
used here, is a metaphor taken from embroidering, where the figure must
appear the same on the one side as it does on the other; therefore, the
cloth must be turned on each side every time the needle is set in, to
see that the stitch be fairly set. Thus narrowly and scrupulously did
the psalmist examine his conduct; and the result was, a deep conviction
that he had departed from the way of God and truth.

Secondly. And turned my feet unto thy testimonies - Having made the
above discovery, and finding himself under the displeasure of God, he
abandoned every evil way, took God's word for his directory, and set out
fairly in the way of life and salvation.

[Psalms 119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">psa 119:60</span></span>

Thirdly. I made haste, and delayed not - He did this with the utmost
speed; and did not trifle with his convictions, nor seek to drown the
voice of conscience.

The original word, which we translate delayed not, is amazingly
emphatical. ולא התמהמהתי velo hithmahmahti, I did not stand
what-what-whating; or, as we used to express the same sentiment,
shilly-shallying with myself: I was determined, and so set out. The
Hebrew word, as well as the English, strongly marks indecision of mind,
positive action being suspended, because the mind is so unfixed as not
to be able to make a choice.

[Psalms 119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">psa 119:58</span></span>

Fourthly. Being determined in his heart, he tells us, I entreated thy
favor with my whole heart. He found he had sinned; that he needed mercy;
that he had no time to lose; that he must be importunate; and therefore
he sought that mercy with all his soul.

Fifthly. Feeling that he deserved nothing but wrath, that he had no
right to any good, he cries for mercy in the way that God had promised
to convey it: "Be merciful unto me!" And to this he is encouraged only
by the promise of God; and therefore prays, "Be merciful unto me
According to thy Word."

[Psalms 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">psa 119:57</span></span>

Sixthly. To keep himself firm in his present resolutions, he binds
himself unto the Lord. "I have said that I would keep thy words." Thy
vows are upon me, and I must not add to my guilt by breaking them.

Seventhly. He did not seek in vain; God reveals himself in the fullness
of blessedness to him, so that he is enabled to exclaim, Thou art my
portion, O Lord! My whole soul trusts in thee, my spirit rests supremely
satisfied with thee. I have no other inheritance, nor do I desire any.
Here then is the way to seek, the way to find, and the way to be happy.
Other effects of this conversion may be seen below.

[Psalms 119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">psa 119:61</span></span>

The bands of the wicked have robbed me - חבלי chebley, the cables,
cords, or snares of the wicked. They have hunted us like wild beasts;
many they have taken for prey, and many they have destroyed.

[Psalms 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">psa 119:62</span></span>

At midnight I will rise - We are so overpowered with a sense of thy
goodness, that in season and out of season we will return thee thanks.

[Psalms 119:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">psa 119:63</span></span>

I am a companion - This was the natural consequence of his own
conversion; he abandoned the workers of iniquity, and associated with
them that feared the Lord.

[Psalms 119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">psa 119:64</span></span>

The earth is full of thy mercy - What an astonishing operation has the
grace of God! In the midst of want, poverty, affliction, and bondage, it
makes those who possess it happy! When Christ dwells in the heart by
faith, we have nothing but goodness around us. Others may complain; but
to us even the earth appears full of the mercy of the Lord.

[Psalms 119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">psa 119:65</span></span>

Thou hast dealt well with thy servant - Whatsoever thy word has
promised, thou hast fulfilled. Every servant of God can testify that God
has done him nothing but good, and therefore he can speak good of his
name.

[Psalms 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">psa 119:66</span></span>

Teach me good judgment and knowledge - טוב טעם ודעי למדני tob taam
vedaath lammnedeni. Teach me (to have) a good taste and discernment. Let
me see and know the importance of Divine things, and give me a relish
for them.

[Psalms 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">psa 119:67</span></span>

Before I was afflicted I went astray - Many have been humbled under
affliction, and taught to know themselves and humble themselves before
God, that probably without this could never have been saved; after this,
they have been serious and faithful. Affliction sanctified is a great
blessing; unsanctified, it is an additional curse.

[Psalms 119:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">psa 119:68</span></span>

Thou art good - And because thou art good, thou doest good; and because
thou delightest to do good, teach me thy statutes.

[Psalms 119:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">psa 119:69</span></span>

The proud have forged a lie - The poor captives in Babylon had their
conduct and motives continually misrepresented, and themselves belied
and calumniated.

[Psalms 119:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">psa 119:70</span></span>

Their heart is as fat as grease - They are egregiously stupid, they have
fed themselves without fear; they are become flesh-brutalized, and given
over to vile affections, and have no kind of spiritual relish: but I
delight in thy law - I have, through thy goodness, a spiritual feeling
and a spiritual appetite.

[Psalms 119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_071">psa 119:71</span></span>

It is good for me that I have been afflicted - See on [Psa
119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067) (note).

[Psalms 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_072">psa 119:72</span></span>

The law of thy mouth is better - Who can say this? Who prefers the law
of his God, the Christ that bought him, and the heaven to which he hopes
to go, when he can live no longer upon earth, to thousands of gold and
silver? Yea, how many are there who, like Judas, sell their Savior even
for thirty pieces of silver? Hear this, ye lovers of the world and of
money!

As the letter ט teth begins but few words, not forty, in the Hebrew
language, there is less variety under this division than under any of
the preceding.

[Psalms 119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_073">psa 119:73</span></span>

Thy hands have made me - Thou hast formed the mass out of which I was
made; and fashioned me - thou hast given me that particular form that
distinguishes me from all thy other creatures.

Give me understanding - As thou hast raised me above the beasts that
perish in my form and mode of life, teach me that I may live for a
higher and nobler end, in loving, serving, and enjoying thee for ever.
Show me that I was made for heaven, not for earth.

[Psalms 119:74](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#074)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_074">psa 119:74</span></span>

They that fear thee - They who are truly religious will be glad - will
rejoice, at this farther proof of the saving power of God.

[Psalms 119:75](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#075)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_075">psa 119:75</span></span>

I know - that thy judgments are right - All the dispensations of thy
providence are laid in wisdom, and executed in mercy: let me see that it
is through this wisdom and mercy that I have been afflicted.

[Psalms 119:76](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#076)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_076">psa 119:76</span></span>

Thy merciful kindness - Let me derive my comfort and happiness from a
diffusion of thy love and mercy, חסדך chasdecha, thy exuberant goodness,
through my soul.

[Psalms 119:77](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#077)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_077">psa 119:77</span></span>

Let thy tender mercies - רחמיך rachameycha, thy fatherly and
affectionate feelings.

[Psalms 119:78](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#078)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_078">psa 119:78</span></span>

Let the proud be ashamed - To reduce a proud man to shame, is to humble
him indeed. Let them be confounded. Without cause - without any
colourable pretext, have they persecuted me.

[Psalms 119:79](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#079)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_079">psa 119:79</span></span>

Let those that fear thee - The truly pious.

Turn unto me - Seeing thy work upon me, they shall acknowledge me as a
brand plucked from the burning.

[Psalms 119:80](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#080)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_080">psa 119:80</span></span>

Let my heart be sound in thy statutes - Let it be perfect - all given up
to thee, and all possessed by thee.

[Psalms 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_081">psa 119:81</span></span>

My soul fainteth for thy salvation - I have longed so incessantly after
thy salvation - the complete purification and restoration of my soul,
that my very spirits are exhausted.

"My heartstrings groan with deep complaint;My soul lies panting, Lord,
for thee;

And every limb and every jointStretches for perfect purity."

[Psalms 119:82](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#082)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_082">psa 119:82</span></span>

Mine eyes fail - With looking up for the fulfillment of thy promise, as
my heart fails in longing after thy presence.

[Psalms 119:83](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#083)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_083">psa 119:83</span></span>

Like a bottle in the smoke - In the eastern countries their bottles are
made of skins; one of these hung in the smoke must soon be parched and
shrivelled up. This represents the exhausted state of his body and mind
by long bodily affliction and mental distress.

[Psalms 119:84](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#084)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_084">psa 119:84</span></span>

How many are the days of thy servants - Dost thou not know that I have
few to live, and they are full of trouble?

When wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me? - Shall not
the pride of the Chaldeans be brought down, the arm of their strength
broken, and thy people delivered? In this verse there is none of the ten
words used in reference to God's law.

[Psalms 119:85](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#085)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_085">psa 119:85</span></span>

The proud have digged pits - The Vulgate, Septuagint, Ethiopic, and
Arabic, translate this verse thus: "They have recited to me unholy
fables, which are not according to thy law." They wish us to receive
their system of idolatry, and the tales concerning their gods; but these
are not according to thy law. The Anglo-Saxon is the same: They quothed
me the unrightwise spells; but no so so law thine.

[Psalms 119:87](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#087)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_087">psa 119:87</span></span>

They had almost consumed me - Had it not been for thy mercy, we had all
been destroyed under this oppressive captivity.

[Psalms 119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#088)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_088">psa 119:88</span></span>

Quicken me - Make and keep me alive.

So shall I keep - Without the spiritual life there is no obedience; we
must therefore rise from the dead, and be quickened by the Spirit of
Christ.

[Psalms 119:89](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_089">psa 119:89</span></span>

For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven - Thy purposes are all
settled above, and they shall all be fulfilled below.

[Psalms 119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_090">psa 119:90</span></span>

Thy faithfulness - That which binds thee to accomplish the promise made.
And this shall be, not for an age merely, but from generation to
generation; for thy promises refer to the whole duration of time.

Thou hast established the earth - Thou hast given it its appointed place
in the system, and there it abideth.

[Psalms 119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_091">psa 119:91</span></span>

They continue this day - This verse should be thus read: All are thy
servants; therefore, they continue this day according to thy ordinances.
"All the celestial bodies are governed by thy power. Thou hast given an
ordinance or appointment to each, and each fulfils thy will in the place
thou hast assigned it."

[Psalms 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_092">psa 119:92</span></span>

Unless thy law had been my delights - Had we not had the consolations of
religion, we should long ago have died of a broken heart.

[Psalms 119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_093">psa 119:93</span></span>

I will never forget thy precepts - How can I? It is by them I live.

[Psalms 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_094">psa 119:94</span></span>

I am thine, save me - He who can say this need fear no evil. In all
trials, temptations, dangers, afflictions, persecutions, I am thine. Thy
enemies wish to destroy me! Lord, look to thy servant; thy servant looks
to thee. O how sovereign is such a word against all the evils of life! I
am Thine! therefore save thine Own!

[Psalms 119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_096">psa 119:96</span></span>

I have seen an end of all perfection - Literally, "Of all consummations
I have seen the end:" as if one should say, Every thing of human origin
has its limits and end, howsoever extensive, noble, and excellent. All
arts and sciences, languages, inventions, have their respective
principles, have their limits and ends; as they came from man and relate
to man, they shall end with man: but thy law, thy revelation, which is a
picture of thy own mind, an external manifestation of thy own
perfections, conceived in thy infinite ideas, in reference to eternal
objects, is exceeding broad; transcends the limits of creation; and
extends illimitably into eternity! This has been explained as if it
meant: All the real or pretended perfection that men can arrive at in
this life is nothing when compared with what the law of God requires.
This saying is false in itself, and is no meaning of the text. Whatever
God requires of man he can, by his grace, work in man.

[Psalms 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_097">psa 119:97</span></span>

O how love I thy law - This is one of the strongest marks of a gracious
and pious heart, cast in the mould of obedience. Such love the precepts
of Christ: in his commandments they delight; and this delight is shown
by their making them frequent subjects of their meditation.

[Psalms 119:98](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_098">psa 119:98</span></span>

Wiser than mine enemies - Some have thought that this Psalm was composed
by Daniel, and that he speaks of himself in these verses. Being
instructed by God, he was found to have more knowledge than any of the
Chaldeans, magicians, soothsayers, etc., etc.; and his wisdom soon
appeared to the whole nation vastly superior to theirs.

[Psalms 119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_099">psa 119:99</span></span>

I have more understanding than all my teachers - As he had entered into
the spiritual nature of the law of God, and saw into the exceeding
breadth of the commandment, he soon became wiser than any of the priests
or even prophets who instructed him.

[Psalms 119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_100">psa 119:100</span></span>

I understand more than the ancients - God had revealed to him more of
that hidden wisdom which was in his law than he had done to any of his
predecessors. And this was most literally true of David, who spoke more
fully about Christ than any who had gone before him; or, indeed,
followed after him. His compositions are, I had almost said, a sublime
Gospel.

[Psalms 119:101](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#101)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_101">psa 119:101</span></span>

I have refrained my feet - By avoiding all sin, the spirit of wisdom
still continues to rest upon me.

[Psalms 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_103">psa 119:103</span></span>

Sweeter than honey to my mouth! - What deep communion must this man have
had with his Maker! These expressions show a soul filled with God. O
Christians, how vastly superior are our privileges! and alas! how vastly
inferior in general, are our consolations, our communion with God, and
our heavenly-mindedness!

[Psalms 119:104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_104">psa 119:104</span></span>

Through thy precepts I get understanding - Spiritual knowledge increases
while we tread in the path of obedience. Obedience is the grand means of
growth and instruction. Obedience trades with the talent of grace, and
thus grace becomes multiplied.

[Psalms 119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105">psa 119:105</span></span>

Thy word is a lamp - This is illustrated thus by Solomon, [Pro
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#023) : "The commandment is a lamp; and
the law is light; and reproofs of instruction are the way of life."
God's word is a candle which may be held in the hand to give us light in
every dark place and chamber; and it is a general light shining upon all
his works, and upon all our ways.

[Psalms 119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_106">psa 119:106</span></span>

I have sworn - Perhaps this means no more than that he had renewed his
covenant with God; he had bound himself to love and serve him only.

[Psalms 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_107">psa 119:107</span></span>

I am afflicted very much - עד מאד ad meod, "to extremity, excessively."
We are in the most oppressive captivity.

Quicken me - Deliver us from our bondage.

[Psalms 119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_108">psa 119:108</span></span>

The freewill-offerings of my mouth - נדבות פי nidboth pi, the voluntary
offerings which I have promised. Or, As we are in captivity, and cannot
sacrifice to thee, but would if we could; accept the praises of our
mouth, and the purposes of our hearts, instead of the sacrifices and
offerings which we would bring to thy altar, but cannot.

[Psalms 119:109](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#109)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_109">psa 119:109</span></span>

My soul is continually in my hand - נפשי naphshi, my life; that is, it
is in constant danger, every hour I am on the confines of death.

The expression signifies to be in continual danger. So Xenarchus in
Athenaeus, lib. xiii., c. 4: Εν τῃ χειρι την ψυχην εχοντα, "having the
life in the hand;" which signifies continual danger and jeopardy. There
is some thing like this in the speech of Achilles to Ulysses, Hom. Il.
ix., ver. 322: -

Αιει εμην ψυχην παραβαλλομενος πολεμιζειν·

"Always presenting my life to the dangers of the fight."

My soul is in thy hand, is the reading of the Syriac, Septuagint,
Ethiopic, and Arabic; but this is a conjectural and useless emendation.

[Psalms 119:110](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#110)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_110">psa 119:110</span></span>

The wicked have laid a snare - Thus their lives were continually exposed
to danger.

[Psalms 119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_111">psa 119:111</span></span>

As a heritage - In [Psa 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057) he
says, God is my portion, חלקי chelki. In this he says, Thy testimonies
have I taken as a heritage, נחל nachal. To these he was heir; he had
inherited them from his fathers, and he was determined to leave them to
his family for ever. If a man can leave nothing to his child but a
Bible, in that he bequeaths him the greatest treasure in the universe.

[Psalms 119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_112">psa 119:112</span></span>

I have inclined mine heart - I used the power God gave me, and turned to
his testimonies with all mine heart. When we work with God, we can do
all things.

[Psalms 119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_113">psa 119:113</span></span>

I hate vain thoughts - I have hated סעפים seaphim, "tumultuous, violent
men." I abominate all mobs and insurrections, and troublers of the
public peace.

[Psalms 119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_114">psa 119:114</span></span>

Mv hiding place - My asylum.

And my shield - There is a time in which I may be called to suffer in
secret; then thou hidest me. There may be a time in which thou callest
me to fight; then thou art my Shield and Protector.

[Psalms 119:116](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#116)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_116">psa 119:116</span></span>

Depart from me - Odi profanum vulgus, etarceo, I abominate the profane,
and will have no communion with them. I drive them away from my
presence.

Uphold me - סמכני sammecheni, prop me up; give me thyself to lean upon.

[Psalms 119:117](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#117)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_117">psa 119:117</span></span>

Hold thou me up - I shall grow weary and faint in the way, if not
strengthened and supported by thee.

And I shall be safe - No soul can be safe, unless upheld by thee.

[Psalms 119:118](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_118">psa 119:118</span></span>

Thou hast trodden down - All thy enemies will be finally trodden down
under thy feet.

Their deceit is falsehood - Their elevation is a lie. The wicked often
become rich and great, and affect to be happy, but it is all false; they
have neither a clean nor approving conscience. Nor can they have thy
approbation; and, consequently, no true blessedness.

[Psalms 119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_119">psa 119:119</span></span>

Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross - There is no
true metal in them: when they are tried by the refining fire, they are
burnt up; they fly off in fumes, and come to no amount. There is
probably an allusion here to the scum or scorias at the surface of
melting metals, which is swept oft previously to casting the metal into
the mould.

Therefore I love thy testimonies - Thy testimonies will stand; and thy
people will stand; because thou who didst give the one, and who
upholdest the other, art pure, immovable, and eternal.

[Psalms 119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_120">psa 119:120</span></span>

My flesh trembleth for fear of thee - I know thou art a just and holy
God: I know thou requirest truth in the inner parts. I know that thou
art a Spirit, and that they who worship thee must worship thee in spirit
and in truth; and I am often alarmed lest I fall short. It is only an
assurance of my interest in thy mercy that can save me from distressing
fears and harassing doubts. It is our privilege to know we are in God's
favor; and it is not less so to maintain a continual filial fear of
offending him. A true conception of God's justice and mercy begets
reverence.

[Psalms 119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121">psa 119:121</span></span>

I have done judgment and justice - I have given the best decision
possible on every case that came before me; and I have endeavored to
render to all their due.

[Psalms 119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_122">psa 119:122</span></span>

Be surety for thy servant - ערב arob, give a pledge or token that thou
wilt help me in times of necessity. Or, Be bail for thy servant. What a
word is this! Pledge thyself for me, that thou wilt produce me safely at
the judgment of the great day. Then sustain and keep me blameless till
the coming of Christ. Neither of these two verses has any of the ten
words in reference to God's law or attributes. The judgment and the
justice refer to the psalmist's own conduct in [Psa
119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121). The hundred and twenty-second
has no word of the kind.

[Psalms 119:123](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#123)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_123">psa 119:123</span></span>

Mine eyes fail - See on [Psa 119:82](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#082)
(note).

[Psalms 119:125](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#125)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_125">psa 119:125</span></span>

I am thy servant - See on [Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094)
(note).

[Psalms 119:126](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_126">psa 119:126</span></span>

It is time for thee, Lord, to work - The time is fulfilled in which thou
hast promised deliverance to thy people. They - the Babylonians,

Have made void thy law - They have filled up the measure of their
iniquities.

[Psalms 119:127](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_127">psa 119:127</span></span>

Therefore I love thy commandments - I see thou wilt do all things well.
I will trust in thee.

Above gold - מזהב mizzahab, more than resplendent gold; gold without any
stain or rust.

Yea, above fine gold - ומפז umippaz, above solid gold; gold separated
from the dross, perfectly refined.

[Psalms 119:128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#128)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_128">psa 119:128</span></span>

All thy precepts concerning all things to be right - There are too many
supplied words here to leave the text unsuspected. All the ancient
versions, except the Chaldee, seem to have omitted the second כל col,
All and read the text thus: "Therefore I have walked straight in all thy
precepts." I go straight on in all thy precepts, hating every false way.
I neither turn to the right hand nor to the left; the false ways are
crooked; thy way is straight. I am going to heaven, and that way lies
straight before me. To walk in the way of falsity I cannot, because I
hate it; and I hate such ways because God hates them.

[Psalms 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_129">psa 119:129</span></span>

Thy testimonies are wonderful - There is a height, length, depth, and
breadth in thy word and testimonies that are truly astonishing; and on
this account my soul loves them, and I deeply study them. The more I
study, the more light and salvation I obtain.

[Psalms 119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_130">psa 119:130</span></span>

The entrance of thy words giveth light - פתח pethach, the opening of it:
when I open my Bible to read, light springs up in my mind. Every sermon,
every prayer, every act of faith, is an opening by which light is let
into the seeking soul.

[Psalms 119:131](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#131)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_131">psa 119:131</span></span>

I opened my mouth, and panted - A metaphor taken from an animal
exhausted in the chase. He runs, open-mouthed, to take in the cooling
air; the heart beating high, and the muscular force nearly expended
through fatigue. The psalmist sought for salvation, as he would run from
a ferocious beast for his life. Nothing can show his earnestness in a
stronger point of view.

[Psalms 119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_132">psa 119:132</span></span>

As thou usest to do - Treat me as thy mercy has induced thee to treat
others in my circumstances. Deal with me as thou dealest with thy
friends.

[Psalms 119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_133">psa 119:133</span></span>

Order my steps - הכן hachen, make them firm; let me not walk with a
halting or unsteady step.

Have dominion over me - בי bi, In me. Let me have no governor but God,
let the throne of my heart be filled by him, and none other.

[Psalms 119:135](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#135)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_135">psa 119:135</span></span>

Make thy face to shine - Give me a sense of thy approbation. Let me
know, by the testimony of thy Spirit in my conscience, that thou art
reconciled to me. The godly in all ages derived their happiness from a
consciousness of the Divine favor. The witness of God's spirit in the
souls of believers was an essential principle in religion from the
foundation of the world.

[Psalms 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_136">psa 119:136</span></span>

Rivers of waters run down mine eyes - How much had this blessed man the
honor of God and the salvation of souls at heart! O for more of that
spirit which mourns for the transgressions of the land! But we are not
properly convinced of the exceeding sinfulness of sin.

[Psalms 119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_137">psa 119:137</span></span>

Righteous art thou - Thou art infinitely holy in thy nature; and
therefore thou art upright in thy judgments - all thy dispensations to
men.

[Psalms 119:138](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#138)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_138">psa 119:138</span></span>

Thy testimonies - Every thing that proceeds from thee partakes of the
perfections of thy nature.

[Psalms 119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_139">psa 119:139</span></span>

My zeal hath consumed me - My earnest desire to promote thy glory, and
the pain I feel at seeing transgressions multiplied, have worn down both
my flesh and spirits.

[Psalms 119:140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#140)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_140">psa 119:140</span></span>

Thy word is very pure - צרופה tseruphah, it is purification. It is not a
purified thing, but a thing that purifies. "Now ye are clean," said
Christ, "by the word I have spoken unto you." God's word is a fire to
purify as well as a hammer to break.

[Psalms 119:141](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#141)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_141">psa 119:141</span></span>

I am small and despised - And on these accounts have every thing to
fear. Being small, I cannot resist; being despised, I am in danger; but
even all this does not induce me to start aside, or through the fear of
man to be unfaithful to thee.

[Psalms 119:142](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#142)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_142">psa 119:142</span></span>

Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness - The word צדק tsedek
is a word of very extensive meaning in the Bible. It signifies, not only
God's inherent righteousness and perfection of nature, but also his
method of treating others; his plan of redemption; his method of saving
others. And the word δικαιοσυνη, which answers to it, in the Septuagint
and in the New Testament, is used with the same latitude of meaning, and
in the same sense; particularly in that remarkable passage, [Rom
3:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025) (note), where see the notes.
Thy merciful method of dealing with sinners and justifying the ungodly
will last as long as the earth lasts; and thy law that witnesses this,
in all its pages, is the truth.

[Psalms 119:143](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#143)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_143">psa 119:143</span></span>

Trouble and anguish - I am exercised with various trials from men and
devils.

Have taken hold on me - But still I cleave to my God, and am delighted
with his law.

[Psalms 119:144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#144)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_144">psa 119:144</span></span>

The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting - Thy moral law was
not made for one people, or for one particular time; it is as
imperishable as thy nature, and of endless obligation. It is that law by
which all the children of Adam shall be Judged.

Give me understanding - To know and practice it.

And I shall live - Shall glorify thee, and live eternally; not for the
merit of having done it, but because thou didst fulfill the work of the
law in my heart, having saved me from condemnation by it.

[Psalms 119:145](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_145">psa 119:145</span></span>

I cried with my whole heart - The whole soul of the psalmist was engaged
in this good work. He whose whole heart cries to God will never rise
from the throne of grace without a blessing.

[Psalms 119:147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_147">psa 119:147</span></span>

I prevented the dawning - קדמתי kiddamti, "I went before the dawn or
twilight."

[Psalms 119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_148">psa 119:148</span></span>

Mine eyes prevent - קדמו kiddemu, "go before the watches." Before the
watchman proclaims the hour, I am awake, meditating on thy words. The
Jews divided the night into three watches, which began at what we call
six o'clock in the evening, and consisted each of four hours. The Romans
taught them afterwards to divide it into four watches of three hours
each; and to divide the day and night into twelve hours each; wherein
different guards of soldiers were appointed to watch. At the proclaiming
of each watch the psalmist appears to have risen and performed some act
of devotion. For a remarkable custom of our Saxon ancestors, see the
note on [Psa 119:164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164) (note).

[Psalms 119:150](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#150)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_150">psa 119:150</span></span>

They draw nigh - They are just at hand who seek to destroy me.

They are far from thy law - They are near to all evil, but far from
thee.

[Psalms 119:151](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#151)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_151">psa 119:151</span></span>

Thou art near - As they are near to destroy, so art thou near to save.
When the enemy comes in as a flood, the Spirit of the Lord lifts up a
standard against him.

[Psalms 119:152](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#152)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_152">psa 119:152</span></span>

Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old - קדם ידעתי kedem
yedati, "Long ago I have known concerning thy testimonies." Thou hast
designed that thy testimonies should bear reference to, and evidence of,
those glorious things which thou hast provided for the salvation of men;
and that this should be an everlasting testimony. They continue, and
Christ is come.

[Psalms 119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_153">psa 119:153</span></span>

Consider mine affliction - See mine addiction or humiliation: but the
eye of the Lord affects his heart; and therefore he never sees the
distresses of his followers without considering their situation, and
affording them help.

[Psalms 119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_154">psa 119:154</span></span>

Plead my cause - ריבה ריבי ribah ribi. "Be my Advocate in my suit."
Contend for us against the Babylonians, and bring us out of our bondage.

According to thy word - Spoken by thy prophets for our comfort and
encouragement.

[Psalms 119:155](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#155)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_155">psa 119:155</span></span>

Salvation is far from the wicked - There is no hope of their conversion.

For they seek not thy statutes - And they who do not seek, shall not
find.

[Psalms 119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_156">psa 119:156</span></span>

Great are thy tender mercies - They are רבים rabbim, multitudes. They
extend to all the wretchednesses of all men.

[Psalms 119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_158">psa 119:158</span></span>

I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved - Literally, I was affected
with anguish.

[Psalms 119:160](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#160)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_160">psa 119:160</span></span>

Thy word is true from the beginning - ראש rosh, the head or beginning of
thy word, is true. Does he refer to the first word in the Book of
Genesis, בראשית bereshith, "in the beginning?" The learned reader knows
that ראש rash, or raash, is the root in that word. Every word thou hast
spoken from the first in Bereshith (Genesis) to the end of the law and
prophets, and all thou wilt yet speak, as flowing from the fountain of
truth, must be true; and all shall have in due time, their fulfllment.
And all these, thy words endure for ever. They are true, and ever will
be true.

[Psalms 119:161](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_161">psa 119:161</span></span>

Princes have persecuted me - This may refer to what was done by prime
ministers, and the rulers of provinces, to sour the king against the
unfortunate Jews, in order still to detain them in bondage. In reference
to David, the plotting against him in Saul's court, and the dangers he
ran in consequence of the jealousies of the Philistine lords while he
sojourned among them, are well known.

My heart standeth in awe - They had probably offers made them of
enlargement or melioration of condition, providing they submitted to
some idolatrous conditions; but they knew they had to do with a jealous
God; their hearts stood in awe, and they were thereby kept from sin.

[Psalms 119:162](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#162)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_162">psa 119:162</span></span>

As one that findeth great spoil - שלל רב shalal rab. This appears to
refer to such spoil as is acquired by stripping the dead in a field of
battle, taking the rich garments of the slain chiefs; or it may refer to
plunder in general. As God opened his eyes he beheld wonders in his law;
and each discovery of this kind was like finding a prize.

[Psalms 119:163](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#163)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_163">psa 119:163</span></span>

I - abhor lying - Perhaps they might have made the confessions which the
Chaldeans required, and by mental reservation have kept an inward firm
adherence to their creed; but this, in the sight of the God of truth,
must have been lying; and at such a sacrifice they would not purchase
their enlargement, even from their captivity.

[Psalms 119:164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_164">psa 119:164</span></span>

Seven times a day do I praise thee - We have often seen that seven was a
number expressing perfection, completion, etc., among the Hebrews; and
that it is often used to signify many, or an indefinite number, see [Pro
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#016); [Lev
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#028). And here it may mean no more
than that his soul was filled with the spirit of gratitude and praise,
and that he very frequently expressed his joyous and grateful feelings
in this way. But Rabbi Solomon says this is to be understood literally,
for they praised God twice in the morning before reading the decalogue,
and once after; twice in the evening before the same reading, and twice
after; making in the whole seven times. The Roman Church has prescribed
a similar service.

In a manuscript Saxon Homily, Domin. 3, in Quadrag, a.d. 971, I find the
following singular directions: -

Every Christian man is commanded that he always his body seven times
bless with the sign of Christ's cross.

1\. First, at day-break.

2\. Second time at undern tide, (nine o'clock in the morning).

3\. The third time at midday.

4\. The fourth time at noon-tide. (3 o'clock P.M.)

5\. The fifth time in the evening.

6\. The sixth time at night ere he go to rest.

7\. The seventh time at midnight. A good man would do so if he awoke.

It seems that the sign of the cross was thought sufficient, even without
prayer.

[Psalms 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_165">psa 119:165</span></span>

Great peace have they - They have peace in their conscience, and joy in
the Holy Spirit; and

Nothing shall offend - Stumble, or put them out of the way.

[Psalms 119:166](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#166)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_166">psa 119:166</span></span>

Lord, I have hoped - Thou hast promised deliverance, and I have expected
it on the ground of that promise.

[Psalms 119:167](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#167)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_167">psa 119:167</span></span>

My soul hath kept - I have not attended to the latter merely, but my
spirit has entered into the spirit and design of thy testimonies.

[Psalms 119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_168">psa 119:168</span></span>

For all my ways are before thee - Thou knowest that I do not lie; thy
eye has been upon my heart and my conduct, and thou knowest that I have
endeavored to walk before thee with a perfect heart.

[Psalms 119:169](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#169)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_169">psa 119:169</span></span>

Let my cry come near before thee - This is really a fine image; it is of
frequent occurrence, and is little heeded. Here the psalmists cry for
deliverance is personified; made an intelligent being, and sent up to
the throne of grace to negotiate in his behalf. He pursues this
prosopopoeia in the next verse and sends his supplication in the same
way. I have already had occasion to refer to a similar figure in Homer,
where prayers are represented as the daughters of Jupiter. See on [Psa
88:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#002) (note).

[Psalms 119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_171">psa 119:171</span></span>

My lips shall utter praise - תהלה tehillah, a song of praise.

[Psalms 119:172](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#172)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_172">psa 119:172</span></span>

My tongue shall speak of thy word - There is a curious distinction here.
In the preceding verse he says, "My lips shall utter;" here no reference
is made to articulate sounds, except as affixed to musical notes. In
this verse he says, "My tongue shall speak;" here articulate and
intelligible words are intended. He first utters sounds connected with
words expressive of his grateful feelings; in the second he speaks
words, principally those which God himself had spoken, containing
promises of support, purposes relative to the redemption of his people,
and denunciations against their enemies.

[Psalms 119:173](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#173)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_173">psa 119:173</span></span>

Let thine hand help me - Exert thy power in my defense.

[Psalms 119:175](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#175)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_175">psa 119:175</span></span>

Let my soul live - Let my life be preserved, and my soul quickened!

[Psalms 119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_176">psa 119:176</span></span>

I have gone astray like a lost sheep - A sheep, when it has once lost
the flock, strays in such a manner as to render the prospect of its own
return utterly hopeless. I have seen them bleating when they have lost
the flock, and when answered by the others, instead of turning to the
sound, have gone on in the same direction in which they were straying,
their bleatings answered by the rest of the flock, till they were out of
hearing! This fact shows the propriety of the next clause.

Seek thy servant - I shall never find thee; come to the wilderness, take
me up, and carry me to the flock. See the notes on the parable of the
lost sheep, [Luk 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004) (note), etc. The
psalmist began with "Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in
the law of the Lord;" and he concludes with "I have gone astray like a
lost sheep; seek thy servant." And thus, conscious of the blessedness of
those who are in the way or righteousness, he desires to be brought into
it, that he may walk in newness of life. [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) : "It is a good way, and they
are blessed that walk in it." Verse the last, "Bring me into this way,
that I may be blessed." And thus the Psalm, in sentiment, returns into
itself; and the latter verse is so connected with the former, as to make
the whole a perfect circle, like the serpent biting its own tail.

There is one extraordinary perfection in this Psalm: begin where you
will, you seem to be at the commencement of the piece; end where you
will, you seem to close with a complete sense. And yet it is not like
the Book of Proverbs, a tissue of detached sentences; it is a whole
composed of many parts, and all apparently as necessary to the
perfection of the Psalm, as the different alphabetical letters under
which it is arranged are to the formation of a complete alphabet. Though
there be a continual recurrence of the same words, which would of itself
prevent it from having a pleasing effect upon the ear, yet these words
are so connected with a vast variety of others, which show their force
and meaning in still new and impressive points of light, that attention
is still excited, and devotion kept alive, during the whole reading. It
is constructed with admirable art, and every where breathes the justest
and highest encomiums on the revelation of God; shows the glories of the
God who gave it, the necessities and dependence of his intelligent
creatures, the bounty of the Creator, and the praise and obedience which
are his due. It is elegant throughout; it is full of beauties, and I
have endeavored in the preceding notes to mark some of them; but the
number might have been greatly multiplied. To no Psalm can its own words
be better applied, [Psa 119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018) : "Open
thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 120](psa120)

</div>
