<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa126)  [Next](psa128) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 127](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 127:0</span></span>

The necessity of God's blessing on every undertaking, without which no
prosperity can be expected, [Psa
127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001), [Psa
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002). Children are a heritage from
the Lord, [Psa 127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003), [Psa
127:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#004). A fruitful wife is a blessing
to her husband, [Psa 127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005).

The Hebrew, Chaldee, and Vulgate attribute this Psalm to Solomon. The
Syriac says it is "A Psalm of David concerning Solomon; and that it was
spoken also concerning Haggai and Zechariah, who forwarded the building
of the temple." The Septuagint, Ethiopic, Arabic, and Anglo-Saxon have
no title, but simply "A Psalm of Degrees." It was most likely composed
for the building of the second temple, under Nehemiah, and by some
prophet of that time.

[Psalms 127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 127:1</span></span>

Except the Lord build the house - To build a house is taken in three
different senses in the sacred writings.

1\. To build the temple of the Lord, which was called הבית habbeith, the
house, by way of eminence.

2\. To build any ordinary house, or place of dwelling.

3\. To have a numerous offspring.

In this sense it is supposed to be spoken concerning the Egyptian
midwives; that because they feared the Lord, therefore he built them
houses. See the note on [Exo 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#021).
But, however, the above passage may be interpreted, it is a fact that b
ben, a son, and tb bath, a daughter, and tyb beith, a house, come from
the same root hnb banah, to build; because sons and daughters build up a
household, or constitute a family, as much and as really as stones and
timber constitute a building. Now it is true that unless the good hand
of God be upon us we cannot prosperously build a place of worship for
his name. Unless we have his blessing, a dwelling-house cannot be
comfortably erected. And if his blessing be not on our children, the
house (the family) may be built up, but instead of its being the house
of God, it will be the synagogue of Satan. All marriages that are not
under God's blessing will be a private and public curse. This we see
every day.

Except the Lord keep the city - When the returned Jews began to restore
the walls of Jerusalem, and rebuild the city, Sanballat, Tobiah, and
others formed plots to prevent it. Nehemiah, being informed of this, set
up proper watches and guards. The enemy, finding this, gathered
themselves together, and determined to fall upon them at once, and cut
them all off. Nehemiah, having gained intelligence of this also, armed
his people, and placed them behind the wall. Sanballat and his company,
finding that the Jews were prepared for resistance, abandoned their
project; and Nehemiah, to prevent surprises of this kind, kept one-half
of the people always under arms, while the other half was employed in
the work. To this the psalmist alludes; and in effect says, Though you
should watch constantly, guard every place, and keep on your armor ready
to repel every attack, yet remember the success of all depends upon the
presence and blessing of God. While, therefore, ye are not slothful in
business, be fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; for there is no
success either in spiritual or secular undertakings but in consequence
of the benediction of the Almighty.

[Psalms 127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 127:2</span></span>

It is vain for you to rise up early - There seems to be here an allusion
to the daily and nightly watches which Nehemiah instituted. The people
are worn out with constant labor and watching; he therefore divided them
in such a manner, that they who had worked in the day should rest by
night, and that they who worked by night should rest in the day; and
thus his beloved, a title of the Jews, the beloved of God, got sleep,
due refreshment, and rest. As for Nehemiah and his servants, they never
put off their clothes day or night but for washing.

[Psalms 127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 127:3</span></span>

Lo, children are a heritage of the Lord - That is, To many God gives
children in place of temporal good. To many others he gives houses,
lands, and thousands of gold and silver, and with them the womb that
beareth not; and these are their inheritance. The poor man has from God
a number of children, without lands or money; these are his inheritance;
and God shows himself their father, feeding and supporting them by a
chain of miraculous providences. Where is the poor man who would give up
his six children, with the prospect of having more, for the thousands or
millions of him who is the center of his own existence, and has neither
root nor branch but his forlorn solitary self upon the face of the
earth? Let the fruitful family, however poor, lay this to heart;
"Children are a heritage of the Lord; and the fruit of the womb is his
reward." And he who gave them will feed them; for it is a fact, and the
maxim formed on it has never failed, "Wherever God sends mouths, he
sends meat." "Murmur not," said an Arab to his friend, "because thy
family is large; know that it is for their sakes that God feeds thee."

[Psalms 127:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 127:4</span></span>

As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man - Each child will, in the
process of time, be a defense and support to the family, as arrows in
the quiver of a skillful and strong archer; the more he has, the more
enemies he may slay, and consequently the more redoubted shall he be.

Children of the youth - The children of young people are always more
strong and vigorous, more healthy, and generally longer lived than those
of elderly, or comparatively elderly persons. Youth is the time for
marriage; I do not mean infancy or a comparative childhood, in which
several fools join in marriage who are scarcely fit to leave the nursery
or school. Such couples generally disagree; they cannot bear the boyish
and girlish petulancies and caprices of each other; their own growth is
hindered, and their offspring, (if any), have never much better than an
embryo existence. On the other hand age produces only a dwarfish or
rickety offspring, that seldom live to procreate; and when they do, it
is only to perpetuate deformity and disease. It would be easy to assign
reasons for all this; but the interpretation of Scripture will seldom
admit of physiological details. It is enough that God has said, Children
of the youth are strong and active, like arrows in the hands of the
mighty.

[Psalms 127:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 127:5</span></span>

Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them - This is generally
supposed to mean his house full of children, as his quiver if full of
arrows; but I submit whether it be not more congenial to the metaphors
in the text to consider it as applying to the wife: "Happy is the man
who has a breeding or fruitful wife;" this is the gravida sagittis
pharetra "the quiver pregnant with arrows." But it may be thought the
metaphor is not natural. I think otherwise: and I know it to be in the
Jewish style, and the style of the times of the captivity, when this
Psalm was written, and we find the pudendum muliebre, or human matrix,
thus denominated, Ecclus. 26:12: Κατεναντι παντος πασσαλου καθησεται,
και εναντι βελους ανοιξει φαρετραν. The reader may consult the place in
the Apocrypha, where he will find the verse well enough translated.

With the enemies in the gate - "When he shall contend with his
adversaries in the gate of the house of judgment." - Targum. The
reference is either to courts of justice, which were held at the gates
of cities, or to robbers who endeavor to force their way into a house to
spoil the inhabitants of their goods. In the first case a man falsely
accused, who has a numerous family, has as many witnesses in his behalf
as he has children. And in the second case he is not afraid of
marauders, because his house is well defended by his active and vigorous
sons. It is, I believe, to this last that the psalmist refers.

This Psalm may be entitled, "The Soliloquy of the happy Householder: -
The poor man with a large loving family, and in annual expectation of an
increase, because his wife, under the Divine blessing, is fruitful." All
are blessed of the Lord, and his hand is invariably upon them for good.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 128](psa128)

</div>
