<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa100)  [Next](psa102) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 101](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 101:0</span></span>

The subject proposed, mercy and judgment, [Psa
101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001). The psalmist's resolution in
respect to his private conduct, [Psa
101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002). He will put away evil, inward
and outward, [Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003). No evil
person shall stand in his presence, [Psa
101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004); nor any slanderer of his
neighbor, [Psa 101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004), [Psa
101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005). He will encourage the faithful
and upright, [Psa 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006); but the
deceitful, the liars, and the profligate, he will cast out of the city
of God, [Psa 101:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007), [Psa
101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008).

The Hebrew and all the Versions attribute this Psalm to David. It shows
us the resolutions he formed when he came to the throne; and it is a
perfect model according to which a wise prince should regulate his
conduct and his government.

[Psalms 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 101:1</span></span>

I will sing of mercy and judgment - David might say, Adverse and
prosperous providences have been of the utmost use to my soul;
therefore, I will thank God for both. Or, as he was probably now called
to the government of all the tribes, he might make a resolution that he
would show חסד chesed, incessant benevolence, to the upright; and משפט
mishpat, the execution of judgment, to the wicked; and would make the
conduct of God the model of his own.

[Psalms 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 101:2</span></span>

I will behave myself wisely - God's law prescribes a perfect way of
life; in this perfect way I have professed to walk, and I must act
wisely in order to walk in it.

When wilt thou come unto me? - I can neither walk in this way, nor grow
wise unto salvation, unless thou come unto me by thy grace and Spirit;
for without thee I can do nothing.

I will walk within my house - It is easier for most men to walk with a
perfect heart in the Church, or even in the world, than in their own
families. How many are as meek as lambs among others, when at home they
are wasps or tigers! The man who, in the midst of family provocations,
maintains a Christian character, being meek, gentle, and long-suffering
to his wife, his children, and his servants, has got a perfect heart,
and adorns the doctrine of God his Savior in all things.

The original is very emphatic; אתהלך ethhallech, "I will set myself to
walk," I will make it a determined point thus to walk. I will bear and
forbear with children, servants, etc., not speaking rashly, nor giving
way to bad tempers. Through various motives a man will behave with
propriety and decorum among others; but none of these motives operate in
his own house where he feels himself master, and consequently under no
restraint.

[Psalms 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 101:3</span></span>

I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes - I will undertake no unjust
wars; will enter into no sinful alliances; will not oppress my subjects
by excessive taxation, to support extravagance in my court. I will not
look favourably on things or words of Belial. What is good for nothing
or evil in its operation, what is wicked in its principle, and what
would lead me away from righteousness and truth, I will never set before
my eyes.

Them that turn aside - I shall particularly abominate the conduct of
those who apostatize from the true religion, and those who deny its
Divine authority, and who live without having their conduct governed by
its influence, such shall never he put in a place of political trust or
confidence by me.

[Psalms 101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 101:4</span></span>

A froward heart - Rash and headstrong men shall not be employed by me.

I will not know a wicked person - I will give no countenance to sinners
of any kind; and whatever is evil shall be an object of my abhorrence.

[Psalms 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 101:5</span></span>

Whoso privily slandereth his neighbor - All flatterers and time-servers,
and those who by insinuations and false accusations endeavor to supplant
the upright, that they may obtain their offices for themselves or their
dependants, will I consider as enemies to the state, I will abominate,
and expel them from my court.

The Chaldee gives a remarkable meaning to the Hebrew, מלשני בסתר רעהו
melasheni bassether reehu, which we translate, Whoso privily slandereth
his neighbour, and which it renders thus, דמשתעי לישן תליתי על חבריה
demishtaey lishan telitai al chabreyah: "He who speaks with the triple
tongue against his neighbor." That is, the tongue by which he slays
three persons, viz.,

1\. The man whom he slanders;

2\. Him to whom he communicates the slander; and,

3\. Himself, the slanderer.

Every slanderer has his triple tongue, and by every slander inflicts
those three deadly wounds. Such a person deserves to be cut off. On this
subject St. Jerome speaks nearly in the same way: Ille qui detrahit, et
se, et illum qui audit, demergit; "He who slanders ruins both himself
and him who hears him;" he might have added, and him who is slandered,
for this is often the case; the innocent are ruined by detraction.

A high look and a proud heart - One who is seeking preferment; who
sticks at nothing to gain it; and one who behaves himself haughtily and
insolently in his office.

Will not I suffer - לא אוכל lo uchal, I cannot away with. These persons
especially will I drive from my presence, and from all state
employments.

[Psalms 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 101:6</span></span>

Mine eyes - My approbation.

Upon the faithful - The humble, upright followers of God.

That they may dwell with me - Be my confidants and privy counsellors. No
irreligious or wicked man, whatever his abilities may be, shall be
countenanced or supported by me. I will purify my court from the base,
the irreligious, the avaricious, the venal, the profligate, and the
wicked.

He that walketh in a perfect way - He that is truly religious.

He shalt serve me - Shall be my prime minister, and the chief officer in
my army, and over my finances.

[Psalms 101:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 101:7</span></span>

He that worketh deceit - that tenets lies - I will expel from my court
all sycophants and flatterers. Tiberius encouraged flatterers; Titus
burned some, banished several others, and sold many for slaves.

[Psalms 101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 101:8</span></span>

I will early destroy - I will take the first opportunity of destroying
all the wicked of the land. I will purify my court, purge Jerusalem, and
cleanse the whole land of every abomination and abominable person; so
that the city of my God, where holiness alone should dwell, shall indeed
become the Holy City; that the state may be made prosperous, and the
people happy. Such an administration must have been a good one, where
such pious caution was used in choosing all the officers of the state.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 102](psa102)

</div>
