<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev011)  [Next](rev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 12:0</span></span>

The woman clothed with the sun, and in travail, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001), [Rev
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#002). The great red dragon waiting to
devour the child as soon as born, [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003), [Rev
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#004). The woman is delivered of a son,
who is caught up unto God; and she flees to the wilderness, [Rev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005), [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006). The war in heaven between
Michael and the dragon, [Rev 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007),
[Rev 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#008). The dragon and his angels
are overcome and cast down to the earth; whereupon the whole heavenly
host give glory to God, [Rev 12:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009).
The dragon, full of wrath at his defeat, persecutes the woman, [Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012), [Rev
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#013). She flees to the wilderness,
whither he attempts to pursue her; and he makes war with her seed, [Rev
12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014).

Before I introduce the comment mentioned at the close of the preceding
chapter, I think it necessary to state that the phraseology of the whole
chapter is peculiarly rabbinical, and shall insert a few selections
which may serve to illustrate some of the principal figures.

In Sohar Exod., fol. 47, col. 187, we find a mystical interpretation of
[Exo 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#022) : If men strive, and hurt a
woman with child, so that her fruit depart - he shall be surely
punished, as the woman's husband will lay upon him. "If men strive, i.e.
Michael and Samael, and hurt a woman with child, i.e. the Israelitish
Church, so that her fruit depart, hoc fit in exilio, he shall surely be
punished, i.e., Samael. As the woman's husband, that is, the holy and
blessed God."

[Revelation 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 12:1</span></span>

There appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun -
That the woman here represents the true Church of Christ most
commentators are agreed. In other parts of the Apocalypse, the pure
Church of Christ is evidently portrayed by a woman. In [Rev
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007), a great multitude are
represented as saying, "Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to
him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife hath made
herself ready." In [Rev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009), an angel
talks with St. John, saying, "Come hither, I will show thee the Bride,
the Lamb's wife." That the Christian Church is meant will appear also
from her being clothed with the sun, a striking emblem of Jesus Christ,
the Sun of righteousness, the light and glory of the Church; for the
countenance of the Son of God is as the sun shineth in his strength. The
woman has: -

The moon under her feet - Bishop Newton understands this of the Jewish
typical worship and indeed the Mosaic system of rites and ceremonies
could not have been better represented, for it was the shadow of good
things to come. The moon is the less light, ruling over the night, and
deriving all its illumination from the sun; in like manner the Jewish
dispensation was the bright moonlight night of the world, and possessed
a portion of the glorious light of the Gospel. At the rising of the sun
the night is ended, and the lunar light no longer necessary, as the sun
which enlightens her shines full upon the earth; exactly in the same way
has the whole Jewish system of types and shadows has been superseded by
the birth, life, crucifixion, death, resurrection, ascension, and
intercession of Jesus Christ. Upon the head of the woman is: -

A crown of twelve stars - A very significant representation of the
twelve apostles, who were the first founders of the Christian Church,
and by whom the Gospel was preached in great part of the Roman empire
with astonishing success. "They that be wise shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness,
as the Stars for ever and ever." [Dan
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003).

[Revelation 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 12:2</span></span>

And she being with child cried, travailing in birth, etc. - This, when
taken in connection with the following verses, is a striking figure of
the great persecution which the Church of Christ should suffer under the
heathen Roman emperors, but more especially of that long and most
dreadful one under Diocletian. The woman is represented as Being with
child, to show that the time would speedily arrive when God's patient
forbearance with the heathen would be terminated, and that a deliverer
should arise in the Christian world who would execute the Divine
vengeance upon paganism.

[Revelation 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 12:3</span></span>

There appeared another wonder - a great red dragon - The dragon here is
a symbol, not of the Roman empire in general, but of the Heathen Roman
empire. This great pagan power must have, therefore, been thus
represented from the religion which it supported. But what is a dragon?
An entirely fabulous beast of antiquity, consequently, in this respect,
a most proper emblem of the heathen worship, which consisted in paying
adoration to numerous imaginary beings, termed gods, goddesses, etc. The
very foundation of the heathen religious system is mostly built upon
fable; and it is very difficult to trace many of their superstitions to
any authentic original; and even those which appear to derive their
origin from the sacred writings are so disguised in fable as literally
to bear no more resemblance to the truth than the dragon of the ancients
does to any animal with which we are acquainted. But it may be asked why
the Spirit of God should represent the heathen Roman empire as a dragon,
rather than by anger other of the fabulous animals with which the
mythology of the ancient Romans abounded. The answer is as follows; In
the eighth chapter of the Prophet Daniel, God has represented the
kingdom of the Greeks by a he-goat, for no other apparent reason than
this, that it was the national military standard of the Grecian
monarchy; we may therefore expect that the pagan Roman empire is called
a Dragon on a similar account. In confirmation of this point it is very
remarkable that the dragon was the principal standard of the Romans next
to the eagle, in the second, third, fourth, and fifth centuries of the
Christian era. Of this we have abundant evidence in the writings of both
heathens and Christians. Arrian is the earliest writer who has mentioned
that dragons were used as military standards among the Romans. See his
Tactics, c. 51. Hence Schwebelius supposes that this standard was
introduced after Trajan's conquest of the Daci. See Vegetius de
Revelation Militari a Schwebelio, p. 191, Argentorati, 1806; and Graevii
Thesaur., Antiq. Roman., tom. x., col. 1529. Vegetius, who flourished
about a.d. 386, says, lib. ii. c. 13: Primum signum totius legionis est
aquila, quam aquilifer portal. Dracones etiam per singulas cohortes a
draconariis feruntur ad praelium. "The first standard of the whole
legion is the eagle, which the aquilifer carries. Dragons are also borne
to battle by the Draconarii." As a legion consisted of ten cohorts,
there were therefore ten draconarii to one aquilifer; hence, from the
great number of draconarii in an army, the word signarii or signiferi,
standard-bearers, came at last to mean the carriers of the dragon
standards only, the others retaining the name of aquiliferi - See
Veget., lib. ii. c. 7, and his commentators. The heathen Roman empire is
called a Red dragon; and accordingly we find from the testimony of
ancient writers that the dragon standards of the Romans were painted
red. We read in Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. xvi., c. 12, of Purpureum
signum draconis, "the purple standard of the dragon." See also
Claudianus in Rufinum, lib. ii., l. 177, 178. Pitiscus, in his Lexicon
Antiq. Romans, and Ducange, in his Glossarium Mediae et Infimae
Latinitatis, sub voc. Draco, have considered this subject at great
length, especially the latter writer, who has made several quotations
from Claudianus, Sidonius, Prudentius, and others, in which not only the
standard, but also the image of the dragon itself, is stated to be of a
red or purple color. Of what has been said above respecting the dragon,
this is then the sum: a huge fabulous beast is shown to St. John, by
which some Great Pagan power is symbolically represented; and the Red
dragon is selected from among the numerous imaginary animals which the
fancies of mankind have created to show that this great pagan power is
the heathen Roman empire.

Having seven heads - As the dragon is an emblem of the heathen Roman
power, its heads must denote heathen forms of government. - See the note
on [Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010), where the heads of the
beast are explained in a similar way. These were exactly seven, and are
enumerated by Tacitus (Annal., lib. i., in principio) in words to the
following effect: "The city of Rome was originally governed by kings. L.
Brutus instituted liberty and the consulate. The dictatorship was only
occasionally appointed; neither did the decemviral power last above two
years; and the consular power of the military tribunes was not of long
continuance. Neither had Cinna nor Sylla a long domination: the power of
Pompey and Crassus was also soon absorbed in that of Caesar; and the
arms of Lepidus and Antony finally yielded to those of Augustus." From
this passage it is evident to every person well acquainted with the
Roman history, that the seven forms of government in the heathen Roman
world were,

1\. The regal power;

2\. The consulate;

3\. The dictatorship;

4\. The decemvirate;

5\. The consular power of the military tribunes;

6\. The triumvirate; and,

7\. The imperial government.

It is singular that commentators in general, in their citation of this
passage, have taken no notice of the triumvirate, a form of government
evidently as distinct from any of the others as kings are from consuls,
or consuls from emperors. For the triumvirate consisted in the division
of the Roman republic into three parts, each governed by an officer
possessed with consular authority in his own province; and all three
united together in the regulation of the whole Roman state.
Consequently, it differed entirely from the imperial power, which was
the entire conversion of the Roman state from a republic to a monarchy.

And ten horns - That these ten horns signify as many kingdoms is evident
from the seventh chapter of Daniel, where the angel, speaking of the
fourth beast, says, that "the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten
kings that shall arise;" and in this view of the passage many
commentators are agreed, who also admit that the ten kingdoms are to be
met with "amid the broken pieces of the Roman empire." And it is evident
that nothing less than the dismemberment of the Roman empire, and its
division into ten independent kingdoms, can be intended by the angel's
interpretation just quoted. If, therefore, the ten horns of Daniel's
fourth beast point out as many kingdoms, for the very same reason must
the horns of the dragon have a similar meaning. But the Roman empire was
not divided into several independent kingdoms till a considerable time
after it became Christian. In what sense then can it be said that the
different kingdoms into which the Roman empire was divided by the
barbarous nations are horns of the dragon? They were so because it was
the Roman monarchy, in its seventh Draconic form of government, which
was dismembered by the barbarians. For though the Roman empire was not
completely dismembered till the fifth century, it is well known that the
depression of the heathen idolatry, and the advancement of Christianity
to the throne, elected not the least change in the form of government:
the Romans continued still to be under subjection to the imperial power;
and, consequently, when the heathen barbarous nations divided the Roman
empire among themselves, they might very properly be denominated horns
of the dragon, as it was by means of their incursions that the imperial
power, Founded by the heathen Caesars, was abolished. Machiavel and
Bishop Lloyd enumerate the horns of the dragon thus:

1\. The kingdom of the Huns;

2\. The kingdom of the Ostrogoths;

3 The kingdom of the Visigoths;

4\. The kingdom of the Franks;

5\. The kingdom of the Vandals;

6\. The kingdom of the Sueves and Alans;

7\. The kingdom of the Burgundians;

8\. The kingdom of the Heruli, Rugii, Scyrri, and other tribes which
composed the Italian kingdom of Odoacer;

9\. The kingdom of the Saxons; and

10\. The kingdom of the Lombards.

And seven crowns upon his head - In the seven Roman forms of government
already enumerated, heathenism has been the crowning or dominant
religion.

[Revelation 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 12:4</span></span>

And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven - It is not
unusual in Scripture, as Dr. Mitchell observes, to call the hindmost of
an enemy the tail, as in [Jos 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#019) :
Ye shall cut off the hindmost of them, which is literally in Hebrew,
וזנבתם אותם "Ye shall cut off their tail." See also [Deu
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#018). It is also observable that the
word ουρα, in this verse, has been used by the Greeks in the same sense
with the Hebrew word זנב already referred to. Thus ουρα στρατου, which
we would translate the rear of an army, is literally the tail of an
army. See the Thesaurus of Stephens, in loc. The tail of the dragon is
therefore the heathen Roman power in its seventh or last form of
government, viz., the imperial power; and is not, as Dr. Mitchell
supposes, to be restricted to the last heathen Roman emperors. The
heathen imperial power is said to draw the third part of the stars of
heaven, by which has generally been understood that the Roman empire
subjected the third part of the princes and potentates of the earth. But
that this is not a correct statement of the fact is evident from the
testimony of ancient history. The Roman empire was always considered and
called the empire of the world by ancient writers. See Dionys. Halicar.,
Antiq. Romans lib. i., prope principium; Pitisci Lexicon Antiq. Roman.,
sub voc. imperium; Ovidii Fast., lib. ii. l. 683; Vegetius de Revelation
Militari, lib. i. c. 1., etc., etc. And it is even so named in
Scripture, for St. Luke, in the second chapter of his gospel, informs us
that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that The Whole World
should be taxed, by which is evidently meant the Roman empire. The whole
mystery of this passage consists in the misapprehension of its
symbolical language. In order therefore to understand it, the symbols
here used must be examined. By heaven is meant the most eminent or
ruling part of any nation. This is evident from the very nature of the
symbol, for "heaven is God's throne;" they therefore who are advanced to
the supreme authority in any state are very properly said to be taken up
into heaven, because they are raised to this eminence by the favor of
the Lord, and are ministers of his to do his pleasure. And the calamity
which fell upon Nebuchadnezzar was to instruct him in this important
truth, that the heavens do rule; that is, that all monarchs possess
their kingdoms by Divine appointment, and that no man is raised to power
by what is usually termed the chances of war, but that "the Most High
ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and
setteth up over it the basest of men." The meaning of heaven being thus
ascertained, it cannot be difficult to comprehend the meaning of earth,
this being evidently its opposite, that is, every thing in subjection to
the heaven or ruling part. Stars have already been shown to denote
ministers of religion; and this is more fully evident from [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016) of this book, where the seven
stars which the Son of God holds in his right hand are explained to
signify the seven angels (or messengers) of the seven Churches, by whom
must be meant the seven pastors or ministers of these Churches. The
resemblance of ministers to stars is very striking; for as the stars
give light upon the earth, so are ministers the lights of the cause they
advocate; and their position in heaven, the symbol of domination, very
fitly betokens the spiritual authority of priests or ministers over
their flocks. Hence, as the woman, or Christian Church, has upon her
head a crown of twelve stars, which signifies that she is under the
guidance of the twelve apostles, who are the twelve principal lights of
the Christian world, so has the dragon also his stars or ministers. The
stars therefore which the dragon draws with his tail must represent the
whole body of pagan priests, who were the stars or lights of the heathen
world. But in what sense can it be said that the heathen Roman empire,
which ruled over the whole known world, only draws a third part of the
stars of heaven? The answer is: The religious world in the time of St.
John was divided into three grand branches, viz., the Christian world,
the Jewish world, and the heathen and pagan world: consequently, as a
dragon, a fabulous animal, is an emblem of a civil power supporting a
religion founded in fable; it necessarily follows that the stars or
ministers of the Jews and Christians cannot be numbered among those
which he draws with his tail, as they were not the advocates of his
idolatry, but were ministers of a religion founded by the God of heaven,
and consequently formed no part of the pagan world, though they were in
subjection in secular matters to the pagan Roman empire. The tail of the
dragon therefore draweth after him the whole heathen world.

And did cast then to the earth - That is, reduced all the pagan priests
under the Roman yoke. The words of the prophecy are very remarkable. It
is said the tail of the dragon draweth, (for so συρει should be
translated), but it is added, and Hath Cast then upon the earth, to show
that at the time the Apocalypse was written the world was divided into
the three grand religious divisions already referred to; but that the
tail of the dragon, or the pagan Roman power under its last form of
government, had brought the whole heathen world (which was a third part
of the religious world in the apostolic age) into subjection previously
to the communication of the Revelation to St. John. It is the dragon's
tail that draws the third part of the stars of heaven, therefore it was
during the dominion of his last form of government that Christianity was
introduced into the world; for in the time of the six preceding draconic
forms of government, the world was divided religiously into only two
grand branches, Jews and Gentiles. That the sense in which the third
part is here taken is the one intended in the prophecy is put beyond all
controversy, when it is considered that this very division is made in
the first and third verses, in which mention is made of the woman
clothed with the sun - the Christian Church, the moon under her feet, or
Jewish Church, and the dragon, or heathen power. Thus the heathen
Imperial government is doubly represented, first, by one of the seven
draconic heads, to show that it was one of those seven heathen forms of
government which have been successively at the head of the Roman state;
and secondly, by the dragon's tail, because it was the last of those
seven. For a justification of this method of interpretation, see on the
angel's double explanation of the heads of the beast, [Rev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009) (note), [Rev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010) (note), [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016) (note).

And the dragon stood before the woman, etc. - Constantius Chlorus, the
father of Constantine, abandoned the absurdities of paganism, and
treated the Christians with great respect. This alarmed the pagan
priests, whose interests were so closely connected with the continuance
of the ancient superstitions, and who apprehended that to their great
detriment the Christian religion would become daily more universal and
triumphant throughout the empire. Under these anxious fears they moved
Diocletian to persecute the Christians. Hence began what is termed the
tenth and last general persecution, which was the most severe of all,
and continued nearly ten years; (see Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History of
the Third Century); and as it was the Divine pleasure that, at this
time, a great deliverer should be raised up in behalf of his suffering
people, the woman, or Christian Church, is very appropriately
represented as overtaken with the pangs of labor, and ready to be
delivered. Before the death of Constantius, the heathen party, aware
that Constantine would follow the example of his father, who so much
favored the Christians, beheld him with a watchful and malignant eye.
Many were the snares that, according to Eusebius, were laid for him by
Maximin and Galerius: he relates the frequent and dangerous enterprises
to which they urged him, with the design that he might lose his life.
When Galerius heard of the death of Constantius, and that he had
appointed Constantine his successor, he was filled with the most
ungovernable rage and indignation, notwithstanding he did not dare to
take any steps contrary to the interest of Constantine. The dread of the
armies of the west, which were mostly composed of Christians, was a
sufficient check to all attempts of that kind. Thus the dragon, or
heathen power, stood before the woman, or Christian Church, to devour
her son, or deliverer, as soon as he was born. See Dr. Mitchell's
Exposition of the Revelation, in loc.

[Revelation 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 12:5</span></span>

[Rev 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005) per Adam Clarke

And her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne - In Yalcut
Rubeni are these words: "Rachael, the niece of Methusala, was pregnant,
and ready to be delivered in Egypt. They trod upon her, and the child
came out of her bowels, and lay under the bed; Michael descended, and
took him up to the throne of glory. On that same night the first born of
Egypt were destroyed."

[Rev 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005) per John Edward Clarke

And she brought forth a man child - The Christian Church, when her full
time came, obtained a deliverer, who, in the course of the Divine
providence, was destined: -

To rule all nations - The heathen Roman empire,

With a rod of iron - A strong figure to denote the very great restraint
that should be put upon paganism, so that it should not be able longer
to persecute the Christian Church. The man child mentioned in this verse
is the dynasty of Christians emperors, beginning with Constantine's
public acknowledgment of his belief in the divinity of the Christian
religion, which happened in the latter part of a.d. 312, after the
defeat of the Emperor Maxentius.

And her child was caught up unto God, and to his throne - A succession
of Christian emperors was raised up to the Church; for the Roman throne,
as Bishop Newton observes, is here called the throne of God, because
there is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.

[Revelation 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 12:6</span></span>

And the woman fled into the wilderness - The account of the woman's
flying into the wilderness immediately follows that of her child being
caught up to the throne of God, to denote the great and rapid increase
of heresies in the Christian Church after the time that Christianity was
made the religion of the empire.

Where she hath a place prepared of God - See on [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014) (note).

[Revelation 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 12:7</span></span>

[Rev 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007) per Adam Clarke

There was war in heaven - In the same treatise, fol. 87, 2, on [Exo
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007), Pharaoh took six hundred
chariots, we have these words: "There was war among those above and
among those below, והמלחמה היתה חזקה בשמים vehammilchamaĥ hayethah
chazakah bashshamayim, and there was great war in heaven." Of Michael
the rabbins are full. See much in Schoettgen, and see the note on [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009).

The dragon - and his angels - The same as Rab. Sam. ben David, in Chasad
Shimuel, calls סמאל וחיילותיו Samael vechayilothaiv, "Samael and his
troops;" fol. 28, 2.

[Rev 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007) per John Edward Clarke

And there was war in heaven - As heaven means here the throne of the
Roman empire, the war in heaven consequently alludes to the breaking out
of civil commotions among the governors of this empire.

Michael and his angels fought against the dragon - Michael was the man
child which the woman brought forth, as is evident from the context, and
therefore signifies, as has been shown already, the dynasty of Christian
Roman emperors. This dynasty is represented by Michael, because he is
"the great prince which standeth for the children of God's people." [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001).

And the dragon fought and his angels - Or ministers.

[Revelation 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 12:8</span></span>

And prevailed not - Against the cause of Christianity.

Neither was their place found any more in heaven - The advocates of the
heathen idolatry were prevented from having any farther share in the
government of the empire. The wonderful success of Constantine over all
his enemies, and his final triumph over Licinius, correspond exactly to
the symbolical language in this verse.

[Revelation 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 12:9</span></span>

[Rev 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009) per Adam Clarke

That old serpent - The rabbins speak much of this being, sometimes under
the notion of יצר הרע yetser hara, the evil principle, and sometimes
Samael.

He was cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him -
This is very like a saying in the book Bahir, in Sohar Gen., fol. 27,
col. 107: "And God cast out Samael and his troops from the place of
their holiness."

[Rev 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009) per John Edward Clarke

And the great dragon was cast out, etc. - By the terms Devil and Satan
mentioned in this verse, Pareus, Faber, and many other commentators,
understand literally the great spiritual enemy of mankind. But this view
of the passage cannot be correct, from the circumstance that it is the
dragon which is thus called. Now, if by the dragon be meant the devil,
then use are necessarily led to this conclusion, that the great apostate
spirit is a monster, having seven heads and ten horns; and also that he
has a tail, with which he drags after him the third part of the stars of
heaven. The appellations, old serpent, devil, and Satan, must,
therefore, be understood figuratively. The heathen power is called that
old serpent which deceived the whole world, from its subtlety against
the Christians, and its causing the whole Roman world, as far as it was
in its power, to embrace the absurdities of paganism. It is called the
devil, from its continual false accusations and slanders against the
true worshippers of God, for the devil is a liar from the beginning; and
it is also called Satan, שטן, which is a Hebrew word signifying an
adversary, from its frequent persecutions of the Christian Church. The
dragon and his angels are said to be cast out, which is more than was
said in the preceding verse. There mention is made of his being found no
longer in heaven, or on the throne of the Roman empire, here he is
entirely cast out from all offices of trust in the empire; his religion
is first only tolerated, and then totally abolished, by the imperial
power. This great event was not the work of a reign; it took up many
years, for it had to contend with the deep-rooted prejudices of the
heathen, who to the very last endeavored to uphold their declining
superstition. Paganism received several mortal strokes in the time of
Constantine and his sons Constans and Constantius. It was farther
reduced by the great zeal of Jovian, Valentinian, and Valens; and was
finally suppressed by the edicts of Gratian, Theodosius I., and his
successors. It was not till a.d. 388 that Rome itself, the residence of
the emperor, was generally reformed from the absurdities of paganism;
but the total suppression of paganism soon followed the conversion of
the metropolitan city, and about a.d. 395 the dragon may be considered,
in an eminent sense, to have been cast into the earth, that is, into a
state of utter subjection to the ruling dynasty of Christian emperors.

[Revelation 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 12:10</span></span>

[Rev 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010) per Adam Clarke

The accuser of our brethren - There is scarcely any thing more common in
the rabbinical writings than Satan as the accuser of the Israelites. And
the very same word κατηγορος, accuser, or, as it is in the Codex
Alexandrinus, κατηγωρ, is used by them in Hebrew letters, קטיגור
katigor; e. gr., Pirkey Eliezer, c. 46, speaking of the day of
expiation; "And the holy blessed God hears their testimony from their
accuser, מן הקטיגור min hakkatigor; and expiates the altar, the priests,
and the whole multitude, from the greatest to the least."

In Shemoth Rabba, sec. 31, fol. 129, 2, are these words; "If a man
observes the precepts, and is a son of the law, and lives a holy life,
then Satan stands and accuses him."

"Every day, except the day of expiation Satan is the accuser of men." -
Vayikra Rabba, sec. 21, fol. 164.

"The holy blessed God said to the seventy princes of the world, Have ye
seen him who always accuses my children?" - Yalcut Chadash, fol. 101, 3.

"The devil stands always as an accuser before the King of Israel." -
Sohar Levit., fol. 43, col. 171. See much more in Schoettgen.

[Rev 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010) per John Edward Clarke

And I heard a loud voice, saying, - Now is come salvation, etc. - This
is a song of triumph of the Christian Church over the heathen idolatry,
and is very expressive of the great joy of the Christians upon this most
stupendous event. The loud voice of triumph is said to be heard in
heaven, to show that the Christian religion was now exalted to the
heaven or throne of the Roman. empire. "It is very remarkable," as
Bishop Newton observes, "that Constantine himself, and the Christians of
his time, describe his conquests under the image of a dragon, as if they
had understood that this prophecy had received its accomplishment in
him. Constantine himself, in his epistle to Eusebius and other bishops
concerning the re-edifying and repairing of the churches, saith that
'liberty being now restored, and that the dragon being removed from the
administration of public affairs, by the providence of the great God and
by my ministry, I esteem the great power of God to have been made
manifest to all.' Moreover, a picture of Constantine was set up over the
palace gate, with the cross over his head, and under his feet the great
enemy of mankind, who persecuted the Church by means of impious tyrants,
in the form of a dragon, transfixed with a dart through the midst of his
body, and falling headlong into the depth of the sea." See Eusebius de
Vita Constantini, lib. ii. c. 46; and lib. iii. c. 3, and Socratis Hist.
Eccles., lib. i. c. 9. Constantine added to the other Roman ensigns the
labarum, or standard of the cross, and constituted it the principal
standard of the Christian Roman empire. To this labarum Prudentius
refers, when speaking of the Christian soldiers, in his first hymn περι
στεφανων,

Caesaris vexilla linquunt, eligunt Signum Crucis,

Proque ventosis Draconum, quae gerebant, palliis,

Proferunt Insigne Lignum, quod Draconem subdidit.

"They leave the ensigns of Caesar; they choose the standard of the
cross; and instead of the dragon flags which they carried, moved about
with the wind, they bring forward the illustrious wood that subdued the
dragon."

When the apostle saw the woman in heaven, well might he call it, in the
spirit of prophecy, a great wonder.

[Revelation 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 12:11</span></span>

And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb - Here is given the
reason why the followers of Christ prevailed at this time against all
their adversaries. It was because they fought against the dragon in the
armor of God. They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb - by
proclaiming salvation to sinners through Christ crucified, and by their
continual intercession at the throne of grace for the conversion of the
heathen world.

And by the word of their testimony - By constantly testifying against
the errors and follies of mankind.

And they loved not their lives unto the death - They regarded not their
present temporal estate, but even gladly delivered up their lives to the
fury of their persecutors, and thus sealed the truth of what they spake
with their blood.

[Revelation 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 12:12</span></span>

Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them - Let the
Christians, who are now partakers of the present temporal prosperity,
and advanced to places of trust in the empire, praise and magnify the
Lord who has thus so signally interfered in their behalf. But it is
added: -

Wo to the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea! for the devil is come
down unto you - By the inhabiters of the earth are meant the people in
subjection to the Roman empire; and by the sea, those parts of the Roman
dominions appear to be intended that were reduced to a state of anarchy
by the incursions of the barbarous nations. It is not without precedent
to liken great hosts of nations combined together to the sea. See [Eze
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#003). Here then is a wo denounced
against the whole Roman world which will be excited by the devil, the
father of lies, the heathen party being thus denominated from the method
they pursued in their endeavors to destroy the religion of Jesus. See on
[Rev 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#015) (note).

Having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time -
The Christian religion, the pagan party see with great regret, is
rapidly gaining ground everywhere; and, if not timely checked, must soon
brave all opposition.

[Revelation 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 12:13</span></span>

And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth - When the
heathen party saw that they were no longer supported by the civil power:
-

He persecuted the woman which brought forth the man child - The heathens
persecuted the Christian Church in the behalf of which Divine Providence
had raised up a dynasty of Christian Roman emperors.

[Revelation 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 12:14</span></span>

And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle - Του αετου του
μεγαλου· Of The great eagle. The great eagle here mentioned is an emblem
of the Roman empire in general, and therefore differs from the dragon,
which is a symbol of the Heathen Roman empire in particular. The Roman
power is called an eagle from its legionary standard, which was
introduced among the Romans in the second year of the consulate of C.
Marius; for before that time minotaurs, wolves, leopards, horses, boars,
and eagles were used indifferently, according to the humor of the
commander. The Roman eagles were figures in relievo of silver or gold,
borne on the tops of pikes, the wings being displayed, and frequently a
thunderbolt in their talons. Under the eagle, on the pike, were piled
bucklers, and sometimes crowns. The two wings of the great eagle refer
to the two grand independent divisions of the Roman empire, which took
place January 17, a.d. 395, and were given to the woman, Christianity
being the established religion of both empires.

That she might fly into the wilderness, into her place, etc. - The
apparent repetition here of what is said in [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006) has induced Bishop Newton to
consider the former passage as introduced by way of prolepsis or
anticipation; for, says he, the woman did not fly into the wilderness
till several years after the conversion of Constantine. But that there
is no such prolepsis as the bishop imagines is evident from the
ecclesiastical history of the fourth century; for the woman, or true
Church, began to flee into the wilderness a considerable time before the
division of the great Roman empire into two independent monarchies. The
word translated fled is not to be taken in that peculiar sense as if the
woman, in the commencement of her flight, had been furnished with wings,
for the original word is εφυγεν. The meaning therefore of [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006) and [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014), when taken in connection with
their respective contexts, is, that the woman began to make rapid
strides towards the desert almost immediately after her elevation to the
heaven or throne of the Roman empire, and in the course of her flight
was furnished with the wings of the great eagle ἱνα πετηται, that she
might Fly, into that place prepared of God, where she should be fed a
thousand two hundred and threescore days. It is said here that the
period for which the woman should be nourished in the wilderness would
be a time, times, and a half; consequently this period is the same with
the twelve hundred and sixty days of [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006). But in no other sense can they
be considered the same than by understanding a time to signify a year;
times, two years; and half a time, half a year; i.e., three years and a
half. And as each prophetic year contains three hundred and sixty days,
so three years and a half will contain precisely twelve hundred and
sixty days. The Apocalypse being highly symbolical, it is reasonable to
expect that its periods of time will also be represented symbolically,
that the prophecy may be homogeneous in all its parts. The Holy Spirit,
when speaking of years symbolically, has invariably represented them by
days, commanding, e. gr., the Prophet Ezekiel to lie upon his left side
three hundred and ninety days, that it might be a sign or symbol of the
house of Israel bearing their iniquity as many years; and forty days
upon his right side, to represent to the house of Judah in a symbolical
manner, that they should bear their iniquity forty years, The one
thousand two hundred and threescore days, therefore, that the woman is
fed in the wilderness, must be understood symbolically, and consequently
denote as many natural years. The wilderness into which the woman flies
is the Greek and Latin worlds, for she is conveyed into her place by
means of the two wings of the great eagle. We must not understand the
phrase flying into her place of her removing from one part of the
habitable world into another, but of her speedy declension from a state
of great prosperity to a forlorn and desolate condition. The woman is
nourished for one thousand two hundred and threescore years from the
face of the serpent, The empires in the east and west were destined, in
the course of the Divine providence, to support the Christian religion,
at least nominally while the rest of the world should remain in pagan
idolatry or under the influence of this dragon, here called the serpent,
because he deceiveth the whole world. The words of the prophecy are very
remarkable, The Christian Church is said to be supported by the eastern
and western empires, two mighty denominations; and at the same time
situated in the wilderness, strongly denoting that, though many
professed Christianity, there were but very few who "kept the
commandments of God, and had the testimony of Jesus Christ."

[Revelation 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 12:15</span></span>

And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood - The water here
evidently means great multitudes of nations and peoples; for in [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015), the interpreting angel says,
The waters which thou sawest - are peoples, and multitudes, and nations,
and tongues. This water, then, which the dragon cast out of his mouth,
must be an inundation of heathen barbarous nations upon the Roman
empire; and the purpose which the dragon has in view by this inundation
is, that he might cause the woman, or Christian Church: -

To be carried away of the flood - Entirely swept away from the face of
the earth. Dr. Mosheim, in the commencement of his second chapter upon
the fifth century, observes "that the Goths, the Heruli, the Franks, the
Huns, and the Vandals, with other fierce and warlike nations, for the
most part strangers to Christianity, had invaded the Roman empire, and
rent it asunder in the most deplorable manner. Amidst these calamities
the Christians were grievous, nay, we may venture to say the principal,
sufferers. It is true these savage nations were much more intent upon
the acquisition of wealth and dominion than upon the propagation or
support of the pagan superstitions, nor did their cruelty and opposition
to the Christians arise from any religious principle, or from an
enthusiastic desire to ruin the cause of Christianity; it was merely by
the Instigation of the pagans who remained yet in the empire, that they
were excited to treat with such severity and violence the followers of
Christ." Thus the wo which was denounced, [Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012), against the inhabiters of the
earth and of the sea, came upon the whole Roman world; for, in
consequence of the excitement and malicious misrepresentations of the
pagans of the empire, "a transmigration of a great swarm of nations"
came upon the Romans, and ceased not their ravages till they had
desolated the eastern empire, even as far as the gates of Byzantium, and
finally possessed themselves of the western empire. "If," says Dr.
Robertson, in the introduction to his History of Charles V., vol. i.,
pp. 11, 12, edit. Lond. 1809, "a man was called to fix upon the period
in the history of the world, during which the condition of the human
race was most calamitous and afflicted, he would, without hesitation,
name that which elapsed from the death of Theodosius the Great to the
establishment of the Lombards in Italy, a period of one hundred and
seventy-six years. The contemporary authors who beheld that scene of
desolation, labor and are at a loss for expressions to describe the
horror of it. The scourge of God, the destroyer of nations, are the
dreadful epithets by which they distinguish the most noted of the
barbarous leaders; and they compare the ruin which they had brought on
the world to the havoc occasioned by earthquakes, conflagrations, or
deluges, the most formidable and fatal calamities which the imagination
of man can conceive." But the subtle design which the serpent or dragon
had in view, when he vomited out of his mouth a flood of waters, was
most providentially frustrated; for: -

[Revelation 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 12:16</span></span>

The earth helped the woman - "Nothing, and indeed," as Bishop Newton
excellently observes, "was more likely to produce the ruin and utter
subversion of the Christian Church than the irruptions of so many
barbarous nations into the Roman empire. But the event proved contrary
to human appearance and expectation: the earth swallowed up the flood;
the barbarians were rather swallowed up by the Romans, than the Romans
by the barbarians; the heathen conquerors, instead of imposing their
own, submitted to the religion of the conquered Christians; and they not
only embraced the religion, but affected even the laws, the manners, the
customs, the language, and the very name, of Romans, so that the victors
were in a manner absorbed and lost among the vanquished." See his
Dissertations on the Prophecies, in loc.

[Revelation 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 12:17</span></span>

And the dragon was wroth with the woman - The heathen party, foiled in
their subtle attempt to destroy Christianity, were greatly enraged, and
endeavored to excite the hatred of the multitude against the religion of
Jesus. "They alleged that before the coming of Christ the world was
blessed with peace and prosperity; but that since the progress of their
religion everywhere, the gods, filled with indignation to see their
worship neglected and their altars abandoned, had visited the earth with
those plagues and desolations which increased every day." See Mosheim's
Ecclesiastical History, cent. V., part 1, and other works on this
subject.

Went to make war with the remnant of her seed - The dragon απηλθε,
departed, i.e., into the wilderness, whither the woman had fled; and in
another form commenced a new species of persecution, directed only
against the remnant of her seed, who keep the commandments of God, and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ. See on [Rev
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#013) of the following chapter (note)
for an illustration of this remarkable passage.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 13](rev013)

</div>
