<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev018)  [Next](rev020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 19:0</span></span>

The whole heavenly host give glory to God, because he has judged the
great whore, and avenged the blood of his saints, [Rev
19:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001.md). The marriage of the Lamb and
his bride, [Rev 19:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007.md). John offers to
worship the angel, but is prevented, [Rev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010.md). Heaven is opened, and Jesus the
Word of God appears on a white horse; he and his armies described, [Rev
19:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011.md). An angel in the sun invites
all the fowls of heaven to come to the supper of the great God, [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017.md), [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018.md). The beast, the false prophet,
and the kings of the earth, gather together to make war with him who
sits on the white horse; but they are all discomfited, and utterly
destroyed, [Rev 19:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019.md).

[Revelation 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 19:1</span></span>

I heard a great voice of much people in heaven - The idolatrous city
being destroyed, and the blood of the martyred saints being avenged,
there is a universal joy among the redeemed of the Lord, which they
commence with the word הללו יה Hallelu-Yah, praise ye Jah or Jehovah;
which the Septuagint, and St. John from them, put into Greek letters
thus: Αλληλουΐα, Allelou-ia, a form of praise which the heathens appear
to have borrowed from the Jews, as is evident from their paeans, or
hymns in honor of Apollo, which began and ended with ελελευ ιη, eleleu
ie; a mere corruption of the Hebrew words. It is worthy of remark that
the Indians of North America have the same word in their religious
worship, and use it in the same sense. "In their places of worship, or
beloved square, they dance sometimes for a whole night always in a
bowing posture, and frequently singing halleluyah Ye ho wah; praise ye
Yah, Ye ho vah:" probably the true pronunciation of the Hebrew יהוה,
which we call Jehovah. See Adair's History of the American Indians.

Salvation - He is the sole author of deliverance from sin; the glory of
this belongs to him, the honor should be ascribed to him, and his power
is that alone by which it is effected.

[Revelation 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 19:2</span></span>

For true and righteous - His judgments displayed in supporting his
followers, and punishing his enemies, are true - according to his
predictions; and righteous, being all according to infinite justice and
equity.

[Revelation 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 19:3</span></span>

Her smoke rose up - There was, and shall be, a continual evidence of
God's judgments executed on this great whore or idolatrous city; nor
shall it ever be restored.

[Revelation 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 19:4</span></span>

The four and twenty elders - The true Church of the Lord Jesus converted
from among the Jews. See [Rev 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#010.md);
[Rev 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014.md).

[Revelation 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 19:5</span></span>

Praise our God, etc. - Let all, whether redeemed from among Jews or
Gentiles, give glory to God.

[Revelation 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 19:6</span></span>

The voice of a great multitude - This is the catholic or universal
Church of God gathered from among the Gentiles.

The Lord God Omnipotent reigneth - Εβασιλευσε Κυριος ὁ Θεος ὁ
παντοκρατωρ. Many excellent MSS., most of the versions, with Andreas and
Arethas, the two most ancient commentators on this book, add ἡμων, our,
after ὁ Θεος· and according to this the text reads emphatically thus:
Our Lord God, the Almighty, reigneth. What consolation to every genuine
Christian that His Lord and God is the Almighty, and that this Almighty
never trusts the reins of the government of the universe out of his
hands! What therefore has his Church to fear?

[Revelation 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 19:7</span></span>

The marriage of the Lamb is come - The meaning of these figurative
expressions appears to be this: After this overthrow of idolatry and
superstition, and the discomfiture of antichrist, there will be a more
glorious state of Christianity than ever was before.

[Revelation 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 19:8</span></span>

Arrayed in fine linen - A prediction that the Church should become more
pure in her doctrines, more pious in her experience, and more righteous
in her conduct, than she had ever been from her formation.

The fine linen here spoken of is not the righteousness of Christ imputed
to believers, for it is here called the righteousness of the saints -
that which the grace and Spirit of Christ has wrought in them.

[Revelation 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 19:9</span></span>

Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper - This is an
evident allusion to the marriage of the king's son, [Mat
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002.md), etc., where the incarnation of
our Lord, and the calling of Jews and Gentiles, are particularly pointed
out. See the notes on [Mat 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002.md).
Blessed are all they who hear the Gospel, and are thus invited to lay
hold on everlasting life.

[Revelation 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 19:10</span></span>

I fell at his feet to worship him - Great as this angel was, St. John
could not mistake him either for Jesus Christ, or for God the Father;
nor was his prostration intended as an act of religious worship. It was
merely an act of that sort of reverence which any Asiatic would pay to a
superior. His mistake was, the considering that he was under obligation
to the angel for the information which he had now received. This mistake
the angel very properly corrects, showing him that it was from God alone
this intelligence came, and that to him alone the praise was due.

I am thy fellow servant - No higher in dignity than thyself; employed by
the same God, on the same errand, and with the same testimony; and
therefore not entitled to thy prostration: worship God - prostrate
thyself to him, and to him give thanks.

The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy - As this is a reason
given by the angel why he should not worship him, the meaning must be
this: I, who have received this spirit of prophecy, am not superior to
thee who hast received the testimony of Christ, to preach him among the
Gentiles; for the commission containing such a testimony is equal to the
gift of the spirit of prophecy. Or, the spirit of prophecy is a general
testimony concerning Jesus, for he is the scope and design of the whole
Scripture; to him gave all the prophets witness. Take Jesus, his grace,
Spirit, and religion out of the Bible, and it has neither scope, design,
object, nor end.

[Revelation 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 19:11</span></span>

A white horse - This is an exhibition of the triumph of Christ after the
destruction of his enemies. The white horse is the emblem of this, and
Faithful and True are characters of Christ. See [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014.md).

In righteousness he doth judge and make war - The wars which he wages
are from no principle of ambition, lust of power, or extension of
conquest and dominion; they are righteous in their principle and in
their object. And this is perhaps what no earthly potentate could ever
say.

[Revelation 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 19:12</span></span>

His eyes were as a flame of fire - To denote the piercing and
all-penetrating nature of his wisdom.

On his head were many crowns - To denote the multitude of his conquests,
and the extent of his dominion.

A name written, that no man knew - This is a reference to what the
rabbins call the shem hammephorash, or tetragrammaton, יהוה Yhvh; or
what we call Jehovah. This name the Jews never attempt to pronounce:
when they meet with it in the Bible, they read אדני Adonai for it; but,
to a man, they all declare that no man can pronounce it; and that the
true pronunciation has been lost, at least since the Babylonish
captivity; and that God alone knows its true interpretation and
pronunciation. This, therefore, is the name which no man knew but he
himself.

[Revelation 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 19:13</span></span>

He was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood - To show that he was just
come from recent slaughter. The description is taken from [Isa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#002.md), [Isa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003.md), where Judas Maccabeus, or some
other conqueror, is described.

The Word of God - Written in the Targum, and in other Jewish writings,
מימרא דיי meimera daiya, "the word of Jehovah;" by which they always
mean a person, and not a word spoken. See the notes on [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md), etc.

[Revelation 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 19:14</span></span>

The armies which were in heaven - Angels and saints over whom Jesus
Christ is Captain,

Clothed in fine linen - All holy, pure, and righteous.

[Revelation 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 19:15</span></span>

Out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword - See on [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016) (note.md). This appears to mean the
word of the Gospel, by which his enemies are confounded, and his friends
supported and comforted.

With a rod of iron - He shall execute the severest judgment on the
opposers of his truth.

He treaded the winepress - As the grapes are trodden to express the
juice, so his enemies shall be bruised and beaten, so that their life's
blood shall be poured out.

[Revelation 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 19:16</span></span>

On his vesture and on his thigh a name written - Dr. Dodd has well
observed on this passage, that "it appears to have been an ancient
custom among several nations to adorn the images of their deities,
princes, victors at public games, and other eminent persons, with
inscriptions, expressing either the character of the persons, their
names, or some other circumstance which might contribute to their honor;
and to that custom the description here given of Christ may possibly
have some allusion.

"There are several such images yet extant, with an inscription written
either on the garment, or on one of the thighs, or on that part of the
garment which was over the thigh; and probably this is the meaning of
the apostle. And as these inscriptions are placed on the upper garment,
Grotius seems very justly to have explained the words επι το ἱματιον, by
his imperial robe, that his power in this victory might be conspicuous
to all. But as a farther confirmation of this sense of the passage it
may not be improper here to describe briefly several remarkable figures
of this sort, which are still extant." This description I shall give
from my own examination.

1\. Herodotus, Euterpe, lib. ii. p. 127, edit. Gale, speaking of the
actions of Sesostris, and of the images he set up in the countries which
he conquered, has the following words: Εισι δε περι Ιωνιην δυο τυποι εν
πετρῃσι εγκεκολαμμενοι τουτου του ανδρος, κ. τ. λ. "Two images likewise
of this man are seen in Ionia, on the way that leads from Ephesus to
Phocaea, and from Sardis to Smyrna. The figure is five palms in height;
in his right hand he holds a dart, in his left a bow, armed after the
manner of the Egyptians and Ethiopians. On a line drawn across the
breast, from one shoulder to the other, are these words, written in
Egyptian hieroglyphics: Εγω τηνδε την χωρην ωμοισι τοισι εμοισι
εκτησαμην· 'I obtained this country by these my shoulders;'" i.e., by my
own power.

2\. In the Etruria Regalis of Dempster, in the appendix at the end of
vol. ii., there is a beautiful female figure of brass, about twelve
inches high, the hair gracefully plaited, and the head adorned with a
diadem. She has a tunic without sleeves, and over that a sort of
pallium. On the outside of the right thigh, close to the tunic, and
probably on it, in the original, is an inscription in Etruscan
characters. What these import I cannot say. Dempster has given a general
explanation of the image in the appendix to the above volume, p. 108.
The plate itself is the eighty-third of the work.

3\. There are two other images found in the same author, vol. i., p. 91,
tab. xxiv.; the first is naked, with the exception of a short loose
jupe, or petticoat, which goes round the loins, and over the left arm.
On the left thigh of this image there is an inscription in Etruscan
characters. The second has a similar jupe, but much longer, which
extends to the calf of the leg, and is supported over the bended left
arm. Over the right thigh, on this vesture, there is an Etruscan
inscription in two lines.

4\. Montfaucon, Antiquite Expliquee, vol. iii., part 2, p. 268, has
introduced an account of two fine images, which are represented tab.
CLVII. The first is a warrior entirely naked, except a collar, one
bracelet, and boots. On his left thigh, extending from the groin to a
little below the knee, is an inscription in very ancient Etruscan
characters, in two lines, but the import is unknown.

The second is a small figure of brass, about six inches long, with a
loose tunic, which is suspended from the left shoulder down to the calf
of the legs. On this tunic, over the left thigh, is an inscription
(perhaps) in very ancient Latin characters, but in the Etruscan
language, as the learned author conjectures. It is in one line, but what
it means is equally unknown.

5\. In the same work, p. 269, tab. CLVIII., another Etruscan warrior is
represented entirely naked; on the left thigh is the following words in
uncial Greek letters, ΚΑΦΙΣΟΔΩΡΟΣ, and on the right thigh, ΑΙΣΧΛΑΜΙΟΥ,
i.e., "Kaphisodorus, the son of Aischlamius." All these inscriptions are
written longitudinally on the thigh.

6\. Gruter, vol. iii., p. DCCCCLXXXIX, sub. tit. Affectus Servorum et
Libertinorum inter se, et in suos, gives us the figure of a naked
warrior, with his left hand on an axe, the end of whose helve rests on
the ground, with the following inscription on the inside of his left
thigh, longitudinally written, as in all other cases: -

A. Poblicius. D. L. Antioc.

Ti. Barbius. Q. P. L. Tiber.

7\. The rabbins say, that "God gave to the Israelites a sword, on which
the ineffable name יהוה Yehovah was inscribed; and as long as they held
that sword the angel of death had no power over them." Shemoth Rabba,
sec. 51, fol. 143, 2. Bemidbar Rabba, sec. 12, fol. 214, 2.

In the latter tract, sec. 16, fol. 232, 3, and in Rab. Tanchum, fol. 66,
mention is made of the guardian angels of the Israelites, who were
clothed with purple vestments, on which was inscribed שם המפורש shem
hammephorash, the ineffable name. See more in Schoettgen.

8\. But what comes nearer to the point, in reference to the title given
here to Christ, is what is related of Sesostris by Diodorus Siculus,
lib. i. c. 55, p. 166, edit. Bipont, of whom he says: "Having pushed his
conquests as far as Thrace, he erected pillars, on which were the
following words in Egyptian hieroglyphics: Τηνδε την χωραν ὁπλοις
κατεστρεψατο τοις ἑαυτου Βασιλευς Βασιλεων, και Δεσποτης Δεσποτων,
Σεσοωσις·" This province, Sesoosis, (Sesostris), King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, conquered by his own arms. This inscription is conceived
almost in the words of St. John. Now the Greek historian did not borrow
the words from the apostle, as he died in the reign of Augustus, about
the time of our Lord's incarnation. This cannot be the same inscription
mentioned above by Herodotus, the one being in Ionia, the other in
Thrace: but as he erected several of those pillars or images, probably a
nearly similar inscription was found on each.

9\. This custom seems to have been common among the ancient Egyptians.
Inscriptions are frequently found on the images of Isis, Osiris, Anubis,
etc., at the feet, on the head, on the back, on the girdle, etc., etc.
Eight of those ancient images in my own collection abound with these
inscriptions.

1\. Osiris, four inches and a quarter high, standing on a thrones all
covered over with hieroglyphics exquisitely engraved.

2\. Anubis, six inches high, with a tiara, on the back of which is cut
ΛΕΓΟΡΝΥΘ , in uncial Greek characters.

3\. The Cercopithecus, seven inches long, sitting on a pedestal, and at
his feet, in the same characters, ΧΑΔΕΟ.

4\. An Isis, about eight inches high, on her back ΔΡΥΓΟ.

5\. Ditto, seven inches, beautifully cut, standing, holding a serpent in
her left hand, and at her feet ΕΤΑΠΥΓΙ.

6\. Ditto, five inches and a quarter, round whose girdle is ΠΙΕΥΧΥΔΙ;
but part of this inscription appears to be hidden under her arms, which
are extended by her side.

7\. Ditto, five inches high, hooded, with a loose stola, down the back
of which are seven lines of Greek uncial characters, but nearly
obliterated.

8\. Ditto, four inches high, with a girdle going round the back
immediately under the arms, the front of which is hidden under a sort of
a stomacher; on the part that appears are these characters, ΧΕΝΛΑ. These
may be all intended as a kind of abrasaxas or tutelary deities; and I
give this notice of them, and the inscriptions upon them, partly in
illustration of the text, and partly to engage my learned and
antiquarian readers in attempts to decipher them. I would have given the
Etruscan characters on the other images described above, but have no
method of imitating them except by an engraving.

As these kinds of inscriptions on the thigh, the garments, and different
parts of the body, were in use among different nations, to express
character, conduct, qualities, and conquests, we may rest assured that
to them St. John alludes when he represents our sovereign Lord with an
inscription upon his vesture and upon his thigh; and had we not found it
a custom among other nations, we should have been at a loss to account
for its introduction and meaning here.

[Revelation 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 19:17</span></span>

An angel standing in the sun - Exceedingly luminous; every part of him
emitting rays of light. From this representation, Milton has taken his
description of Uriel, the angel of the sun. Paradise Lost, b. iii. l.
648 -

"The Archangel Uriel, one of the seven Who, in God's presence, nearest
to his throne Stands ready at command and are his eyes That run through
all the heavens, or down to the earth Bears his swift errands over moist
and dry, Over sea and land."

All the fowls that fly - The carcasses of God's enemies shall be food
for all the fowls of heaven. This is according to a Jewish tradition,
Synopsis Sohar, p. 114, n. 25: "In the time when God shall execute
vengeance for the people of Israel, he shall feed all the beasts of the
earth for twelve months with their flesh and all the fowls for seven
years." It is well known that both beasts and birds of prey are
accustomed to frequent fields of battle, and live upon the slain.

[Revelation 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 19:18</span></span>

That ye may eat the flesh of kings - There shall be a universal
destruction; the kings, generals, captains, and all their host, shall be
slain.

[Revelation 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 19:19</span></span>

I saw the beast - See the notes on Revelation 12 (note), Revelation 13
(note) and Revelation 17 (note).

[Revelation 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 19:20</span></span>

And the beast was taken, and - the false prophet - See the notes on [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008.md), etc.

That worshipped his image - The beast has been represented as the Latin
empire; the image of the beast, the popes of Rome; and the false
prophet, the papal clergy.

Were cast alive into a lake of fire - Were discomfited when alive - in
the zenith of their power, and destroyed with an utter destruction.

[Revelation 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 19:21</span></span>

With the sword of him that sat upon the horse - He who sat on the white
horse is Christ; and his sword is his word - the unadulterated Gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 20](rev020.md)

</div>
