<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev015)  [Next](rev017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 16:0</span></span>

The angels are commanded to pour out their vials upon the earth, [Rev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001). The first pours out his vial on
the earth, by which a grievous sore is produced, [Rev
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#002). The second angel pours out his
trial on the sea, and it is turned into blood, [Rev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003). The third angel pours out his
vial on the rivers and fountains, and they are turned also into blood,
[Rev 16:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#004). The fourth angel pours
out his vial on the sun, and men are scorched with fire, [Rev
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#008), [Rev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009). The fifth angel pours out his
vial on the throne of the beast, [Rev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010), [Rev
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#011). The sixth angel pours out his
vial on the river Euphrates, [Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012). Three unclean spirits come out
of the mouth of the beast, dragon and false prophet: and go forth to
gather all the kings of the world to battle, in the place called
Armageddon, [Rev 16:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013). The seventh
angel pours out his vial on the air, on which followed thunders,
lightnings, earth-quakes, and extraordinary hail, [Rev
16:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017).

[Revelation 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 16:1</span></span>

Go your ways, and pour out - These ministers of the Divine justice were
ready to execute vengeance upon transgressors, having full power; but
could do nothing in this way till they received especial commission.
Nothing can be done without the permission of God; and in the
manifestation of justice or mercy by Divine agency, there must be
positive command.

[Revelation 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 16:2</span></span>

A noisome and grievous sore - This is a reference to the sixth Egyptian
plague, boils and blains, [Exo 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008),
[Exo 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009), etc.

[Revelation 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 16:3</span></span>

As the blood of a dead man - Either meaning blood in a state of
putrescency, or an effusion of blood in naval conflicts; even the sea
was tinged with the blood of those who were slain in these wars. This is
most probably the meaning of this vial. These engagements were so
sanguinary that both the conquerors and the conquered were nearly
destroyed; every living soul died in the sea.

[Revelation 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 16:4</span></span>

Upon the rivers and fountains of waters - This is an allusion to the
first Egyptian plague, [Exo 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020); and
to those plagues in general there are allusions throughout this chapter.
It is a sentiment of the rabbins that "whatever plagues God inflicted on
the Egyptians in former times, he will inflict on the enemies of his
people in all later times." See a long quotation on this subject from
Rabbi Tanchum in Schoettgen.

[Revelation 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 16:5</span></span>

The angel of the waters - The rabbins attribute angels, not only to the
four elements so called, but to almost every thing besides. We have
already seen the angel of the bottomless pit, [Rev
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011), and the angel of the fire, [Rev
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018). The angel of the earth is
spoken of in Yalcut Rubeni, fol. 13, 2, and is called Admael. They have
also an angel that presides over the grass; another that presides over
the cattle which feed upon the grass.

They say that God employed the angel of the sea to swallow up the waters
at the creation, that the dry land might appear. He disobeyed, and God
slew him; the name of the angel of the sea is Rahab. See Baba bathra,
fol. 74, 2. It is plain from several places that the writer of the
Apocalypse keeps these notions distinctly in view.

[Revelation 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 16:6</span></span>

Thou hast given them blood to drink - They thirsted after blood and
massacred the saints of God; and now they have got blood to drink! It is
said that when Tomyris, queen of the Scythians, had vanquished Cyrus,
she cut off his head and threw it into a vessel of blood, saying these
words: Satia te sanguine, quem sitisti, cujusque insatiabilis semper
fuisti; "Satisfy thyself with blood, for which thou hast thirsted, and
for which thy desire has been insatiable." See Justin. Hist., lib. i. c.
8. This figure of speech is called sarcasm in rhetoric.

"Sarcasmus with this biting taunt doth kill:

Cyrus, thy thirst was blood; now drink thy fill."

[Revelation 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 16:8</span></span>

Poured out his vial upon the sun - Mr. Robert Fleming, more than one
hundred years ago, in his View of Scripture Prophecy, supposed that the
sun here meant the French empire, and conjectured that this vial would
be poured out on that empire about the year 1794. And it is remarkable
that in 1793 the French king was beheaded by the National Assembly; and
great and unparalleled miseries fell upon the French nation, which
nearly extinguished all their nobility, and brought about a war that
lasted twenty-three years, and nearly ruined that country and all the
nations of Europe.

[Revelation 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 16:9</span></span>

They repented not - No moral national amendment has taken place in
consequence of the above calamities in that unhappy country, nor indeed
any of those nations engaged against her in that long and ruinous
contest, which has now terminated, (1817), without producing one
political, moral, or religious advantage to herself or to Europe.

[Revelation 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 16:10</span></span>

The seat of the beast - Επι τον θρονον του θηριου· Upon the throne of
the wild beast. The regal family was smitten by the fourth vial; they
did not repent: then the fifth angel pours out his vial on the throne of
the wild beast, or antichristian idolatrous power.

Was full of darkness - Confusion, dismay, and distress.

[Revelation 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 16:11</span></span>

Blasphemed the God of heaven - Neither did they repent; therefore other
judgments must follow. Some think that the sun was Vitellius, the Roman
emperor, and that his throne means Rome; and the darkening refers to the
injuries she sustained in her political consequence by the civil wars
which then took place, from which she never entirely recovered. Others
apply it all to papal Rome, and in this respect make out a very clear
case! Thus have men conjectured, but how much nearer are we to the
truth?

[Revelation 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 16:12</span></span>

Upon the great river Euphrates - Probably meaning the people in the
vicinity of this river; though some think that the Tiber is intended.

The water thereof was dried up - The people discomfited, and all
impediments removed.

The kings of the east - There seems to be an allusion here to the ruin
of Babylon by Cyrus, predicted by the Prophet Jeremiah, Jeremiah
50:1-51:64. But what city or people is pointed out by this Babylon it is
in vain to conjecture.

[Revelation 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 16:13</span></span>

Three unclean spirits - Perhaps false teachers, called afterwards
spirits of devils, which persuade the kings of the earth by lying
miracles to come forth to the place of general slaughter, [Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014), [Rev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016),

Some good critics apply this to Vespasian, and his pretended miracles.
See the account in Tacitus, lib. iv. c. 81.

[Revelation 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 16:15</span></span>

Behold, I come as a thief - Here is a sudden but timely warning to put
every man on his guard, when this sudden and generally unexpected
tribulation should take place.

Keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked - Here is a plain allusion to
the office of him who was called the prefect or overseer, of the
mountain of the temple. His custom was to go his rounds during the
watches of the night; and if he found any of the Levites sleeping on his
watch, he had authority to beat him with a stick, and burn his
vestments. See Middoth, fol. 34, 1, and Tamid. fol. 27, 2; 28, 1. Such a
person being found on his return home naked, it was at once known that
he had been found asleep at his post, had been beaten, and his clothes
burnt; thus his shame was seen - he was reproached for his infidelity
and irreligion.

[Revelation 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 16:16</span></span>

Armageddon - The original of this word has been variously formed, and
variously translated. It is הר־מגדון har-megiddon, "the mount of the
assembly;" or חרמה גדהון chormah gedehon, "the destruction of their
army;" or it is הר־מגדו har-megiddo, "Mount Megiddo," the valley of
which was remarkable for two great slaughters: one of the Israelites,
[Kg2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029), the other of the
Canaanites, [Jdg 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#016); [Jdg
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019). But Mount Megiddo, that is
Carmel, is the place, according to some, where these armies should be
collected.

But what is the battle of Armageddon? How ridiculous have been the
conjectures of men relative to this point! Within the last twenty years
this battle has been fought at various places, according to our purblind
seers and self-inspired prophets! At one time it was Austerlitz, at
another Moscow, at another Leipsic, and now Waterloo! And thus they have
gone on, and will go on, confounding and being confounded.

[Revelation 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 16:17</span></span>

Poured out his vial into the air - To signify that this plague was to be
widely diffused, and perhaps to intimate that pestilences and various
deaths would be the effect of this vial. But possibly air in this place
may have some emblematical meaning.

It is done - It is said, [Rev 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007),
that in the days of the seventh trumpet the mystery of God should be
finished; so here we find it completed. Γεγονε· All's over! Fuimus
Troes! Ilium fuit! Once there were Trojans, and they had a city; but now
all are extinct.

[Revelation 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 16:18</span></span>

A great earthquake - Most terrible commotions, both civil and religious.
Or a convulsion, shaking, or revolution.

[Revelation 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 16:19</span></span>

The great city - Some say Jerusalem, others Rome pagan, others Rome
papal.

The cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath - Alluding to the
mode of putting certain criminals to death, by making them drink a cup
of poison. See on [Heb 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009) (note).

[Revelation 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 16:20</span></span>

Every island fled away - Probably meaning the capture of seaport towns,
and fortified places.

[Revelation 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 16:21</span></span>

A great hail - about the weight of a talent - Has this any reference to
cannon balls and bombs? It is very doubtful; we are all in the dark in
these matters.

The words ὡς ταλαντιαια, as a talent, are used to express something
great, excessively oppressive; as νοσηματων ταλαντιαιων, terrible
diseases, not diseases of the weight of a talent. See Rosenmuller.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 17](rev017)

</div>
