<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev019)  [Next](rev021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 20:0</span></span>

An angel binds Satan a thousand years, and shuts him up in the
bottomless pit, [Rev 20:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001.md). They who
were beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, who have part in the first
resurrection, and shall reign with Christ a thousand years, [Rev
20:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004.md). When the thousand years are
expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, shall go forth and
deceive the nations, and shall gather Gog and Magog from the four
corners of the earth, [Rev 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#007.md), [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008.md). These shall besiege the holy
city; but fire shall come down from heaven and consume them, and they
and the devil be cast into a lake of fire, [Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009.md), [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010.md). The great white throne, and the
dead, small and great, standing before God, and all judged according to
their works, [Rev 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011.md), [Rev
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012.md). The sea, death, and hades, give
up their dead, and are destroyed; and all not found in the book of life
are cast into the lake of fire, [Rev
20:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#013.md).

[Revelation 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 20:1</span></span>

An angel came down from heaven - One of the executors of the Divine
justice, who receives criminals, and keeps them in prison, and delivers
them up only to be tried and executed.

The key of the prison and the chain show who he is; and as the chain was
great, it shows that the culprit was impeached of no ordinary crimes.

[Revelation 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 20:2</span></span>

The dragon - See the notes on [Rev
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009.md).

That old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan - He who is called the
old serpent is the Devil - the calumniator, and Satan - the opposer. He
who supposes that the term old serpent here plainly proves that the
creature that tempted our first parents was actually a snake, must enjoy
his opinion; and those who can receive such a saying, why let them
receive it. Selah.

A thousand years - In what this binding of Satan consists, who can tell?
How many visions have been seen on this subject both in ancient and
modern times! This, and what is said [Rev
20:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003.md), no doubt refers to a time in
which the influence of Satan will be greatly restrained, and the true
Church of God enjoy great prosperity, which shall endure for a long
time. But it is not likely that the number, a thousand years, is to be
taken literally here, and year symbolically and figuratively in all the
book beside. The doctrine of the millennium, or of the saints reigning
on earth a thousand years, with Christ for their head, has been
illustrated and defended by many Christian writers, both among the
ancients and moderns. Were I to give a collection of the conceits of the
primitive fathers on this subject, my readers would have little reason
to applaud my pains. It has long been the idle expectation of many
persons that the millennium, in their sense, was at hand; and its
commencement has been expected in every century since the Christian era.
It has been fixed for several different years, during the short period
of my own life! I believed those predictions to be vain, and I have
lived to see them such. Yet there is no doubt that the earth is in a
state of progressive moral improvement; and that the light of true
religion is shining more copiously everywhere, and will shine more and
more to the perfect day. But when the religion of Christ will be at its
meridian of light and heat, we know not. In each believer this may
speedily take place; but probably no such time shall ever appear, in
which evil shall be wholly banished from the earth, till after the day
of judgment, when the earth having been burnt up, a new heaven and a new
earth shall be produced out of the ruins of the old, by the mighty power
of God: righteousness alone shall dwell in them. The phraseology of the
apostle here seems partly taken from the ancient prophets, and partly
rabbinical; and it is from the Jewish use of those terms that we are to
look for their interpretation.

[Revelation 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 20:3</span></span>

He should deceive the nations no more - Be unable to blind men with
superstition and idolatry as he had formerly done.

[Revelation 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 20:4</span></span>

I saw thrones - Christianity established in the earth, the kings and
governors being all Christians.

Reigned with Christ a thousand years - I am satisfied that this period
should not be taken literally. It may signify that there shall be a long
and undisturbed state of Christianity; and so universally shall the
Gospel spirit prevail, that it will appear as if Christ reigned upon
earth; which will in effect be the case, because his Spirit shall rule
in the hearts of men; and in this time the martyrs are represented as
living again; their testimony being revived, and the truth for which
they died, and which was confirmed by their blood, being now everywhere
prevalent. As to the term thousand years, it is a mystic number among
the Jews. Midrash Tillin, in [Psa
90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015.md), Make us glad according to the
days wherein thou hast afflicted us, adds, "by Babylon, Greece, and the
Romans; and in the days of the Messiah. How many are the days of the
Messiah? Rab. Elieser, the son of R. Jose, of Galilee, said, The days of
the Messiah are a thousand years."

Sanhedrin, fol. 92, 1, cited by the Aruch, under the word אירק says:
"There is a tradition in the house of Elias, that the righteous, whom
the holy blessed God shall raise from the dead, shall not return again
to the dust; but for the space of a thousand years, in which the holy
blessed God shall renew the world, they shall have wings like the wings
of eagles, and shall fly above the waters." It appears therefore that
this phraseology is purely rabbinical. Both the Greeks and Latins have
the same form of speech in speaking on the state of the righteous and
wicked after death. There is something like this in the Republic of
Plato, book x., p. 322, edit. Bip., where, speaking of Erus, the son of
Armenius, who came to life after having been dead twelve days, and who
described the states of departed souls, asserting "that some were
obliged to make a long peregrination under the earth before they arose
to a state of happiness, ειναι δε την πορειαν χιλιετη, for it was a
journey of a thousand years," he adds, "that, as the life of man is
rated at a hundred years, those who have been wicked suffer in the other
world a ten-fold punishment, and therefore their punishment lasts a
thousand years."

A similar doctrine prevailed among the Romans; whether they borrowed it
from the Greeks, or from the rabbinical Jews, we cannot tell.

Thus Virgil, speaking of the punishment of the wicked in the infernal
regions, says: -

Has omnes, ubi Mille rotam volvere per annos,

Lethaeum ad fluvium Deus evocat agmine magno:

Scilicet immemores supera ut convexa revisant,

Rursus et incipiant in corpora velle reverti.

Aen., lib. vi., 748.

"But when a thousand rolling years are past,

So long their dreary punishment shall last,

Whole droves of spirits, by the driving god,

Are led to drink the deep Lethean flood

In large, forgetful draughts, to sleep the cares

Of their past labors and their irksome years;

That, unremembering of its former pain,

The soul may clothe itself with flesh again."

How the apostle applies this general tradition, or in what sense he may
use it, who can tell?

[Revelation 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 20:5</span></span>

The rest of the dead lived not again - It is generally supposed from
these passages that all who have been martyred for the truth of God
shall be raised a thousand years before the other dead, and reign on
earth with Christ during that time, after which the dead in general
shall be raised; but this also is very doubtful.

[Revelation 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 20:6</span></span>

Blessed - Μακαριος· Happy. And holy; he was holy, and therefore he
suffered for the testimony of Jesus in the time when nothing but
holiness was called to such a trial.

The first resurrection - Supposed to be that of the martyrs, mentioned
above.

The second death - Punishment in the eternal world; such is the
acceptation of the phrase among the ancient Jews.

Hath no power - Ουκ εχει εξουσιαν· Hath no authority - no dominion over
him. This is also a rabbinical mode of speech. In Erubin, fol. 19, 1;
Chagiga, fol. 27, 1: "Res Lakish said, The fire of hell hath no power
over an Israelite who sins. Rab. Elieser says; The fire of hell hath no
power over the disciples of the wise men."

[Revelation 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 20:7</span></span>

Satan shall be loosed - How can this bear any kind of literal
interpretation? Satan is bound a thousand years, and the earth is in
peace; righteousness flourishes, and Jesus Christ alone reigns. This
state of things may continue for ever if the imprisonment of Satan be
continued. Satan, however, is loosed at the end of the thousand years,
and goes out and deceives the nations, and peace is banished from the
face of the earth, and a most dreadful war takes place, etc., etc. These
can be only symbolical representations, utterly incapable of the sense
generally put upon them.

[Revelation 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 20:8</span></span>

Gog and Magog - This seems to be almost literally taken from the
Jerusalem Targum, and that of Jonathan ben Uzziel, on [Num
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#026.md). I shall give the words at
length: "And there were two men left in the camp, the name of the one
was Eldad, the name of the other was Medad, and on them the spirit of
prophecy rested. Eldad prophesied and said, 'Behold, Moses the prophet,
the scribe of Israel, shall be taken from this world; and Joshua the son
of Nun, captain of the host, shall succeed him.' Medad prophesied and
said, 'Behold quails shall arise out of the sea, and be a stumbling
block to Israel.' Then they both prophesied together, and said, 'In the
very end of time Gog and Magog and their army shall come up against
Jerusalem, and they shall fall by the hand of the King Messiah; and for
seven whole years shall the children of Israel light their fires with
the wood of their warlike engines, and they shall not go to the wood nor
cut down any tree.'" In the Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel, on the same
place, the same account is given; only the latter part, that is, the
conjoint prophecy of Eldad and Medad, is given more circumstantially,
thus: "And they both prophesied together, and said, 'Behold, a king
shall come up from the land of Magog in the last days, and shall gather
the kings together, and leaders clothed with armor, and all people shall
obey them; and they shall wage war in the land of Israel against the
children of the captivity, but the hour of lamentation has been long
prepared for them, for they shall be slain by the flame of fire which
shall proceed from under the throne of glory, and their dead carcasses
shall fall on the mountains of the land of Israel; and all the wild
beasts of the field, and the wild fowl of heaven, shall come and devour
their carcasses; and afterwards all the dead of Israel shall rise again
to life, and shall enjoy the delights prepared for them from the
beginning, and shall receive the reward of their worlds.'"

This account seems most evidently to have been copied by St. John, but
how he intended it to be applied is a question too difficult to be
solved by the skill of man; yet both the account in the rabbins and in
St. John is founded on Ezekiel, Ezekiel 38:1-39:29. The rabbinical
writings are full of accounts concerning Gog and Magog, of which
Wetstein has made a pretty large collection in his notes on this place.
Under these names the enemies of God's truth are generally intended.

[Revelation 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 20:9</span></span>

The beloved city - Primarily, Jerusalem, typically, the Christian
Church.

[Revelation 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 20:10</span></span>

And the devil - was cast onto the lake - Before Satan was bound, that
is, his power was curtailed and restrained; now, he is cast into the
lake of fire, his power being totally taken away.

[Revelation 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 20:11</span></span>

A great white throne - Refulgent with glorious majesty.

Him that sat on it - The indescribable Jehovah.

From whose face the earth and the heaven fled away - Even the brightness
of his countenance dissolved the universe, and annihilated the laws by
which it was governed. This is a very majestic figure, and finely
expressed.

There was found no place for them - The glorious majesty of God filling
all things, and being all in all.

[Revelation 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 20:12</span></span>

The dead, small and great - All ranks, degrees, and conditions of men.
This description seems to refer to [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009.md), [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md).

And the books were opened - See [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001.md). "Rab. Jehuda said: All the
actions of men, whether good or bad, are written in a book, and of all
they shall give account." - Sohar Gen., fol. 79, col. 298. "How careful
should men be to shun vice, and to act uprightly before the holy blessed
God, seeing there are so many which go throughout the earth, see the
works of men, testify of them, and write them in a book!" - Ibid., fol.
105, col. 417.

"In the first day of the new year the holy blessed God sits that he may
judge the world; and all men, without exception, give an account of
themselves; and the books of the living and the dead are opened."

Sohar Chadash, fol. 19, 1.

The books mentioned here were the books of the living and the dead, or
the book of life and the book of death: that is, the account of the good
and evil actions of men; the former leading to life, the latter to
death. St. John evidently alludes here to [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010.md), on which the rabbinical account
of the books appears to be founded. The expressions are figurative in
both.

According to their works - And according to their faith also, for their
works would be the proof whether their faith were true or false; but
faith exclusively could be no rule in such a procedure.

[Revelation 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 20:13</span></span>

The sea gave up the dead - Those who had been drowned in it, and those
millions slain in naval contests, who had no other grave.

And death - All who died by any kind of disease. Death is here
personified, and represented as a keeper of defunct human beings;
probably no more than earth or the grave is meant, as properly belonging
to the empire of death.

And hell - Ἁιδης, Hades, the place of separate spirits. The sea and
death have the bodies of all human beings; hades has their spirits. That
they may be judged, and punished or rewarded according to their works,
their bodies and souls must be reunited; hades, therefore, gives up the
spirits; and the sea and the earth give up the bodies.

[Revelation 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 20:14</span></span>

And death and hell were cast into the lake - Death himself is now
abolished, and the place for separate spirits no longer needful. All
dead bodies and separated souls being rejoined, and no more separation
of bodies and souls by death to take place, consequently the existence
of these things is no farther necessary.

This is the second death - The first death consisted in the separation
of the soul from the body for a season; the second death in the
separation of body and soul from God for ever. The first death is that
from which there may be a resurrection; the second death is that from
which there can be no recovery. By the first the body is destroyed
during time; by the second, body and soul are destroyed through
eternity.

[Revelation 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 20:15</span></span>

Written in the book of life - Only those who had continued faithful unto
death were taken to heaven. All whose names were not found in the public
registers, who either were not citizens, or whose names had been erased
from those registers because of crimes against the state, could claim
none of those emoluments or privileges which belong to the citizens; so
those who either did not belong to the new and spiritual Jerusalem, or
who had forfeited their rights and privileges by sin, and had died in
that state, were cast into the lake of fire.

This is the way in which God, at the day of judgment, will proceed with
sinners and apostates. Reader, see that thy name be written in the
sacred register; and, if written in, see that it never be blotted out.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 21](rev021.md)

</div>
