<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev003)  [Next](rev005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 4:0</span></span>

John sees the throne of God in heaven surrounded by twenty-four elders;
and four living creatures, full of eyes; which all join in giving glory
to the Almighty, [Rev 4:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001.md).

[Revelation 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 4:1</span></span>

A door was opened in heaven - This appears to have been a visible
aperture in the sky over his head.

[Revelation 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 4:2</span></span>

I was in the Spirit - Rapt up in an ecstasy.

[Revelation 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 4:3</span></span>

And he that sat - There is here no description of the Divine Being, so
as to point out any similitude, shape, or dimensions. The description
rather aims to point out the surrounding glory and effulgence than the
person of the almighty King. See a similar description [Num
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#010.md), etc., and the notes there.

[Revelation 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 4:4</span></span>

Four and twenty elders - Perhaps this is in reference to the smaller
Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, which was composed of twenty-three elders; or to
the princes of the twenty-four courses of the Jewish priests which
ministered at the tabernacle and the temple, at first appointed by
David.

Clothed in white raiment - The garments of the priests.

On their heads crowns of gold - An emblem of their dignity. The Jewish
writers represent human souls as being created first; and before they
enter the body, each is taken by an angel into paradise, where it sees
the righteous sitting in glory with crowns upon their heads. Rab.
Tanchum, fol. 39, 4.

[Revelation 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 4:5</span></span>

Seven lamps of fire - Seven angels, the attendants and ministers of the
supreme King. See [Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md), and the
note there.

[Revelation 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 4:6</span></span>

Four beasts - Τεσσαρα ζωα· Four living creatures or four animals. The
word beast is very improperly used here and elsewhere in this
description. Wiclif first used it, and translators in general have
followed him in this uncouth rendering. A beast before the throne of God
in heaven sounds oddly.

[Revelation 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 4:7</span></span>

The first beast was like a lion - It is supposed that there is a
reference here to the four standards or ensigns of the four divisions of
the tribes in the Israelitish camp, as they are described by Jewish
writers.

The first living creature was like a lion; this was, say the rabbins,
the standard of Judah on the east, with the two tribes of Issachar and
Zabulon. The second, like a calf or ox, which was the emblem of Ephraim
who pitched on the west, with the two tribes of Manasseh and Benjamin.
The third, with the face of a man, which, according to the rabbins, was
the standard of Reuben who pitched on the south, with the two tribes of
Simeon and Gad. The fourth which was like a flying (spread) eagle, was,
according to the same writers, the emblem on the ensign of Dan who
pitched on the north, with the two tribes of Asher and Naphtali. This
traditionary description agrees with the four faces of the cherub in
Ezekiel's vision. See my notes and diagrams on Numbers 2.

Christian tradition has given these creatures as emblems of the four
evangelists. To John is attributed the Eagle; to Luke the Ox, to Mark
the Lion, and to Matthew the Man, or angel in human form. As the former
represented the whole Jewish Church or congregation, so the latter is
intended to represent the whole Christian Church.

[Revelation 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 4:8</span></span>

The four beasts had each of them six wings - I have already observed, in
the preface to this book, that the phraseology is rabbinical; I might
have added, and the imagery also. We have almost a counterpart of this
description in Pirkey Elieser. chap. 4. I shall give the substance of
this from Schoettgen. "Four troops of ministering angels praise the holy
blessed God: the first is Michael, at the right hand; the next is
Gabriel, at the left; the third is Uriel, before; and the fourth is
Raphael, behind him. The shechinah of the holy, blessed God is in the
midst, and he himself sits upon a throne high and elevated, hanging in
the air; and his magnificence is as amber חשמל, (chashmal), in the midst
of the fire, [Eze 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004.md), On his head is
placed a crown and a diadem, with the incommunicable name (יהוה Yehovah)
inscribed on the front of it. His eyes go throughout the whole earth; a
part of them is fire, and a part of them hail. At his right hand stands
Life, and at his left hand Death; and he has a fiery scepter in his
hand. Before him is the veil spread, that veil which is between the
temple and the holy of holies; and seven angels minister before him
within that veil: the veil and his footstool are like fire and
lightning; and under the throne of glory there is a shining like fire
and sapphire, and about his throne are justice and judgment.

"The place of the throne are the seven clouds of glory; and the chariot
wheels, and the cherub, and the living creatures which give glory before
his face. The throne is in similitude like sapphire; and at the four
feet of it are four living creatures, each of which has four faces and
four wings. When God speaks from the east, then it is from between the
two cherubim with the face of a Man; when he speaks from the south, then
it is from between the two cherubim with the face of a Lion; when from
the west, then it is from between the two cherubim with the face of an
Ox; and when from the north, then it is from between the two cherubim
with the face of an Eagle.

"And the living creatures stand before the throne of glory; and they
stand in fear, in trembling, in horror, and in great agitation; and from
this agitation a stream of fire flows before them. Of the two seraphim
one stands at the right hand of the holy blessed God, and one stands at
the left; and each has six wings: with two they cover their face lest
they should see the face of the shechina; with two they cover their feet
lest they should find out the footstool of the shechinah; and with two
they fly, and sanctify his great name. And they answer each other,
saying Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts; the whole earth is full of
his glory. And the living creatures stand near his glory, yet they do
not know the place of his glory; but wheresoever his glory is, they cry
out and say, Blessed be the glory of the Lord in his place."

In Shemoth Rabba, sec. 23, fol. 122, 4, Rabbi Abin says: "There are four
which have principality in this world: among intellectual creatures,
Man; among birds, the Eagle; among cattle, the Ox; and among wild
beasts, the Lion: each of these has a kingdom and a certain
magnificence, and they are placed under the throne of glory, [Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010.md), to show that no creature is to
exalt itself in this world, and that the kingdom of God is over all."
These creatures may be considered the representatives of the whole
creation.

[Revelation 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 4:10</span></span>

Cast their crowns before the throne - Acknowledge the infinite supremacy
of God, and that they have derived their being and their blessings from
him alone. This is an allusion to the custom of prostrations in the
east, and to the homage of petty kings acknowledging the supremacy of
the emperor.

[Revelation 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 4:11</span></span>

Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive - Thus all creation acknowledges the
supremacy of God; and we learn from this song that he made all things
for his pleasure; and through the same motive he preserves. Hence it is
most evident, that he hateth nothing that he has made, and could have
made no intelligent creature with the design to make it eternally
miserable. It is strange that a contrary supposition has ever entered
into the heart of man; and it is high time that the benevolent nature of
the Supreme God should be fully vindicated from aspersions of this kind.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 5](rev005.md)

</div>
