<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev005)  [Next](rev007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 6:0</span></span>

What followed on the opening of the seven seals. The opening of the
first seal; the white horse, [Rev 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001.md),
[Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002.md). The opening of the second
seal; the red horse, [Rev 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#003.md), [Rev
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#004.md). The opening of the third seal;
the black horse and the famine, [Rev
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005.md), [Rev
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#006.md). The opening of the fourth seal;
the pale horse, [Rev 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#007.md), [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008.md). The opening of the fifth seal;
the souls of men under the altar, [Rev
6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009.md). The opening of the sixth seal;
the earthquake, the darkening of the sun and moon, and falling of the
stars, [Rev 6:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012.md). The terrible
consternation of the kings and great men of the earth, [Rev
6:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015.md).

[Revelation 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 6:1</span></span>

When the Lamb opened one of the seals - It is worthy of remark that the
opening of the seals is not merely a declaration of what God will do,
but is the exhibition of a purpose then accomplished; for whenever the
seal is opened, the sentence appears to be executed. It is supposed
that, from Revelation 6:1-11:19, the calamities which should fall on the
enemies of Christianity, and particularly the Jews, are pointed out
under various images, as well as the preservation of the Christians
under those calamities.

One of the four beasts - Probably that with the face of a lion. See [Rev
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007.md).

Come and see - Attend to what is about to be exhibited. It is very
likely that all was exhibited before his eyes as in a scene, and he saw
every act represented which was to take place, and all the persons and
things which were to be the chief actors.

[Revelation 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 6:2</span></span>

A white horse - Supposed to represent the Gospel system, and pointing
out its excellence, swiftness, and purity.

He that sat on him - Supposed to represent Jesus Christ.

A bow - The preaching of the Gospel, darting conviction into the hearts
of sinners.

A crown - The emblem of the kingdom which Christ is to establish on
earth.

Conquering, and to conquer - Overcoming and confounding the Jews first,
and then the Gentiles; spreading more and more the doctrine and
influence of the cross over the face of the earth.

[Revelation 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 6:3</span></span>

The second beast - That which had the face of an ox.

[Revelation 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 6:4</span></span>

Another horse - red - The emblem of war; perhaps also of severe
persecution, and the martyrdom of the saints.

Him that sat thereon - Same say, Christ; others, Vespasian; others, the
Roman armies; others, Artabanus, king of the Parthians, etc., etc.

Take peace from the earth - To deprive Judea of all tranquillity.

They should kill one another - This was literally the case with the
Jews, while besieged by the Romans.

A great sword - Great influence and success, producing terrible carnage.

[Revelation 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 6:5</span></span>

The third beast - That which had the face of a man.

A black horse - The emblem of famine. Some think that which took place
under Claudius. See [Mat 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007.md); the
same which was predicted by Agabus, [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md).

A pair of balances - To show that the scarcity would be such, that every
person must be put under an allowance.

[Revelation 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 6:6</span></span>

A measure of wheat for a penny - The chaenix here mentioned was a
measure of dry things; and although the capacity is not exactly known,
yet it is generally agreed that it contained as much as one man could
consume in a day; and a penny, the Roman denarius, was the ordinary pay
of a laborer. So it appears that in this scarcity each might be able to
obtain a bare subsistence by his daily labor; but a man could not, in
such cases, provide for a family.

Three measures of barley - This seems to have been the proportion of
value between the wheat and the barley. Barley was allowed to afford a
poor aliment, and was given to the Roman soldiers instead of wheat, by
way of punishment.

Hurt not the oil and the wine - Be sparing of these: use them not as
delicacies, but for necessity; because neither the vines nor the olives
will be productive.

[Revelation 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 6:7</span></span>

The fourth beast - That which had the face of an eagle.

[Revelation 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 6:8</span></span>

A pale horse - The symbol of death. Pallida mors, pale death, was a very
usual poetic epithet; of this symbol there can be no doubt, because it
is immediately said, His name that sat on him was Death.

And hell followed with him - The grave, or state of the dead, received
the slain. This is a very elegant prosopopaeia, or personification.

Over the fourth part of the earth - One fourth of mankind was to feel
the desolating effects of this seal.

To kill with sword - War; with hunger - Famine; with death - Pestilence;
and with the beasts of the earth - lions, tigers, hyenas, etc., which
would multiply in consequence of the devastations occasioned by war,
famine, and pestilence.

[Revelation 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 6:9</span></span>

The fifth seal - There is no animal nor any other being to introduce
this seal, nor does there appear to be any new event predicted; but the
whole is intended to comfort the followers of God under their
persecutions, and to encourage them to bear up under their distresses.

I saw under the altar - A symbolical vision was exhibited, in which he
saw an altar; and under it the souls of those who had been slain for the
word of God - martyred for their attachment to Christianity, are
represented as being newly slain as victims to idolatry and
superstition. The altar is upon earth, not in heaven.

[Revelation 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 6:10</span></span>

And they cried with a loud voice - That is, their blood, like that of
Abel, cried for vengeance; for we are not to suppose that there was any
thing like a vindictive spirit in those happy and holy souls who had
shed their blood for the testimony of Jesus. We sometimes say Blood
cries for blood; that is, in the order of Divine justice, every
murderer, and every murdering persecutor, shall be punished.

O Lord - Ὁ Δεσποτης· Sovereign Lord, supreme Ruler; one having and
exercising unlimited and uncontrolled authority.

Holy - In thy own nature, hating iniquity;

And true - In all thy promises and threatenings;

Dost thou not judge - The persecutors;

And avenge our blood - Inflict signal punishment;

On them that dwell on the earth? - Probably meaning the persecuting
Jews; they dwelt επι της γης, upon that land, a form of speech by which
Judea is often signified in the New Testament.

[Revelation 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 6:11</span></span>

White robes - The emblems of purity, innocence, and triumph.

They should rest yet for a little season - This is a declaration that,
when the cup of the iniquity of the Jews should be full, they should
then be punished in a mass. They were determined to proceed farther, and
God permits them so to do; reserving the fullness of their punishment
till they had filled up the measure of their iniquity. If this book was
written before the destruction of Jerusalem, as is most likely, then
this destruction is that which was to fall upon the Jews; and the little
time or season was that which elapsed between their martyrdom, or the
date of this book, and the final destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans,
under Vespasian and his son Titus, about a.d. 70. What follows may refer
to the destruction of the heathen Roman empire.

[Revelation 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 6:12</span></span>

The sixth seal - This seal also is opened and introduced by Jesus Christ
alone.

A great earthquake - A most stupendous change in the civil and religious
constitution of the world. If it refer to Constantine the Great, the
change that was made by his conversion to Christianity might be very
properly represented under the emblem of an earthquake, and the other
symbols mentioned in this and the following verses.

The sun - the ancient pagan government of the Roman empire, was totally
darkened; and, like a black hair sackcloth, was degraded and humbled to
the dust.

The moon - the ecclesiastical state of the same empire, became as blood
- was totally ruined, their sacred rites abrogated, their priests and
religious institutions desecrated, their altars cast down, their temples
destroyed, or turned into places for Christian worship.

[Revelation 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 6:13</span></span>

The stars of heaven - The gods and goddesses, demi-gods, and deified
heroes, of their poetical and mythological heaven, were prostrated
indiscriminately, and lay as useless as the figs or fruit of a tree
shaken down before ripe by a tempestuous wind.

[Revelation 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 6:14</span></span>

And the heaven departed as a scroll - The whole system of pagan and
idolatrous worship, with all its spiritual, secular, and superstitious
influence, was blasted, shrivelled up, and rendered null and void, as a
parchment scroll when exposed to the action of a strong fire.

And every mountain - All the props, supports, and dependencies of the
empire, whether regal allies, tributary kings, dependent colonies, or
mercenary troops, were all moved out of their places, so as to stand no
longer in the same relation to that empire, and its worship, support,
and maintenance, as they formerly did.

And island - The heathen temples, with their precincts and enclosures,
cut off from the common people, and into which none could come but the
privileged, may be here represented by islands, for the same reasons.

[Revelation 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 6:15</span></span>

The kings of the earth, etc. - All the secular powers who had endeavored
to support the pagan worship by authority, influence, riches, political
wisdom, and military skill; with every bondman - all slaves, who were in
life and limb addicted to their masters or owners.

And every freeman - Those who had been manumitted, commonly called
freedmen, and who were attached, through gratitude, to the families of
their liberators. All hid themselves - were astonished at the total
overthrow of the heathen empire, and the revolution which had then taken
place.

[Revelation 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 6:16</span></span>

Said to the mountains and rocks - Expressions which denote the strongest
perturbation and alarm. They preferred any kind of death to that which
they apprehended from this most awful revolution.

From the face of him that sitteth on the throne - They now saw that all
these terrible judgments came from the Almighty; and that Christ, the
author of Christianity, was now judging, condemning, and destroying them
for their cruel persecutions of his followers.

[Revelation 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 6:17</span></span>

For the great day of his wrath - The decisive and manifest time in which
he will execute judgment on the oppressors of his people.

Who shall be able to stand? - No might can prevail against the might of
God. All these things may literally apply to the final destruction of
Jerusalem, and to the revolution which took place in the Roman empire
under Constantine the Great. Some apply them to the day of judgment; but
they do not seem to have that awful event in view. These two events were
the greatest that have ever taken place in the world, from the flood to
the eighteenth century of the Christian era; and may well justify the
strong figurative language used above.

Through I do not pretend to say that my remarks on this chapter point
out its true signification, yet I find others have applied it in the
same way. Dr. Dodd observes that the fall of Babylon, Idumea, Judah,
Egypt, and Jerusalem, has been described by the prophets in language
equally pompous, figurative, and strong. See [Isa
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010.md); [Isa
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004.md), concerning Babylon and Idumea;
[Jer 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023.md), [Jer
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#024.md), concerning Judah; [Eze
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#007.md), concerning Egypt; [Joe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010.md), [Joe
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031.md), concerning Jerusalem; and our
Lord himself, [Mat 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029.md), concerning
the same city. "Now," says he, "it is certain that the fall of any of
these cities or kingdoms was not of greater concern or consequence to
the world, nor more deserving to be described in pompous figures, than
the fall of the pagan Roman empire, when the great lights of the heathen
world, the sun, moon, and stars, the powers civil and ecclesiastical,
were all eclipsed and obscured, the heathen emperors and Caesars were
slain, the heathen priests and augurs were extirpated, the heathen
officers and magistrates were removed, the temples were demolished, and
their revenues were devoted to better uses. It is customary with the
prophets, after they have described a thing in the most symbolical and
figurative manner, to represent the same again in plainer language; and
the same method is observed here, [Rev
6:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015.md) : And the kings of the earth,
etc. That is, Maximin, Galerius, Maxentius, Licinius, etc., with all
their adherents and followers, were so routed and dispersed that they
hid themselves in dens, etc.; expressions used to denote the utmost
terror and confusion. This is, therefore, a triumph of Christ over his
heathen enemies, and a triumph after a severe persecution; so that the
time and all the circumstances, as well as the series and order of the
prophecy, agree perfectly with this interpretation. Galerius, Maximin,
and Licinius, made even a public confession of their guilt, recalled
their decrees and edicts against the Christians, and acknowledged the
just judgments of God and of Christ in their own destruction." See
Newton, Lowman, etc., and Dr. Dodd on this chapter, with the works of
several more recent authors.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 7](rev007.md)

</div>
