<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](jde001)  [Next](rev001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Revelation of St. John the Divine

Among the interpreters of the Apocalypse, both in ancient and modern
times, we find a vast diversity of opinions, but they may be all reduced
to four principal hypotheses, or modes of interpretation: -

1\. The Apocalypse contains a prophetical description of the destruction
of Jerusalem, of the Jewish war, and the civil wars of the Romans.

2\. It contains predictions of the persecutions of the Christians under
the heathen emperors of Rome, and of the happy days of the Church under
the Christian emperors, from Constantine downwards.

3\. It contains prophecies concerning the tyrannical and oppressive
conduct of the Roman pontiffs, the true antichrist; and foretells the
final destruction of popery.

4\. It is a prophetic declaration of the schism and heresies of Martin
Luther, those called Reformers, and their successors; and the final
destruction of the Protestant religion.

The first opinion has been defended by Professor Wetstein, and other
learned men on the continent.

The second is the opinion of the primitive fathers in general, both
Greek and Latin.

The third was first broached by the Abb Joachim, who flourished in the
thirteenth century, was espoused by most of the Franciscans; and has
been and still is the general opinion of the Protestants.

The fourth seems to have been invented by popish writers, merely by way
of retaliation; and has been illustrated and defended at large by a Mr.
Walmsley, (I believe), titular dean of Wells, in a work called the
History of the Church, under the feigned name of Signior Pastorini.

In this work he endeavors to turn every thing against Luther and the
Protestants, which they interpreted of the pope and popery; and attempts
to show, from a computation of the Apocalyptical numbers, that the total
destruction of Protestantism in the world will take place in 1825! But
this is not the first prophecy that has been invented for the sake of an
event, the accomplishment of which was earnestly desired; and as a
stimulus to excite general attention, and promote united exertion, when
the time of the pretended prophecy was fulfilled. But 1825 is past by,
and 1832 is come, and the Protestant Church is still in full vigor,
while the Romish Church is fast declining.

The full title of the book which I quote is the following: -

"The General History of the Christian Church, from her birth to her
final triumphant state in Heaven, chiefly deduced from the Apocalypse of
St. John the Apostle. By Sig. Pastorini.

'Blessed is he that readeth and heareth the words of this prophecy.' -
Apocalypse, [Rev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003).

Printed in the year M.DCC.LXXI." 8vo. No place nor printer's name
mentioned.

The place where he foretells the final destruction of Protestantism is
in pp. 249 and 262.

The Catholic college of Maynooth, in Ireland, have lately published a
new edition of this work! in which the author kindly predicts the
approaching overthrow of the whole Protestant system, both in Church and
state; and in the meantime gives them, most condescendingly, Abaddon or
the devil for their king!

Who the writer of the Apocalypse was, learned men are not agreed. This
was a question, as well in ancient as in modern times. We have already
seen that many have attributed it to the Apostle John; others, to a
person called John the presbyter, who they say was an Ephesian, and
totally different from John the apostle. And lastly, some have
attributed it to Cerinthus, a contemporary of John the apostle. This
hypothesis, however, seems utterly unsupportable; as there is no
probability that the Christian Church would have so generally received a
work which came from the hands of a man at all times reputed a very
dangerous heretic; nor can the doctrines it contains ever comport with a
Cerinthian creed.

Whether it was written by John the apostle, John the presbyter, or some
other person, is of little importance if the question of its inspiration
be fully established. If written by an apostle it is canonical; and
should be received, without hesitation, as a work Divinely inspired.
Every apostle acted under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. John was
an apostle, and consequently inspired; therefore, whatever he wrote was
written by Divine inspiration. If, therefore, the authenticity of the
work be established, i.e., that it was written by John the apostle, all
the rest necessarily follow.

As I have scarcely any opinion to give concerning this book on which I
could wish any of my readers to rely, I shall not enter into any
discussion relative to the author, or the meaning of his several visions
and prophecies; but for general information refer to Dr. Lardner,
Michaelis, and others.

Various attempts have been made by learned men to fix the plan of this
work; but even in this few agree. I shall produce some of the chief of
these: and first, that of Wetstein, which is the most singular of the
whole.

He supposes the book of the Apocalypse to have been written a
considerable time before the destruction of Jerusalem. The events
described from the fourth chapter to the end he supposes to refer to the
Jewish war, and to the civil commotions which took place in Italy while
Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian were contending for the empire. These
contentions and destructive wars occupied the space of about three years
and a half, during which Professor Wetstein thinks the principal events
took place which are recorded in this book. On these subjects he speaks
particularly in his notes, at the end of which he subjoins what he calls
his Ανακεφαλαιωσις, or synopsis of the whole work, which I proceed now
to lay before the reader.

"This prophecy, which predicts the calamities which God should send on
the enemies of the Gospel, is divided into two parts. The first is
contained in the closed book; the second, in the open book.

I. The first concerns the earth and the third part, i.e., Judea and the
Jewish nation,

II\. The second concerns many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and
kings, [Rev 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#011), i.e., the Roman
empire.

1\. The book written within and without, and sealed with seven seals,
[Rev 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001), is the bill of divorce sent
from God to the Jewish nation.

2\. The crowned conqueror on the white horse armed with a bow, [Rev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002), is Artabanus, king of the
Parthians, who slaughtered multitudes of the Jews in Babylon.

3\. The red horse, [Rev 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#004). The
Sicarii and robbers in Judea, in the time of the Proconsuls Felix and
Festus.

4\. The black horse, [Rev 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005). The
famine under Claudius.

5\. The pale horse, [Rev 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008). The
plague which followed the robberies and the famine.

6\. The souls of those who were slain, [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009). The Christians in Judea, who were
persecuted, and were now about to be avenged.

7\. The great earthquake, [Rev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012).
The commotions which preceded the Jewish rebellion.

8\. The servants of God from every tribe, sealed in their foreheads,
[Rev 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003). The Christians taken under
the protection of God, and warned by the prophets to flee immediately
from the land.

9\. The silence for half an hour, [Rev
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#001). The short truce granted at the
solicitation of King Agrippa. Then follows the rebellion itself.

1\. The trees are burnt, [Rev 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007). The
fields and villages, and unfortified places of Judea, which first felt
the bad effects of the sedition.

2\. The burning mountain cast into the sea which in consequence became
blood, [Rev 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#008); and,

3\. The burning star falling into the rivers, and making the waters
bitter, [Rev 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#010), [Rev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011). The slaughter of the Jews at
Caesarea and Scythopolis.

4\. The eclipsing of the sun, moon, and stars, [Rev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012). The anarchy of the Jewish
commonwealth.

5\. The locusts like scorpions hurting men, [Rev
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#003). The expedition of Cestius Gallus,
prefect of Syria.

6\. The army with arms of divers colors, [Rev
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#016), [Rev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#017). The armies under Vespasian in
Judea. About this time Nero and Galba died; after which followed the
civil war, signified by the sounding of the seventh trumpet, [Rev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007), [Rev
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#011); [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015).

1\. The two prophetic witnesses, two olive trees, two candlesticks, [Rev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003), [Rev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004). Teachers in the Church,
predicting the destruction of the Jewish temple and commonwealth.

2\. The death of the witnesses, [Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007). Their flight, and the flight of
the Church of Jerusalem, to Pella, in Arabia.

3\. The resurrection of the witnesses, after three days and a half, [Rev
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011). The predictions began to be
fulfilled at a time in which their accomplishment was deemed impossible;
and the doctrine of Christ begins to prevail over Judea, and over the
whole earth.

4\. The tenth part of the city fell in the same hour, and seven thousand
names of men slain, [Rev 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013).
Jerusalem seized by the Idumeans; and many of the priests and nobles,
with Annas, the high priest, signified by names of men, i.e. men of
name, slain by the Zealots.

5\. The woman clothed with the sun, the moon under her feet, and a crown
of twelve stars on her head, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001). The Christian Church.

6\. The great red dragon seen in heaven, with seven heads, seven
diadems, and ten horns, [Rev 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003). The
six first Caesars, who were all made princes at Rome, governing the
armies and the Roman people with great authority; especially Nero, the
last of them, who, having killed his mother, cruelly vexed the
Christians, and afterwards turned his wrath against the rebellious Jews.

7\. The seven-headed beast from the sea, having ten horns surrounded
with diadems, [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001). Galba, Otho,
and Vitellius, who were shortly to reign, and who were proclaimed
emperors by the army.

8\. This beast, having a mouth like a lion, the body like a leopard, the
feet like a bear, [Rev 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002).
Avaricious Galba; rash, unchaste, and inconstant Otho; Vitellius, cruel
and sluggish, with the German any.

9\. One head, i.e., the seventh, cut off, [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003). Galba.

10\. He who leadeth into captivity shall be led into captivity; he who
killeth with the sword shall be killed with the sword, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010). Otho, who subdued the murderers
of Galba, and slew himself with a dagger, Vitellius, who bound Sabinus
with chains and was himself afterwards bound.

11\. Another beast rising out of the earth, with two horns, [Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011). Vespasian and his two and,
Titus and Domitian, elected emperors at the same time in Judea.

12\. The number of the wild beast, 666, the number of a man, Teitan,
Titan or Titus: T, 300. E, 5. I, 10. T, 300. A, 1. N. 50, making in the
whole 666. \[But some very respectable MSS. have 616 for the number; if
the N be taken away from Teitan, then the letters in Teita make exactly
the sum 616\].

13\. A man sitting upon a cloud, unity a crown of gold upon his head,
and a sickle in his hand, [Rev 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014).
Otho and his army, about to prevent supplies for the army of Vitellius.

14\. An angel of fire commanding another angel to gather the vintage;
the winepress trodden whence the blood flows out 1600 furlongs. The
followers of Vitellius laying all waste with fire; and the Bebriaci
conquering the followers of Otho with great slaughter.

Then follow the seven plagues: -

1\. The grievous sore, [Rev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#002). The
diseases of the soldiers of Vitellius through intemperance.

2\. The sea turned into blood, [Rev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003). The fleet of Vitellius beaten,
and the maritime towns taken from them by the Flavii.

3\. The rivers turned into blood, [Rev
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#004). The slaughter of the adherents
of Vitellius, at Cremona and elsewhere, near rivers.

4\. The scorching of the sun, [Rev
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#008). The diseases of the Vitellii
increasing, and their exhausted bodies impatient of the heat.

5\. The seat of the beast darkened, [Rev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010). All Rome in commotion through
the torpor of Vitellius.

6\. Euphrates dried up, and a way made for the kings of the east; and
the three unclean spirits like frogs. The Flavii besieging Rome with a
treble army; one part of which was by the bank of the Tiber.

The shame of him who is found asleep and naked. Vitellius, [Rev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015). Armageddon, [Rev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016). The praetorian camps.

7\. The fall of Babylon, [Rev 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019).
The sacking of Rome.

1\. The whore, [Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001). Rome.

2\. The seven kings, [Rev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#010).
Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and Galba.

3\. The eighth, which is of the seven, [Rev
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#011). Otho, destined by adoption to
be the son and successor of Galba.

4\. The ten horns, [Rev 17:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012). The
leaders of the Flavian factions.

5\. The merchants of the earth, [Rev
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#011); i.e., of Rome, which was then
the emporium of the whole world.

6\. The beast and the false prophet, [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020). Vespasian and his family,
contrary to all expectation, becoming extinct in Domitian, as the first
family of the Caesars, and of the three princes, Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius.

7\. The millennium, or a thousand years, [Rev
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#002). Taken from [Psa
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004), a time appointed by God,
including the space of forty years, from the death of Domitian to the
Jewish war under Adrian.

8\. Gog and Magog, going out over the earth, [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008). Barchochebas, the false Messiah,
with an immense army of the Jews, coming forth suddenly from their caves
and dens, tormenting the Christians, and carrying on a destructive war
with the Romans.

9\. The New Jerusalem, [Rev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001), [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002). The Jews being brought so low as
to be capable of injuring no longer; the whole world resting after being
expiated by wars; and the doctrine of Christ propagated and prevailing
everywhere with incredible celerity.

Wetstein contends (and he is supported by very great men among the
ancients and moderns) that "the book of the Revelation was written
before the Jewish war, and the civil wars in Italy; that the important
events which took place at that time, the greatest that ever happened
since the foundation of the world, were worth enough of the Divine
notice, as the affairs of his Church were so intimately connected with
them; that his method of exposition proves the whole book to be a
well-connected, certain series of events; but the common method of
interpretation, founded on the hypothesis that the book was written
after the destruction of Jerusalem, is utterly destitute of certainty,
and leaves every commentator to the luxuriance of his own fancy, as is
sufficiently evident from what has been done already on this book; some
interpreters leading the reader now to Thebes, now to Athens, and
finding in the words of the sacred penman Constantine the Great; Arius,
Luther, Calvin; the Jesuits; the Albigenses; the Bohemians; Chemnitius;
Elizabeth, queen of England; Cecil, her treasurer; and who not?" - See
Wetstein's Gr. Test., vol. ii. p. 889.

Those who consider the Apocalypse as a prophecy and scenical exhibition
of what shall happen to the Christian Church to the end of the world,
lay this down as a proposition, which comprises the subject of the whole
book: The contest of Christ with his enemies; and his final victory and
triumph over them. See [Co1 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025);
Matthew 24:1-51; Mark 13:1-37; Luke 21:5-38. But what is but briefly
hinted in the above scriptures, is detailed at large in the Apocalypse,
and represented by various images nearly in the following order: -

1\. The decrees of the Divine providence, concerning what is to come,
are declared to John.

2\. The manner in which these decrees shall be executed is painted in
the most vivid colors.

3\. Then follow thanksgivings to God, the ruler and governor of all
things, for these manifestations of his power, wisdom and goodness.

After the exordium, and the seven epistles to the seven Churches of Asia
Minor, to whose angels or bishops the book seems to be dedicated,
(Revelation 1:1-3:22), the scene of the visions is opened in heaven,
full of majesty; and John receives a promise of a revelation relative to
the future state of the Church, Revelation 4:1-5:14.

The enemies of the Church of Christ which the Christians had then most
to fear were the Jews, the heathens, and the false teachers. All these
are overcome by Christ, and over them he triumphs gloriously. First of
all, punishments are threatened to the enemies of the kingdom of Christ,
and the preservation of his own followers in their greatest trials
determined; and these determinations are accompanied with the praises
and thanksgivings of all the heavenly inhabitants, and of all good men,
Revelation 6:1-10:11.

The transactions of the Christian religion are next recorded, Revelation
11:1-14:5. The Christians are persecuted: -

1\. By the Jews; but they were not only preserved, but they increase and
prosper.

2\. By the heathens; but in vain do these strive to overthrow the
kingdom of Christ, which is no longer confined within the limits of
Judea, but spreads among the Gentiles, and diffuses itself over the
whole Roman empire, destroying idolatry, and rooting out superstition,
in every quarter, Revelation 12:1-13:10.

3\. False teachers and impostors of various kinds, under the name of
Christians, but enemies of the cross of Christ, more intent on promoting
the interests of idolatry or false worship than the cause of true
religion, [Rev 13:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011), exert their
influence to corrupt and destroy the Church; but, notwithstanding,
Christianity becomes more extended, and true believers more confirmed in
their holy faith, [Rev 14:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001). Then
new punishments are decreed against the enemies of Christ, both Jews and
heathens: the calamities coming upon the Jewish nation before its final
overthrow are pointed out, Revelation 14:1-15:8. Next follows a
prediction of the calamities which shall take place during the Jewish
war; and the civil wars of the Romans during the contentions of Otho and
Vitellius, Revelation 16:1-16, who are to suffer most grievous
punishments for their cruelties against the Christians, Revelation
17:1-18. The Jewish state being now finally overthrown, Revelation
18:1-24, the heavenly inhabitants give praise to God for his justice and
goodness; Christ is congratulated for his victory over his enemies, and
the more extensive progress of his religion, [Rev
19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).

Opposition is, however, not yet totally ended: idolatry again lifts up
its head, and new errors are propagated; but over these also Christ
shows himself to be conqueror, [Rev
19:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011). Finally, Satan, who had long
reigned by the worship of false gods, errors, superstitions, and
wickedness, is deprived of all power and influence; and the concerns of
Christianity go on gloriously, [Rev
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001). But towards the end of the
world new enemies arise, and threaten destruction to the followers of
Christ; but in vain is their rage, God appears in behalf of his
servants, and inflicts the most grievous punishments upon their
adversaries, [Rev 20:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#006). The last
judgment ensues, [Rev 20:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011), all
the wicked are punished, and the enemies of the truth are chained, so as
to be able to injure the godly no more; the genuine Christians, who had
persevered unto death, are brought to eternal glory; and, freed from all
adversities, spend a life that shall never end, in blessedness that
knows no bounds, Revelation 21:1-22:21. See Rosenmuller.

Eichhorn takes a different view of the plan of this book; though in
substance not differing much from that above. According to this writer
the whole is represented in the form of a drama, the parts of which are
the following:

I. The title, [Rev 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001).

II\. The prologue, Revelation 1:4-3:22; in which it is stated that the
argument of the drama refers to the Christians; epistles being sent to
the Churches, which, in the symbolic style, are represented by the
number seven.

Next follows the drama itself, the parts of which are: -

The prolusio, or prelude, Revelation 4:1-8:5; in which the scenery is
prepared and adorned.

Act the first, Revelation 8:6-12:17. Jerusalem is taken, and Judaism
vanquished by Christianity.

Act the second, Revelation 13:1-20:10. Rome is conquered, and heathenism
destroyed by the Christian religion.

Act the third, Revelation 20:11-22:5. The New Jerusalem descends from
heaven; or the happiness of the life to come, and which is to endure for
ever, is particularly described, [Rev
22:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006). Taken in this sense, Eichhorn
supposes the work to be most exquisitely finished, and its author to
have had a truly poetic mind, polished by the highest cultivation; to
have been accurately acquainted with the history of all times and
nations, and to have enriched himself with their choicest spoils.

My readers will naturally expect that I should either give a decided
preference to some one of the opinions stated above, or produce one of
my own; I can do neither, nor can I pretend to explain the book: I do
not understand it; and in the things which concern so sublime and awful
a subject, I dare not, as my predecessors, indulge in conjectures. I
have read elaborate works on the subject, and each seemed right till
another was examined. I am satisfied that no certain mode of
interpreting the prophecies of this book has yet been found out, and I
will not add another monument to the littleness or folly of the human
mind by endeavoring to strike out a new course. I repeat it, I do not
understand the book; and I am satisfied that not one who has written on
the subject knows any thing more of it than myself. I should, perhaps,
except J. E. Clarke, who has written on the number of the beast. His
interpretation amounts nearly to demonstration; but that is but a small
part of the difficulties of the Apocalypse: that interpretation, as the
most probable ever yet offered to the public, shall be inserted in its
proper place; as also his illustration of the xiith, xiiith, and xviith
chapters. As to other matters, I must leave them to God, or to those
events which shall point out the prophecy; and then, and probably not
till then, will the sense of these visions be explained.

A conjecture concerning the design of the book may be safely indulged;
thus then it has struck me, that the book of the Apocalypse may be
considered as a Prophet continued in the Church of God, uttering
predictions relative to all times, which have their successive
fulfillment as ages roll on; and thus it stands in the Christian Church
in the place of the Succession of Prophets in the Jewish Church; and by
this especial economy Prophecy is Still Continued, is Always Speaking;
and yet a succession of prophets rendered unnecessary. If this be so, we
cannot too much admire the wisdom of the contrivance which still
continues the voice and testimony of prophecy, by means of a very short
book, without the assistance of any extraordinary messenger, or any
succession of such messengers, whose testimony would at all times be
liable to suspicion, and be the subject of infidel and malevolent
criticism, howsoever unexceptionable to ingenuous minds the credentials
of such might appear.

On this ground it is reasonable to suppose that several prophecies
contained in this book have been already fulfilled, and that therefore
it is the business of the commentator to point such out. It may be so;
but as it is impossible for me to prove that my conjecture is right, I
dare not enter into proceedings upon it, and must refer to Bishop
Newton, and such writers as have made this their particular study.

After having lived in one of the most eventful eras of the world; after
having seen a number of able pens employed in the illustration of this
and other prophecies; after having carefully attended to those facts
which were supposed to be the incontestable proofs of the fulfillment of
such and such visions, seals, trumpets, thunders, and vials of the
Apocalypse; after seeing the issue of that most terrible struggle which
the French nation, the French republic, the French consulate, and the
French empire, have made to regain and preserve their liberties, which,
like arguing in a circle, have terminated where they began, without one
political or religious advantage to them or to mankind; and after
viewing how the prophecies of this book were supposed to apply almost
exclusively to these events, the writers and explainers of these
prophecies keeping pace in their publications with the rapid succession
of military operations, and confidently promising the most glorious
issue, in the final destruction of superstition, despotism, arbitrary
power, and tyranny of all kinds, nothing of which has been realized; I
say, viewing all these things, I feel myself at perfect liberty to state
that, to my apprehension, all these prophecies have been misapplied and
misapprehended; and that the Key to them is not yet intrusted to the
sons of men. My readers will therefore excuse me from any exposure of my
ignorance or folly by attempting to do what many, with much more wisdom
and learning, have attempted, and what every man to the present day has
failed in, who has preceded me in expositions of this book. I have no
other mountain to heap on those already piled up; and if I had, I have
not strength to lift it: those who have courage may again make the
trial; already we have had a sufficiency of vain efforts.

Ter sunt conati imponere Pelio Ossam

Scilicet, atque Ossae frondosum involvere Olympum:

Ter Pater extructos disjecit fulmine montes.

Virg., G. i. 281.

With mountains piled on mountains thrice they strove

To scale the steepy battlements of Jove;

And thrice his lightning and red thunder play'd,

And their demolish'd works in ruin laid.

Dryden

I had resolved, for a considerable time, not to meddle with this book,
because I foresaw that I could produce nothing satisfactory on it: but
when I reflected that the literal sense and phraseology might be made
much plainer by the addition of philological and critical notes; and
that, as the diction appeared in many places to be purely rabbinical, (a
circumstance to which few of its expositors have attended), it might be
rendered plainer by examples from the ancient Jewish writers; and that
several parts of it spoke directly of the work of God in the soul of
man, and of the conflicts and consolations of the followers of Christ,
particularly in the beginning of the book, I changed my resolution, and
have added short notes, principally philological, where I thought I
understood the meaning.

I had once thought of giving a catalogue of the writers and commentators
on this book, and had begun a collection of this kind; but the question
of Cui bono? What good end is this likely to serve? not meeting with a
satisfactory answer in my own mind, caused me to throw this collection
aside. I shall notice two only.

1\. The curious and learned work entitled, "A plaine Discovery of the
whole Revelation of St. John," written by Sir John Napier, inventor of
the logarithms, I have particularly described in the general preface to
the Holy Scriptures, prefixed to the Book of Genesis, to which the
reader is requested to refer.

2\. Another work, not less singular, and very rare, entitled, "The Image
of both Churches, after the most wonderful and heavenly Revelation of
Sainct John the Evangelist, containing a very fruitfull exposition or
paraphrase upon the same: wherein it is conferred with the other
scriptures, and most auctorised histories Compyled by John Bale, an
exyle also in thys lyfe for the faithful testimony of Jesu." Printed at
London by Thomas East, 18mo., without date.

The author was at first a Carmelite, but was afterwards converted to the
Protestant religion. He has turned the whole of the Apocalypse against
the Romish Church; and it is truly astonishing to see with what address
he directs every image, metaphor, and description, contained in this
book, against the corruptions of this Church. He was made bishop of
Ossory, in Ireland; but was so persecuted by the papists that he
narrowly escaped with his life, five of his domestics being murdered by
them. On the accession of Mary he was obliged to take refuge in the Low
Countries, where it appears he compiled this work. As he was bred up a
papist, and was also a priest, he possessed many advantages in attacking
the strongest holds of his adversaries. He knew all their secrets, and
he uncovered the whole; he was acquainted with all their rites,
ceremonies, and superstitions, and finds all distinctly marked in the
Apocalypse, which he believes was written to point out the abominations,
and to foretell the final destruction of this corrupt and intolerant
Church. I shall make a few references to his work in the course of the
following notes. In [Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001), the
author shows his opinion, and speaks something of himself: Come hither,
I will show thee the judgment of the great whore, etc. "Come hither,
friende John, I will show thee in secretnesse the tirrible judgement of
the great whore, or counterfaite Church of hypocrites. Needs must this
whore be Rome, for that she is the great citie which reigneth over the
kings of the earth. Evident it is both by Scriptures and Cronicles that
in John's dayes Rome had dominion over all the whole world: and being
infected with the abominations of all landes, rightly is shee called
Babylon. or Citie of Confusion. And like as in the Scriptures ofte tymes
under the name of Jerusalem is ment the whole kingdom of Juda, so under
the name of Rome here may be understanded the unyversall worlde, with
all their abominations and divilleshnesses, their idolatryes,
witchcraftes, sectes, superstitions, papacyes, priesthoodes, relygions,
shavings, anointings, blessings, sensings, processions, and the divil of
all such beggeryes. For all the people since Christes assencion, hath
this Rome infected with hir pestilent poisons gathered from all
idolatrous nations, such time as she held over them the monarchial
suppremit. At the wryting of this prophecy felt John of their cruiltie,
being exiled into Pathmos for the faithfull testimony of Jesu. And so
did I, poore creature, with my poore wife and children, at the
gatheringe of this present commentary, flying into Germanye for the
same," etc.

Shall I have the reader's pardon if I say that it is my firm opinion
that the expositions of this book have done great disservice to
religion: almost every commentator has become a prophet; for as soon as
he began to explain he began also to prophesy. And what has been the
issue? Disappointment laughed at hope's career, and superficial thinkers
have been led to despise and reject prophecy itself. I shall sum up all
that I wish to say farther in the words of Graserus: Mihi tota
Apocalypsis valde obscura videtur; et talis, cujus explicatio citra
periculum vix queat tentari. Fateor me hactenus in nullius Scripti
Biblici lectione minus vroficere, quam in hoc obscurissimo Vaticinio.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 1](rev001)

</div>
