<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev006)  [Next](rev008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 7:0</span></span>

The four angels holding the four winds of heaven, [Rev
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md). The angel with the seal of the
living God, and sealing the servants of God out of the twelve tribes,
whose number amounted to one hundred and forty-four thousand, [Rev
7:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002.md). Besides these, there was an
innumerable multitude from all nations, who gave glory to God and the
Lamb, [Rev 7:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009.md). One of the elders
shows who these are, and describes their most happy state, [Rev
7:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013.md).

[Revelation 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 7:1</span></span>

And after these things - Immediately after the preceding vision.

I saw four angels - Instruments which God employs in the dispensation of
his providence; we know not what.

On the four corners of the earth - On the extreme parts of the land of
Judea, called ἡ γη, the land, or earth, by way of eminence.

Holding the four winds - Preventing evil from every quarter. Earth -
sea, nor on any tree; keeping the whole of the land free from evil, till
the Church of Christ should wax strong, and each of his followers have
time to prepare for his flight from Jerusalem, previously to its total
destruction by the Romans.

[Revelation 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 7:2</span></span>

The seal of the living God - This angel is represented as the chancellor
of the supreme King, and as ascending from the east, απο ανατολης ἡλιου,
from the rising of the sun. Some understand this of Christ, who is
called ανατολη, the east, [Luk 1:78](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#078.md).

Four angels, to whom it was given to hurt - Particular agents employed
by Divine providence in the management of the affairs of the earth; but
whether spiritual or material we know not.

[Revelation 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 7:3</span></span>

Till we have sealed the servants of our God - There is manifestly an
allusion to [Eze 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004.md) here. By sealing
we are to understand consecrating the persons in a more especial manner
to God, and showing, by this mark of God upon them, that they were under
his more immediate protection, and that nothing should hurt them. It was
a custom in the east, and indeed in the west too, to stamp with a hot
iron the name of the owner upon the forehead or shoulder of his slave.

It is worthy of remark that not one Christian perished in the siege of
Jerusalem; all had left the city, and escaped to Pella. This I have
often had occasion to notice.

[Revelation 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 7:4</span></span>

I heard the number of them which were sealed - In the number of 144,000
are included all the Jews converted to Christianity; 12,000 out of each
of the twelve tribes: but this must be only a certain for an uncertain
number; for it is not to be supposed that just 12,000 were converted out
of each of the twelve tribes.

[Revelation 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 7:5</span></span>

Of the tribe of Juda, etc. - First, we are to observe that the tribe of
Levi is here mentioned, though that tribe had no inheritance in Israel;
but they now belonged to the spiritual priesthood. Secondly, That the
tribe of Dan, which had an inheritance, is here omitted; as also the
tribe of Ephraim. Thirdly, That the tribe of Joseph is here added in the
place of Ephraim. Ephraim and Dan, being the principal promoters of
idolatry, are left out in this enumeration.

[Revelation 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 7:9</span></span>

A great multitude - This appears to mean the Church of Christ among the
Gentiles, for it was different from that collected from the twelve
tribes; and it is here said to be of all nations, kindreds, people, and
tongues.

Clothed with white robes - As emblems of innocence and purity. With
palms in their hands, in token of victory gained over the world, the
devil, and the flesh.

[Revelation 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 7:10</span></span>

Salvation to our God - That is, God alone is the author of the salvation
of man; and this salvation is procured for and given to them through the
Lamb, as their propitiatory sacrifice.

[Revelation 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 7:11</span></span>

All the angels, etc. - As there is joy in the presence of God among
these holy spirits when one sinner repents, no wonder that they take
such an interest in the gathering together of such innumerable
multitudes who are fully saved from their sins.

[Revelation 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 7:12</span></span>

Saying, Amen - Giving their most cordial and grateful assent to the
praises attributed to God and the Lamb.

Blessing, and glory, etc. - There are here seven different species of
praise attributed to God, as in [Rev
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012) (note.md).

[Revelation 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 7:13</span></span>

One of the elders answered - A Hebraism for spoke. The question is here
asked, that the proposer may have the opportunity of answering it.

[Revelation 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 7:14</span></span>

Sir, thou knowest - That is, I do not know, but thou canst inform me.

Came out of great tribulation - Persecutions of every kind.

And have washed their robes - Have obtained their pardon and purity,
through the blood of the Lamb.

Their white robes cannot mean the righteousness of Christ, for this
cannot be washed and made white in his own blood. This white linen is
said to be the righteousness of the saints, [Rev
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008.md), and this is the righteousness in
which they stand before the throne; therefore it is not Christ's
righteousness, but it is a righteousness wrought in them by the merit of
his blood, and the power of his Spirit.

[Revelation 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 7:15</span></span>

Therefore - Because they are washed in the blood of the Lamb, are they
before the throne - admitted to the immediate presence, of God.

And serve him day and night - Without ceasing; being filled with the
spirit of prayer, faith, love, and obedience.

Shall dwell among them - He lives in his own Church, and in the heart of
every true believer.

[Revelation 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 7:16</span></span>

They shall hunger no more - They shall no longer be deprived of their
religious ordinances, and the blessings attendant on them, as they were
when in a state of persecution.

Neither shall the sun light on them - Their secular rulers, being
converted to God, became nursing fathers to the Church.

Nor any heat - Neither persecution nor affliction of any kind. These the
Hebrews express by the term heat, scorching, etc.

[Revelation 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 7:17</span></span>

The Lamb - The Lord Jesus, enthroned with his Father in ineffable glory.

Shall feed them - Shall communicate to them every thing calculated to
secure, continue, and increase their happiness.

Living fountains of water - A spring in the Hebrew phraseology is termed
living water, because constantly boiling up and running on. By these
perpetual fountains we are to understand endless sources of comfort and
happiness, which Jesus Christ will open out of his own infinite
plenitude to all glorified souls. These eternal living fountains will
make an infinite variety in the enjoyments of the blessed. There will be
no sameness, and consequently no cloying with the perpetual enjoyment of
the same things; every moment will open a new source of pleasure,
instruction, and improvement; they shall make an eternal progression
into the fullness of God. And as God is infinite, so his attributes are
infinite; and throughout infinity more and more of those attributes will
be discovered; and the discovery of each will be a new fountain or
source of pleasure and enjoyment. These sources must be opening through
all eternity, and yet, through all eternity, there will still remain, in
the absolute perfections of the Godhead, an infinity of them to be
opened! This is one of the finest images in the Bible.

God shall wipe away - In the most affectionate and fatherly manner, all
tears from their eyes - all causes of distress and grief. They shall
have pure, unmixed happiness. Reader, this is the happiness of those who
are washed from their sins. Art thou washed? O, rest not till thou art
prepared to appear before God and the Lamb.

If these saints had not met with troubles and distresses, in all
likelihood they had not excelled so much in righteousness and true
holiness. When all avenues of worldly comfort are shut up, we are
obliged to seek our all in God; and there is nothing sought from him
that is not found in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 8](rev008.md)

</div>
