<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev001)  [Next](rev003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 2:0</span></span>

The epistle to the Church of Ephesus, commending their labor and
patience, [Rev 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001). And,
reprehending their having left their first love, exhorting them to
repent, with the promise of the tree of life, [Rev
2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004). The epistle to the Church of
Smyrna, commending their piety, and promising them support in their
tribulation, [Rev 2:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008). The epistle
to the Church of Pergamos, commending their steadfastness in the
heavenly doctrine, [Rev 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012), [Rev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013). And reprehending their laxity in
ecclesiastical discipline, in tolerating heretical teachers in the
Church, [Rev 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014), [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015). The apostle exhorts them to
repent, with the promise of the white stone and a new name, [Rev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016), [Rev
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017). The epistle to the Church of
Thyatira, with a commendation of their charity, faith, and patience,
[Rev 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018), [Rev
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#019). Reprehending their toleration of
Jezebel, the false prophetess, who is threatened with grievous
punishment, [Rev 2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020). Particular
exhortations and promises to this Church, [Rev
2:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024).

I must here advertise my readers,

1\. That I do not perceive any metaphorical or allegorical meaning in
the epistles to these Churches.

2\. I consider the Churches as real; and that their spiritual state is
here really and literally pointed out; and that they have no reference
to the state of the Church of Christ in all ages of the world, as has
been imagined; and that the notion of what has been termed the Ephesian
state, the Smyrnian state, the Pergamenian state, the Thyatirian state,
etc., etc., is unfounded, absurd, and dangerous; and such expositions
should not be entertained by any who wish to arrive at a sober and
rational knowledge of the Holy Scriptures.

3\. I consider the angel of the Church as signifying the messenger, the
pastor, sent by Christ and his apostles to teach and edify that Church.

4\. I consider what is spoken to this angel as spoken to the whole
Church; and that it is not his particular state that is described, but
the states of the people in general under his care.

The Epistle to the Church at Ephesus

[Revelation 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 2:1</span></span>

Unto the angel of the Church of Ephesus - By αγγελος, angel, we are to
understand the messenger or person sent by God to preside over this
Church; and to him the epistle is directed, not as pointing out his
state, but the state of the Church under his care. Angel of the Church
here answers exactly to that officer of the synagogue among the Jews
called שליח ציבור sheliach tsibbur, the messenger of the Church, whose
business it was to read, pray, and teach in the synagogue. The Church at
Ephesus is first addressed, as being the place where John chiefly
resided; and the city itself was the metropolis of that part of Asia.
The angel or bishop at this time was most probably Timothy, who presided
over that Church before St. John took up his residence there, and who is
supposed to have continued in that office till a.d. 97, and to have been
martyred a short time before St. John's return from Patmos.

Holdeth the seven stars - Who particularly preserves, and guides, and
upholds, not only the ministers of those seven Churches, but all the
genuine ministers of his Gospel, in all ages and places.

Walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks - Is the supreme
Bishop and Head, not only of those Churches, but of all the Churches or
congregations of his people throughout the world.

[Revelation 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 2:2</span></span>

I know thy works - For the eyes of the Lord are throughout the earth,
beholding the evil and the good; and, being omnipresent, all things are
continually open and naked before him. It is worthy of remark, that
whatsoever is praiseworthy in any of these Churches is first mentioned;
thereby intimating that God is more intent on finding out the good than
the evil in any person or Church; and that those who wish to reform such
as have fallen or are not making sufficient advances in the Divine life,
should take occasion, from the good which yet remains, to encourage them
to set out afresh for the kingdom of heaven. The fallen or backsliding
who have any tenderness of conscience left are easily discouraged, and
are apt to think that there is no seed left from which any harvest can
be reasonably expected. Let such be told that there is still a seed of
godliness remaining, and that it requires only watching and
strengthening the things which remain, by prompt application to God
through Christ, in order to bring them back to the full enjoyment of all
they have lost, and to renew them in the spirit of their mind. Ministers
continually harping on Ye are dead, ye are dead; there is little or no
Christianity among you, etc., etc., are a contagion in a Church, and
spread desolation and death wheresoever they go. It is far better to
say, in such cases, "Ye have lost ground, but ye have not lost all your
ground; ye might have been much farther advanced, but through mercy ye
are still in the way. The Spirit of God is grieved by you, but it is
evident he has not forsaken you. Ye have not walked in the light as ye
should, but your candlestick is not yet removed, and still the light
shines. Ye have not much zeal, but ye have a little. In short, God still
strives with you, still loves you, still waits to be gracious to you;
take courage, set out afresh, come to God through Christ; believe, love,
obey, and you will soon find days more blessed than you have ever yet
experienced." Exhortations and encouragements of this kind are sure to
produce the most blessed effects; and under such the work of God
infallibly revives.

And thy labor - He knew their works in general. Though they had left
their first love, yet still they had so much love as excited them to
labor, and enabled them to bear persecution patiently, and to keep the
faith; for they could not tolerate evil men, and they had put fictitious
apostles to the test, and had found them to be liars, pretending a
Divine commission while they had none, and teaching false doctrines as
if they were the truths of God.

[Revelation 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 2:3</span></span>

And hast borne - The same things mentioned in the preceding verse, but
in an inverted order, the particular reason of which does not appear;
perhaps it was intended to show more forcibly to this Church that there
was no good which they had done, nor evil which they had suffered, that
was forgotten before God.

And hast not fainted - They must therefore have had a considerable
portion of this love remaining, else they could not have thus acted.

[Revelation 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 2:4</span></span>

Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee - The clause should be read,
according to the Greek, thus: But I have against thee that thou hast
left thy first love. They did not retain that strong and ardent
affection for God and sacred things which they had when first brought to
the knowledge of the truth, and justified by faith in Christ.

[Revelation 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 2:5</span></span>

Remember - Consider the state of grace in which you once stood; the
happiness, love, and joy which you felt when ye received remission of
sins; the zeal ye had for God's glory and the salvation of mankind; your
willing, obedient spirit, your cheerful self-denial, your fervor in
private prayer, your detachment from the world, and your
heavenly-mindedness. Remember - consider, all these.

Whence thou art fallen - Fallen from all those blessed dispositions and
gracious feelings already mentioned. Or, remember what a loss you have
sustained; for so εκπιπτειν is frequently used by the best Greek
writers.

Repent - Be deeply humbled before God for having so carelessly guarded
the Divine treasure.

Do the first works - Resume your former zeal and diligence; watch, fast,
pray, reprove sin, carefully attend all the ordinances of God, walk as
in his sight, and rest not till you have recovered all your lost ground,
and got back the evidence of your acceptance with your Maker.

I will come unto thee quickly - In the way of judgment.

And will remove thy candlestick - Take away my ordinances, remove your
ministers, and send you a famine of the word. As there is here an
allusion to the candlestick in the tabernacle and temple, which could
not be removed without suspending the whole Levitical service, so the
threatening here intimates that, if they did not repent, etc., he would
unchurch them; they should no longer have a pastor, no longer have the
word and sacraments, and no longer have the presence of the Lord Jesus.

[Revelation 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 2:6</span></span>

The deeds of the Nicolaitanes - These were, as is commonly supposed, a
sect of the Gnostics, who taught the most impure doctrines, and followed
the most impure practices. They are also supposed to have derived their
origin from Nicolas, one of the seven deacons mentioned [Act
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005) (note). The Nicolaitanes taught
the community of wives, that adultery and fornication were things
indifferent, that eating meats offered to idols was quite lawful; and
mixed several pagan rites with the Christian ceremonies. Augustine,
Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Tertullian, have spoken largely
concerning them. See more in my preface to 2d Peter, where are several
particulars concerning these heretics.

[Revelation 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 2:7</span></span>

He that hath an ear - Let every intelligent person, and every Christian
man, attend carefully to what the Holy Spirit, in this and the following
epistles, says to the Churches. See the note on [Mat
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015), where the same form of speech
occurs.

To him that overcometh - To him who continues steadfast in the faith,
and uncorrupt in his life; who faithfully confesses Jesus, and neither
imbibes the doctrines nor is led away by the error of the wicked; will I
give to eat of the tree of life. As he who conquered his enemies had,
generally, not only great honor, but also a reward; so here a great
reward is promised τῳ νικωντι, to the conqueror: and as in the Grecian
games, to which there may be an allusion, the conqueror was crowned with
the leaves of some tree; here it is promised that they should eat of the
fruit of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God;
that is, that they should have a happy and glorious immortality. There
is also here an allusion to [Gen 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009),
where it is said, God made the tree of life to grow out of the midst of
the garden; and it is very likely that by eating the fruit of this tree
the immortality of Adam was secured, and on this it was made dependent.
When Adam transgressed, he was expelled from this garden, and no more
permitted to eat of the tree of life; hence he became necessarily
mortal. This tree, in all its sacramental effects, is secured and
restored to man by the incarnation, death, and resurrection of Christ.
The tree of life is frequently spoken of by the rabbins; and by it they
generally mean the immortality of the soul, and a final state of
blessedness. See many examples in Schoettgen. They talk also of a
celestial and terrestrial paradise. The former, they say, "is for the
reception of the souls of the just perfect; and differs as much from the
earthly paradise as light from darkness."

The Epistle to the Church at Smyrna

[Revelation 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 2:8</span></span>

Unto the angel - This was probably the famous Polycarp. See below.

These things saith the first and the last - He who is eternal; from whom
all things come, and to whom all things must return. Which was dead, for
the redemption of the world; and is alive to die no more for ever, his
glorified humanity being enthroned at the Father's right hand.

[Revelation 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 2:9</span></span>

I know thy works - As he had spoken to the preceding Church, so he
speaks to this: I know all that ye have done, and all that ye have
suffered. The tribulation here mentioned must mean persecution, either
from the Jews, the heathens, or from the heretics, who, because of their
flesh-pampering doctrines might have had many partisans at Smyrna.

And poverty - Stripped probably of all their temporal possessions,
because of their attachment to the Gospel.

But thou art rich - Rich in faith, and heir of the kingdom of Christ.

The blasphemy of them which say they are Jews - There were persons there
who professed Judaism, and had a synagogue in the place, and professed
to worship the true God; but they had no genuine religion, and they
served the devil rather than God. They applied a sacred name to an
unholy thing: and this is one meaning of the word blasphemy in this
book.

[Revelation 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 2:10</span></span>

Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer - This may be
addressed particularly to Polycarp, if he was at that time the bishop of
this Church. He had much to suffer; and was at last burnt alive at
Smyrna, about the year of our Lord 166. We have a very ancient account
of his martyrdom, which has been translated by Cave, and is worthy of
the reader's perusal. That account states that the Jews were
particularly active in this martyrdom, and brought the fagots, etc., by
which he was consumed. Such persons must indeed have been of the
synagogue of Satan.

Ten days - As the days in this book are what is commonly called
prophetic days, each answering to a year, the ten years of tribulation
may denote ten years of persecution; and this was precisely the duration
of the persecution under Diocletian, during which all the Asiatic
Churches were grievously afflicted. Others understand the expression as
implying frequency and abundance, as it does in other parts of
Scripture. [Gen 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007), [Gen
31:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041) : Thou hast changed my wages Ten
Times; i.e. thou hast frequently changed my wages [Num
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022) : Those men have tempted me now
these Ten Times; i.e. they have frequently and grievously tempted and
sinned against me. [Neh 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#012) : The
Jews that dwelt by them came and said unto us Ten Times, i.e. they were
frequently coming and informing us, that our adversaries intended to
attack us, [Job 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003); These Ten Times
have ye reproached me; i.e. ye have loaded me with continual reproaches.
[Dan 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#020) : In all matters of wisdom,
he found them Ten Times better than all the magicians; i.e. the king
frequently consulted Daniel and his companions, and found them more
abundantly informed and wise than all his counsellors.

Some think the shortness of the affliction is here intended, and that
the ten days are to be understood as in Terence, Heaut., Act v., scen.
1, ver. 36, Decem dierum vis mi est familia. "I have enjoyed my family
but a short time."

Be thou faithful unto death - Be firm, hold fast the faith, confess
Christ to the last, and at all hazards, and thou shalt have a crown of
life - thou shalt be crowned with life, have an eternal happy existence,
though thou suffer a temporal death. It is said of Polycarp that when
brought before the judge, and commanded to abjure and blaspheme Christ,
he firmly answered, "Eighty and six years have I served him, and he
never did me wrong, how then can I blaspheme my king who hath saved me?"
He was then adjudged to the flames, and suffered cheerfully for Christ
his Lord and Master.

[Revelation 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 2:11</span></span>

He that overcometh - The conqueror who has stood firm in every trial,
and vanquished all his adversaries.

Shall not be hurt of the second death - That is, an eternal separation
from God and the glory of his power; as what we commonly mean by final
perdition. This is another rabbinical mode of speech in very frequent
use, and by it they understand the punishment of hell in a future life.

The Epistle to the Church at Pergamos

[Revelation 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 2:12</span></span>

The angel of the Church in Pergamos - See the description of this place,
[Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011).

Which hath the sharp sword - See on [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016) (note). The sword of the Spirit,
which is the word of God, cuts every way; it convinces of sin,
righteousness, and judgment; pierces between the joints and the marrow,
divides between the soul and spirit, dissects the whole mind, and
exhibits a regular anatomy of the soul. It not only reproves and exposes
sin, but it slays the ungodly, pointing out and determining the
punishment they shall endure. Jesus has the sword with the two edges,
because he is the Savior of sinners, and the Judge of quick and dead.

[Revelation 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 2:13</span></span>

Where Satan's seat is - Ὁπου ὁ θρονος του Σατανα· Where Satan has his
throne - where he reigns as king, and is universally obeyed. It was a
maxim among the Jews, that where the law of God was not studied, there
Satan dwelt; but he was obliged to leave the place where a synagogue or
academy was established.

Thou holdest fast my name - Notwithstanding that the profession of
Christianity exposed this Church to the bitterest persecution, they held
fast the name of Christian, which they had received from Jesus Christ,
and did not deny his faith; for when brought to the trial they openly
professed themselves disciples and followers of their Lord and Master.

Antipas was my faithful martyr - Who this Antipas was we cannot tell. We
only know that he was a Christian, and probably bore some office in the
Church, and became illustrious by his martyrdom in the cause of Christ.
There is a work extant called The Acts of Antipas, which makes him
bishop of Pergamos, and states that he was put to death by being
enclosed in a burning brazen bull. But this story confutes itself, as
the Romans, under whose government Pergamos then was, never put any
person to death in this way. It is supposed that he was murdered by some
mob, who chose this way to vindicate the honor of their god Aesculapius,
in opposition to the claims of our Lord Jesus.

[Revelation 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 2:14</span></span>

I have a few things against thee - Their good deeds are first carefully
sought out and commended; what was wrong in them is touched with a
gentle but effectual hand.

The followers of Balaam, the Nicolaitanes, and the Gnostics, were
probably all the same kind of persons; but see on [Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006) (note). What the doctrine of
Balaam was, see the notes on [Num 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001)
(note) through [Num 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#018); and Numbers
31:1-54 (note). It appears that there were some then in the Church at
Pergamos who held eating things offered to idols in honor of those
idols, and fornication, indifferent things. They associated with
idolaters in the heathen temples, and partook with them in their
religious festivals.

[Revelation 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 2:15</span></span>

The doctrine of the Nicolaitanes - See on [Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006) (note).

[Revelation 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 2:16</span></span>

Will fight against them with the sword of my mouth - See on [Rev
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012) (note). He now speaks for their
edification and salvation; but if they do not repent, he will shortly
declare those judgments which shall unavoidably fall upon them.

[Revelation 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 2:17</span></span>

The hidden manna - It was a constant tradition of the Jews that the ark
of the covenant, the tables of stone, Aaron's rod, the holy anointing
oil, and the pot of manna, were hidden by King Josiah when Jerusalem was
taken by the Chaldeans; and that these shall all be restored in the days
of the Messiah. This manna was hidden, but Christ promises to give it to
him that is conqueror. Jesus is the ark, the oil, the rod, the
testimony, and the manna. He who is partaker of his grace has all those
things in their spiritual meaning and perfection.

And will give him a white stone -

I. It is supposed that by the white stone is meant pardon or
acquittance, and the evidence of it; and that there is an allusion here
to the custom observed by judges in ancient times, who were accustomed
to give their suffrages by white and black pebbles; those who gave the
former were for absolving the culprit, those who gave the latter were
for his condemnation. This is mentioned by Ovid, Metam. lib. xv., ver.
41:

Mos erat antiquus, niveis atrisque lapillis,

His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa.

Nunc quoque sic lata est sententia tristis.

"A custom was of old, and still remains,

Which life or death by suffrages ordains:

White stones and black within an urn are cast,

The first absolve, but fate is in the last."

Dryden.

II\. Others suppose there is an allusion here to conquerors in the
public games, who were not only conducted with great pomp into the city
to which they belonged, but had a white stone given to them, with their
name inscribed on it; which badge entitled them, during their whole
life, to be maintained at the public expense. See Pind., Olymp. vii.
159, and the Scholia there; and see the collections in Wetstein, and
Rosenmuller's note. These were called tesserae among the Romans, and of
these there were several kinds.

1\. Tesserae conviviales, which answered exactly to our cards of
invitation, or tickets of admission to a public feast or banquet; when
the person invited produced his tessera he was admitted. The mention of
the hidden manna here may seem to intimate that there is a reference to
these convivial tesserae, whether given to the victor in the public
games, entitling him to be fed at the public expense, or to a particular
friend, inviting him to a family meal or to a public banquet.

2\. There were tesserae inscribed with different kinds of things, such
as provisions, garments, gold or silver vessels, horses, mares, slaves,
etc. These were sometimes thrown by the Roman emperors among the crowd
in the theatres, and he that could snatched one; and on producing it he
received that, the name of which was inscribed on it. But from Dio
Cassius it appears that those tesserae were small wooden balls, whereas
the tesserae in general were square, whence they had their name, as
having four sides, angles, or corners. Illi τεσσαρην , vel τεσσαραν,
vocabant figuram quamvis quadratam, quae quatuor angulos haberet; and
these were made of stone, marble, bone, or ivory, lead, brass, or other
metal. See Pitiscus.

3\. Tesserae frumentariae, or tickets to receive grain in the public
distributions of corn; the name of the person who was to receive, and
the quantum of grain; being both inscribed on this badge or ticket.
Those who did not need this public provision for themselves were
permitted to sell their ticket, and the bearer was entitled to the
quantum of grain mentioned on it.

4\. But the most remarkable of these instruments were the tesserae
hospitales, which were given as badges of friendship and alliance, and
on which some device was engraved, as a testimony that a contract of
friendship had been made between the parties. A small oblong square
piece of wood, bone, stone, or ivory, was taken and divided into two
equal parts, on which each of the parties wrote his own name, and then
interchanged it with the other. This was carefully preserved, and handed
down even to posterity in the same family; and by producing this when
they traveled, it gave a mutual claim to the bearers of kind reception
and hospitable entertainment at each other's houses.

It is to this custom that Plautus refers in his Poenulus, act. v., scen.
2, ver. 80, in the interview between Agorastocles, and his unknown uncle
Hanno.

Hanno. - O mi popularis, salve!

Agorastocles. - Et tu edepol, quisquis es. Et si quid opus est, quaeso,
die atque impera, Popularitatis caussa.

Han. - Habeo gratiam. Verum ego hic hospitium habeo: Antidamae filium
Quaero; commonstra, si novisti, Agorastoclem. Ecquem adolescentem tu hic
novisti Agorastoclem?

Agor. - Siquidem tu Antidamarchi quaeris adoptatitium, Ego sum ipsus,
quem tu quaeris.

Han. - Hem! quid ego audio?

Agor. - Antidamae gnatum me esse.

Han. - si ita est, tesseram Conferre si vis hospitalem, eccam adtuli.

Agor. - Agedum huc ostende; est par probe: nam habeo domi.

Han. - O mi hospes, salve multum! nam mihi tuus pater, Pater tuus ergo,
hospes Antidamas fuit. Haec mihi hospitalis tessera cum illo fuit.

Agor. - Ergo hic apud me hospitium tibi praebebitur. Nam haud repudio
hospitium, neque Carthaginem: Inde sum oriundus.

Han. - Di dent tibi omnes quae velis.

Hanno. - Hail, my countryman!

Agorastocles. - I hail thee also, in the name of Pollux, whosoever thou
art. And if thou have need of any thing, speak, I beseech thee; and thou
shalt obtain what thou askest, for civility's sake.

Hanno - I thank thee, but I have a lodging here; I seek the son of
Antidamas. Tell me if thou knowest Agorastocles. Dost thou know in this
place the young Agorastocles?

Agorastocles - If thou seek the adopted son of Antidamarchus, I am the
person whom thou seekest.

Hanno - Ha! What do I hear?

Agorastocles - Thou hearest that I am the son of Antidamas.

Hanno - If it be so, compare, if thou pleasest, the hospitable tessera;
here it is, I have brought it with me.

Agorastocles - Come then, reach it hither: it is the exact counterpart;
I have the other at home.

Hanno - O my friend, I am very glad to see thee, for thy father was my
friend; therefore Antidamas thy father was my guest. I divided this
hospitable tessera with him.

Agorastocles - Therefore, a lodging shall be provided for thee with me;
I reverence hospitality, and I love Carthage, where I was born.

Hanno - May all the gods grant thee whatsoever thou wishest!

The tessera taken in this sense, seems to have been a kind of tally; and
the two parts were compared together to ascertain the truth. Now it is
very probable that St. John may allude to this; for on this mode of
interpretation every part of the verse is consistent.

1\. The word ψηφος does not necessarily signify a stone of any kind, but
a suffrage, sentence, decisive vote; and in this place seems answerable
to the tessera. The tessera which Hanno had, he tells us in his Punic
language, was inscribed with the image or name of his god. "Sigillum
hospitii mei est tabula sculpta, conjus sculptura est Deus meus. This is
the interpretation of the Punic words at the beginning of the above 5th
act of the Poenulus, as given by Bochart.

2\. The person who held it had a right to entertainment in the house of
him who originally gave it; for it was in reference to this that the
friendly contract was made.

3\. The names of the contracting persons, or some device, were written
on the tessera, which commemorated the friendly contract; and as the
parts were interchanged, none could know that name or device, or the
reason of the contract, but he who received it.

4\. This, when produced, gave the bearer a right to the offices of
hospitality; he was accommodated with food, lodging, etc., as far as
these were necessary; and to this the eating of the hidden manna may
refer.

But what does this mean in the language of Christ?

1\. That the person is taken into an intimate state of friendship with
him.

2\. That this contract is witnessed to the party by some especial token,
sign, or seal, to which he may have recourse to support his claim, and
identify his person. This is probably what is elsewhere called the
earnest of the Spirit; see the note on [Eph
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014), and the places there referred
to. He then who has received and retains the witness of the Spirit that
he is adopted into the heavenly family, may humbly claim, in virtue of
it, his support of the bread and water of life; the hidden manna - every
grace of the Spirit of God; and the tree of life - immortality, or the
final glorification of his body and soul throughout eternity.

3\. By this state of grace into which he is brought he acquires a new
name, the name of child of God; the earnest of the Spirit, the tessera,
which he has received, shows him this new name.

4\. And this name of child of God no man can know or understand, but he
who has received the tessera or Divine witness.

5\. As his Friend and Redeemer may be found everywhere, because he fills
the heavens and the earth, everywhere he may, on retaining this tessera,
claim direction, succor, support, grace, and glory; and therefore the
privileges of him who overcometh are the greatest and most glorious that
can be imagined.

For a farther account of the tessera of the ancients, as well as for
engravings of several, see Graevii Thesaur.; Pitisci Lexic.; and Poleni
Supplement; and the authors to whom these writers refer.

The Epistle to the Church at Thyatira

[Revelation 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 2:18</span></span>

These things saith the Son of God - See the notes on [Rev
1:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014) (note).

[Revelation 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 2:19</span></span>

I know thy works - And of these he first sets forth their charity, την
αγαπην, their love to God and each other; and particularly to the poor
and distressed: and hence followed their faith, την πιστιν, their
fidelity, to the grace they had received; and service, την διακονιαν,
and ministration; properly pious and benevolent service to widows,
orphans, and the poor in general.

And thy patience - Την ὑπομονην σου· Thy perseverance under afflictions
and persecutions, and thy continuance in well-doing. I put faith before
service according to the general consent of the best MSS. and versions.

Thy works - The continued labor of love, and thorough obedience.

The last to be more than the first - They not only retained what they
had received at first, but grew in grace, and in the knowledge and love
of Jesus Christ. This is a rare thing in most Christian Churches: they
generally lose the power of religion, and rest in the forms of worship;
and it requires a powerful revival to bring them to such a state that
their last works shall be more than their first.

[Revelation 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 2:20</span></span>

That woman Jezebel - There is an allusion here to the history of Ahab
and Jezebel, as given in 2 Kings 9:1-10:36; and although we do not know
who this Jezebel was, yet from the allusion we may take it for granted
she was a woman of power and influence in Thyatira, who corrupted the
true religion, and harassed the followers of God in that city, as
Jezebel did in Israel. Instead of that woman Jezebel, την γυναικα
Ιεζαβηλ, many excellent MSS., and almost all the ancient versions, read
την γυναικα σου Ιεζαβηλ, Thy Wife Jezebel; which intimates, indeed
asserts, that this bad woman was the wife of the bishop of the Church,
and his criminality in suffering her was therefore the greater. This
reading Griesbach has received into the text. She called herself a
prophetess, i.e., set up for a teacher; taught the Christians that
fornication, and eating things offered to idols, were matters of
indifference, and thus they were seduced from the truth. But it is
probable that by fornication here is meant idolatry merely, which is
often its meaning in the Scriptures. It is too gross to suppose that the
wife of the bishop of this Church could teach fornication literally. The
messenger or bishop of this Church, probably her husband, suffered this:
he had power to have cast her and her party out of the Church, or, as
his wife, to have restrained her; but he did not do it, and thus she had
every opportunity of seducing the faithful. This is what Christ had
against the messenger of this Church.

[Revelation 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 2:21</span></span>

I gave her space to repent - "This alludes to the history of Jezebel.
God first sent Elijah to Ahab to pronounce a severe judgment upon him;
upon which Ahab showed tokens of repentance, and so God put off his
punishment. By these means the like punishment pronounced against
Jezebel was also put off. Thus God gave her time to repent, which she
did not, but instead of that seduced her sons to the same sins. See 1
Kings 21:1-29. According to the Mosaical law, the punishment of
idolatrous seducers was not to be delayed at all, but God sometimes
showed mercy; and now much more under the Christian dispensation, though
that mercy is often abused, and thus produces the contrary effect, as in
the case of this Jezebel. See [Ecc
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011).

[Revelation 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 2:22</span></span>

Behold, I will cast her into a bed - "This again alludes to the same
history. Ahaziah, son of Ahab and Jezebel, by his mother's ill
instruction and example, followed her ways. God punished him by making
him fall down, as is supposed, from the top of the terrace over his
house, and so to be bedridden for a long time under great anguish,
designing thereby to give him time to repent; but when, instead of that,
he sent to consult Baalzebub, Elijah was sent to pronounce a final doom
against his impenitence. Thus the son of Jezebel, who had committed
idolatry with and by her advice, was long cast into the bed of
affliction, and not repenting, died: in the same manner his brother
Jehoram succeeded likewise. All this while Jezebel had time and warning
enough to repent; and though she did not prevail with Jehoram to
continue in the idolatrous worship of Baal, yet she persisted in her own
way, notwithstanding God's warnings. The sacred writer, therefore, here
threatens the Gnostic Jezebel to make that wherein she delighteth, as
adulterers in the bed of lust, to be the very place, occasion, and
instrument, of her greatest torment. So in Isaiah, the bed is made a
symbol of tribulation, and anguish of body and mind. See [Isa
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#020); [Job
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#019).

[Revelation 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 2:23</span></span>

And I will kill her children with death - "That is, I will certainly
destroy her offspring and memory, and thereby ruin her designs.
Jezebel's two sons, being both kings were both slain; and after that,
all the seventy sons of Ahab; ([Kg2
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001)); in all which the hand of God
was very visible. In the same manner God predicts the destruction of the
heretics and heresies referred to; see [Rev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016). It should seem by the
expression, I am he which searcheth the reins and the hearts, that these
heretics lurked about, and sowed their pernicious doctrines secretly.
But our Savior tells them that it was in vain, for he had power to bring
their deeds to light, having that Divine power of searching into the
Evilly and affections of men; and hereby he would show both them and us
that he is, according to his title, The Son of God; and hath such eyes
to pry into their actions, that, like a fire, they will search into
every thing, and burn up the chaff which cannot stand his trial; so that
the depths of Satan, mentioned in the next verse, to which this alludes,
(Christ assuming here this title purposely) shall avail nothing to those
who think by their secret craft to undermine the Christian religion; he
will not only bring to light, but baffle all their evil intentions. See
[Rev 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009).

[Revelation 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 2:24</span></span>

But unto you I say, and unto the rest - "But unto the rest, etc. This is
the reading of the Complutensian, and seems preferable to the common
one, as it evidently shows that the rest of the epistle wholly concerns
the faithful, who have not received the former doctrine of error. I will
put upon you none other burden is a commendation of the sound part of
the Church, that they have no need of any new exhortation or charge to
be given them, no new advice but to persevere as usual. See [Rom
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014), [Rom
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015). The expression of burden is
taken from the history of Ahab, [Kg2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025) : The Lord laid this burden on
him; a word often used by the prophets to signify a prophecy threatening
heavy things to be suffered. See on [Isa
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001) (note), and [Num
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#019) (note)." See Dodd's Notes.

It is worthy of remark that the Gnostics called their doctrine the
depths of God, and the depths of Bythos, intimating that they contained
the most profound secrets of Divine wisdom. Christ here calls them the
depths of Satan, being master pieces of his subtlety. Perhaps they
thought them to be of God, while all the time they were deceived by the
devil.

[Revelation 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rev 2:25</span></span>

That which ye have - That is, the pure doctrine of the Gospel, hold fast
till I come - till I come to execute the judgments which I have
threatened.

[Revelation 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rev 2:26</span></span>

Power over the nations - Every witness of Christ has power to confute
and confound all the false doctrines and maxims of the nations of the
world, for Christianity shall at last rule over all; the kingdom of
Christ will come, and the kingdoms of this world become the kingdoms of
our God and of his Christ.

[Revelation 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rev 2:27</span></span>

He shall rule them with a rod of iron - He shall restrain vice by the
strictest administration of justice; and those who finally despise the
word and rebel shall be broken and destroyed, so as never more to be
able to make head against the truth. This seems to refer to the heathen
world; and perhaps Constantine the Great may be intended, who, when he
overcame Licinius, became the instrument in God's hand of destroying
idolatry over the whole Roman empire; and it was so effectually broken
as to be ever after like the fragments of an earthen vessel, of no use
in themselves, and incapable of being ever united to any good purpose.

[Revelation 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rev 2:28</span></span>

And I will give him the morning star - He shall have the brightest and
most glorious empire, next to that of Christ himself. And it is certain
that the Roman empire under Constantine the Great was the brightest
emblem of the latter day glory which has ever yet been exhibited to the
world. It is well known that sun, moon, and stars are emblems, in
prophetic language, of empires, kingdoms, and states. And as the morning
star is that which immediately precedes the rising of the sun, it
probably here intends an empire which should usher in the universal sway
of the kingdom of Christ.

Ever since the time of Constantine the light of true religion has been
increasingly diffused, and is shining more and more unto the perfect
day.

[Revelation 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rev 2:29</span></span>

He that hath an ear - Let every Christian pay the strictest regard to
these predictions of Christ; and let them have a suitable influence on
his heart and life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 3](rev003)

</div>
