<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom008)  [Next](rom010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 9:0</span></span>

Paul expresses his great sorrow for the unbelief and obstinacy of the
Jews, [Rom 9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001). Whose high
privileges he enumerates, [Rom 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004),
[Rom 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005). Points out the manner in
which God has chosen to communicate the knowledge of his name to both
Jews and Gentiles; and how he deals, whether in judgment or mercy, with
individuals; and produces the cases of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Esau, and
Pharaoh, [Rom 9:6-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006). God shows mercy
and judgment as he thinks proper, and none have a right to find fault
with his proceedings, [Rom 9:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018). He
has the same power over the human race as the potter has over the clay,
[Rom 9:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021). The prophets predicted
the calling of the Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews, [Rom
9:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024). The Gentiles have attained to
the knowledge of God's method of saving sinners; while the Jews have not
attained this knowledge, [Rom 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030),
[Rom 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031). The reason why the Jews
have not attained the salvation provided for them in the Gospel, [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032), [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033).

To this and the tenth chapter, Dr. Taylor has prefixed the following
judicious summary: -

The apostle has largely proved in the preceding chapters, that the grace
of God extends to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews; and that the
dispensation of God's mercy was absolutely, and in itself, free to all
who believe, whether Jews or Gentiles, in opposition to the merit of any
works, or of conformity to any law whatever; and that the Gentiles have,
by faith, a good title to the blessings of God's covenant, to which
blessings the Jews cannot have a title any other way. Hitherto the
apostle has not considered the Jews as rejected, except in an indirect
way, but that they had the possibility of continuing in the Church, from
entering into which they should not attempt to prevent the Gentiles, but
allow them to be sharers in the mercies of God; and hence his language
is in sum this: Why may not believing Gentiles be admitted, pardoned,
and saved, as well as you?

But in this chapter, and the two following, the apostle considers the
reception of the Gentiles into the kingdom and covenant of God under the
notion of calling or invitation, and of election or choice: which shows
that he views the two parties in a light different to that in which he
had before placed them. The Gentiles he considers as invited into the
kingdom of God, and as chosen to be his people; and the Jews he
considers as left out and rejected; for as the main body of them had now
rejected the Gospel of Christ, he saw that God was about to unchurch
them, overturn their polity, destroy their temple, and disperse them
over the face of the earth. Thus he knew they would be accursed, or
anathematized from Christ, and reduced to a level with the heathen
nations of the world. And the event has proved that his declarations
were dictated by the Spirit of truth.

It is observable that, agreeably to his delicate manner of writing, and
his nice and tender treatment of his countrymen, he never mentions their
rejection - a subject extremely painful to his thoughts - otherwise than
in a wish that he himself were accursed from Christ for them, or to
prevent them from being accursed from Christ, ([Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)), till he comes to Romans 11,
where he has much to say in their favor, even considered, as at present,
rejected. But it is very evident that his arguments in this chapter rest
on the supposition that the main body of the Jewish nation would be cast
out of the visible kingdom of God; and it is for this reason that in
this and the two following chapters he considers the reception of any
people into the kingdom and covenant of God under the relative notion of
inviting and choosing, or of calling and election. The Jews were
rejected and reprobated; the Gentiles were chosen and called, or
elected. As this is most obviously the apostle's meaning, it is strange
that any should apply his doctrine to the particular and unconditional
reprobation and election of individuals.

It is upon this rejection of the Jews that the calling and election of
the Gentiles rest. If the Jews be not rejected, but are still the
visible Church and kingdom of God, then the Gentiles, according to the
most proper inference from the apostle's doctrine, have no right to the
blessings of the kingdom. Instead of being invited or called, they are
intruders at the heavenly feast; and this the unbelieving Jews labored
to prove, and thus unhinge the believing Gentiles by persuading them
that they were not duly taken into the Church of God; that the Jews
were, and ever must continue to be, the only Church and kingdom of God,
and that they could not be cast off so long as God was faithful to his
promise to Abraham; and that the Gentiles were most miserably deceived
when they supposed they were brought into that kingdom by faith in
Christ, whereas there was no way of entering it, or of being entitled to
its privileges, but by submitting to the law of Moses. This being the
fixed opinion of the Jews, and the ground on which they opposed the
Gentiles and endeavored to sap the foundation of their hope of salvation
from the Gospel of Christ, it was therefore a matter of the utmost
importance to be able to prove that the Jews, by rejecting Christ and
his Gospel, were themselves cast out of the Church, and this in a way
perfectly consistent with the truth of the promise made to Abraham. He
had slightly touched on this subject at the beginning of the third
chapter; but it would have broken in too much on the thread of his
discourse to have pursued the argument there, for which reason he
appears to have reserved it to this place, where he

\(1\) solemnly declares his tenderest affection for his countrymen, and
his real grief of heart for their infidelity and consequent rejection,
[Rom 9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001);

\(2\) Answers objections against this rejection, Romans 9:6-23;

\(3\) Proves the calling of the Gentiles from their own Scriptures, [Rom
9:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024);

\(4\) Gives the true state and reasons of the rejection of the Jews and
the calling of the Gentiles, [Rom 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)
to [Rom 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014);

\(5\) Proves the necessity of the apostolic mission to the Gentiles in
order to their salvation, [Rom
10:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014).

And all this was intended at once to vindicate the Divine dispensations;
to convince the infidel Jew; to satisfy the believing Gentile that his
calling or invitation into the Church of God was valid; to arm him
against the cavils and objections of the unbelieving Jews, and to
dispose the Christian Jew to receive and own the believing Gentile as a
member of the family and kingdom of God, by Divine right, equal to any
to which he himself could pretend. See Taylor's notes, p. 321, etc.

[Romans 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 9:1</span></span>

I say the truth in Christ, I lie not - This is one of the most solemn
oaths any man can possibly take. He appeals to Christ as the searcher of
hearts that he tells the truth; asserts that his conscience was free
from all guile in this matter, and that the Holy Ghost bore him
testimony that what he said was true. Hence we find that the testimony
of a man's own conscience, and the testimony of the Holy Ghost, are two
distinct things, and that the apostle had both at the same time.

As the apostle had still remaining a very awful part of his commission
to execute, namely, to declare to the Jews not only that God had chosen
the Gentiles, but had rejected them because they had rejected Christ and
his Gospel, it was necessary that he should assure them that however he
had been persecuted by them because he had embraced the Gospel, yet it
was so far from being a gratification to him that they had now fallen
under the displeasure of God, that it was a subject of continual
distress to his mind, and that it produced in him great heaviness and
continual sorrow.

[Romans 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 9:3</span></span>

For I could wish that myself were accursed from Christ - This and the
two preceding verses are thus paraphrased by Dr. Taylor: I am so far
from insisting on the doctrine (of the rejection of the Jews) out of any
ill-will to my countrymen, that I solemnly declare, in the sincerity of
my heart, without the least fiction or dissimulation - and herein I have
the testimony of my own conscience, enlightened and directed by the
Spirit of God - that I am so far from taking pleasure in the rejection
of the Jewish nation, that, contrariwise, it gives me continual pain and
uneasiness, insomuch that, as Moses formerly (when God proposed to cut
them off, and in their stead to make him a great nation, [Exo
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010)) begged that he himself should
rather die than that the children of Israel should be destroyed, [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032), so I could even wish that the
exclusion from the visible Church, which will happen to the Jewish
nation, might fall to my own share, if hereby they might be kept in it
and to this I am inclined by natural affection, for the Jews are my dear
brethren and kindred.

Very few passages in the New Testament have puzzled critics and
commentators more than this. Every person saw the perfect absurdity of
understanding it in a literal sense, as no man in his right mind could
wish himself eternally damned in order to save another, or to save even
the whole world. And the supposition that such an effect could be
produced by such a sacrifice, was equally absurd and monstrous.
Therefore various translations have been made of the place, and
different solutions offered. Mr. Wakefield says: "I see no method of
solving the difficulty in this verse, which has so exercised the
learning and ingenuity of commentators, but by the ευχομαι ειναι of
Homer, I profess myself to be; and he translates the passage in a
parenthesis, thus: (for I also was once an alien from Christ) on account
of my brethren, etc. But how it does appear that Saul of Tarsus was ever
an alien from Christ on account of his kinsmen, is to me perfectly
indiscernible. Let us examine the Greek text. Ηυχομην γαρ αυτος εγω
αναθεμα ειναι απο του Χριστου ὑπερτων αδελφων μου, 'For I did wish
myself to be an anathema From Christ (ὑπο, By Christ, as some ancient
MSS. read) for my brethren.' As ηυχομην is the 1st per. sing. of the
imperfect tense, some have been led to think that St. Paul is here
mentioning what had passed through his own mind when filled with the
love of God, he learned the rejection of the Jews; and that he only
mentions it here as a thing which, in the effusions of his loving zeal,
had been felt by him inconsiderately, and without any Divine afflatus
leading him to it; but that he does not intimate that now he felt any
such unreasonable and preposterous wish." I am afraid this is but ill
calculated to solve the difficulty.

The Greek word αναθεμα, anathema, properly signifies any thing devoted
to God, so as to be destroyed: it answers to the Hebrew חרם cherem,
which the Septuagint translate by it, and means either a thing or person
separated from its former state or condition, and devoted to
destruction. In this sense it is used, [Deu
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025), [Deu
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#026); [Jos
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#017), [Jos
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#018); [Jos
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#012).

It is certain that the word, both among the Hebrews and Greeks, was used
to express a person devoted to destruction for the public safety. In
Midrash hanneelam, in Sohar Chadash, fol. 15, Rabbi Chaijah the elder
said: "There is no shepherd found like unto Moses, who was willing to
lay down his life for the sheep; for Moses said, [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032), If thou wilt not pardon their
sin, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou hast written."
Such anathemas, or persons devoted to destruction for the public good,
were common among all ancient nations. See the case of M. Curtius and
Decius among the Romans. When a plague took place, or any public
calamity, it was customary to take one of the lowest or most execrable
of the people, and devote him to the Dii Manes or infernal gods. See
proofs in Schleusner, and see the observations at the end of the
chapter, ([Rom 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033) (note), point 1.).
This one circumstance is sufficient to explain the word in this place.
Paul desired to be devoted to destruction, as the Jews then were, in
order to redeem his countrymen from this most terrible excision. He was
willing to become a sacrifice for the public safety, and to give his
life to redeem theirs. And, as Christ may be considered as devoting them
to destruction, (see Matthew 24), Paul is willing that in their place
Christ should devote him: for I could wish myself, αναθεμα ειμαι απο
(or, as some excellent MSS. have it, ὑπο) του Χριστου, to be devoted By
Christ, to that temporal destruction to which he has adjudged the
disobedient Jews, if by doing so I might redeem them. This, and this
alone, seems to be the meaning of the apostle's wish.

[Romans 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 9:4</span></span>

Who are Israelites - Descendants of Jacob, a man so highly favored of
God, and from whom he received his name Israel - a prince of God, [Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028); from which name his descendants
were called Israelites, and separated unto God for his glory and praise.
Their very name of Israelites implied their very high dignity; they were
a royal nation; princes of the most high God.

The adoption - The Israelites were all taken into the family of God, and
were called his sons and first-born, [Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022); [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001); [Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009); [Hos
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001); and this adoption took place
when God made the covenant with them at Horeb.

The glory - The manifestation of God among them; principally by the
cloud and pillar, and the Shekinah, or Divine presence, appearing
between the cherubim over the mercy-seat. These were peculiar to the
Jews; no other nation was ever thus favored.

The covenants - The covenants made with Abraham, both that which relates
to the spiritual seed, and that which was peculiar to his natural
descendants, [Gal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016), [Gal
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017); which covenants were afterwards
renewed by Moses, [Deu 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001). Some
suppose that the singular is here put for the plural, and that by
covenants we are to understand the decalogue, which is termed ברית
berith, or covenant, [Deu 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013). But it
is more likely that the apostle alludes to the great covenant made with
Abraham, and to its various renewals and extensions at different times
afterwards, as well as to its twofold design - the grant of the land of
Canaan, and the rest that remains for the people of God.

The giving of the law - The revelation of God by God himself, containing
a system of moral and political precepts. This was also peculiar to the
Jews; for to no other nation had he ever given a revelation of his will.

The service - Λατρεια. The particular ordinances, rites, and ceremonies
of their religious worship, and especially the sacrificial system, so
expressive of the sinfulness of sin and the holiness of God.

The promises - The land of Canaan, and the blessings of the Messiah and
his kingdom; which promises had been made and often repeated to the
patriarchs and to the prophets.

[Romans 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 9:5</span></span>

Whose are the fathers - Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, the twelve
patriarchs, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, etc., etc., without
controversy, the greatest and most eminent men that ever flourished
under heaven. From these, is an uninterrupted and unpolluted line, the
Jewish people had descended; and it was no small glory to be able to
reckon, in their genealogy, persons of such incomparable merit and
excellency.

And of whom, as concerning the flesh Christ came - These ancestors were
the more renowned, as being the progenitors of the human nature of the
Messiah. Christ, the Messiah, κατα σαρκα, according to the flesh, sprang
from them. But this Messiah was more than man, he is God over all; the
very Being who gave them being, though he appeared to receive a being
from them.

Here the apostle most distinctly points out the twofold nature of our
Lord - his eternal Godhead and his humanity; and all the transpositions
of particles, and alterations of points in the universe, will not
explain away this doctrine. As this verse contains such an eminent proof
of the deity of Christ, no wonder that the opposers of his divinity
should strive with their utmost skill and cunning to destroy its force.
And it must be truly painful to a mind that has nothing in view but
truth, to see the mean and hypocritical methods used to elude the force
of this text. Few have met it in that honest and manly way in which Dr.
Taylor, who was a conscientious Arian, has considered the subject.
"Christ," says he, "is God over all, as he is by the Father appointed
Lord, King, and Governor of all. The Father hath committed all judgement
to the Son, [Joh 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022); has given all
things into his hands, [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018); he
is Lord of all, [Act 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036). God has
given him a name above every name, [Phi
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009); above every name that is named,
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and has put
all things (himself excepted, [Co1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027)) under his feet and given him to
be head over all things, [Eph 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#021),
[Eph 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#022). This is our Lord's supreme
Godhead. And that he is ευλογητος, blessed for ever, or the object of
everlasting blessing, is evident from [Rev
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012), [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013) : Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain to receive power - and blessing and honor be unto him that sitteth
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever. Thus it appears
the words may be justly applied to our blessed Lord." Notes, p. 329.
Yes, and when we take other scriptures into the account, where his
essential Godhead is particularly expressed, such as [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016), [Col
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017) : For by him were all things
created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or
powers: all things were created By him, and For him: and he is Before
all things, and By him do all things consist; we shall find that he is
not God by investiture or office, but properly and essentially such; for
it is impossible to convey in human language, to human apprehension, a
more complete and finished display of what is essential to Godhead,
indivisible from it, and incommunicable to any created nature, than what
is contained in the above verses. And while these words are allowed to
make a part of Divine revelation, the essential Godhead of Jesus Christ
will continue to be a doctrine of that revelation.

I pass by the groundless and endless conjectures about reversing some of
the particles and placing points in different positions, as they have
been all invented to get rid of the doctrine of Christ's divinity, which
is so obviously acknowledged by the simple text; it is enough to state
that there is no omission of these important words in any MS. or version
yet discovered.

[Romans 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 9:6</span></span>

Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect - A Jew might have
objected, as in [Rom 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003) : "Is not God
bound by his faithfulness to continue the Jews as his peculiar Church
and people, notwithstanding the infidelity of the major part of them? If
they are brought to a level with the Gentiles, will it not follow that
God hath failed in the performance of his promise to Abraham? [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007), [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008) : I will establish my covenant
between me and thee for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and thy seed after thee." To which it may be answered: This awful
dispensation of God towards the Jews is not inconsistent with the
veracity of the Divine promise; for even the whole body of natural born
Jews are not the whole of the Israelites comprehended in the promise.
Abraham is the father of many nations; and his seed is not only that
which is of the law, but that also which is of the faith of Abraham,
[Rom 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016), [Rom
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017). The Gentiles were included in
the Abrahamic covenant as well as the Jews; and therefore the Jews have
no exclusive right to the blessings of God's kingdom.

[Romans 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 9:7</span></span>

Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, etc. - Nor can they
conclude, because they are the natural descendants of Abraham, that
therefore they are all of them, without exception, the children in whom
the promise is to be fulfilled.

But, in Isaac shall thy seed be called - The promise is not confined to
immediate natural descent, but may be accomplished in any part of
Abraham's posterity. For Abraham had several sons besides Isaac, [Gen
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001), [Gen
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002), particularly Ishmael, who was
circumcised before Isaac was born, and in whom Abraham was desirous that
the promise should be fulfilled, [Gen
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018), and in him God might have
fulfilled the promise, had he so pleased; and yet he said to Abraham,
[Gen 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012) : Not in Ishmael, but in
Isaac, shall thy seed be called.

[Romans 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 9:8</span></span>

That is, They which are the children of the flesh - Whence it appears
that not the children who descend from Abraham's loins, nor those who
were circumcised as he was, nor even those whom he might expect and
desire, are therefore the Church and people of God; but those who are
made children by the good pleasure and promise of God, as Isaac was, are
alone to be accounted for the seed with whom the covenant was
established.

[Romans 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 9:9</span></span>

For this is the word of promise, etc. - That is, this is evidently
implied in the promise recorded [Gen
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010) : At this time I will come,
saith God, and exert my Divine power, and Sarah, though fourscore and
ten years old, shall have a son; which shows that it is the sovereign
will and act of God alone, which singles out and constitutes the
peculiar seed that was to inherit the promise made to Abraham.

It should be considered that the apostle, in this and the following
quotations, does not give us the whole of the text which he intends
should be taken into his argument, but only a hint or reference to the
passages to which they belong; directing us to recollect or peruse the
whole passage, and there view and judge of the argument.

That he is so to be understood appears from the conclusion he draws,
[Rom 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016) : So then, it is not of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy. In
his arguments, [Rom 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007), [Rom
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008), etc., he says not one word of
Abraham's willing Ishmael to be the seed in whom the promise might be
fulfilled; nor of Isaac's willing Esau; nor of Moses' willing and
interceding that the Israelites might be spared; nor of Esau's running
for venison; but by introducing these particulars into his conclusion,
he gives us to understand that his quotations are to be taken in
connection with the whole story, of which they are a part; and without
this the apostle's meaning cannot be apprehended.

The same may be said of his conclusion, [Rom
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018) : Whom he will he hardeneth:
hardeneth is not in his argument, but it is in the conclusion. Therefore
hardening is understood in the argument, and he evidently refers to the
case of Pharaoh. The generality of the Jews were well acquainted with
the Scripture, and a hint was sufficient to revive the memory of a whole
passage. - Taylor, p. 330.

[Romans 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 9:10</span></span>

And not only this - A Jew might object: "Ishmael was rejected, not by
the sovereign will of God, but because he was the son of the handmaid,
or bond-woman, and therefore unworthy to be the peculiar seed; but
observe, this was not the only limitation of the seed of Abraham with
regard to inheriting the promise, for when Rebecca was with child by
that one person of Abraham's issue to whom the promise was made, namely,
our father Isaac, she went to inquire of the Lord, [Gen
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022), [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023) : And the Lord said unto her,
Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of People shall be separated
from thy bowels; and the one People shall be stronger than the other
People; and the elder shall serve the younger. That is, the posterity of
the younger shall be a nation much more prosperous and happy than the
posterity of the elder.

[Romans 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 9:11</span></span>

For the children being not yet born - As the word children is not in the
text, the word nations would be more proper; for it is of nations that
the apostle speaks, as the following verses show, as well as the history
to which he refers.

Neither having done any good - To merit the distinction of being made
the peculiar people of God; nor evil, to deserve to be left out of this
covenant, and the distinguishing national blessings which it conferred;
that the purpose of God according to election might stand - that such
distinctions might appear to depend on nothing but God's free choice,
not of works, or any desert in the people or nations thus chosen; but of
the mere purpose of him who calleth any people he pleases, to make them
the depositories of his especial blessings, and thus to distinguish them
from all others.

[Romans 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 9:12</span></span>

The elder shall serve the younger - These words, with those of Malachi,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, are cited by the apostle to
prove, according to their typical signification, that the purpose of
God, according to election, does and will stand, not of works, but of
him that calleth; that is, that the purpose of God, which is the ground
of that election which he makes among men, unto the honor of being
Abraham's seed, might appear to remain unchangeable in him; and to be
even the same which he had declared unto Abraham. That these words are
used in a national and not in a personal sense, is evident from this:
that, taken in the latter sense they are not true, for Jacob never did
exercise any power over Esau, nor was Esau ever subject to him. Jacob,
on the contrary, was rather subject to Esau, and was sorely afraid of
him; and, first, by his messengers, and afterwards personally,
acknowledged his brother to be his lord, and himself to be his servant;
see [Gen 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#004); [Gen
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#008), [Gen
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#013). And hence it appears that
neither Esau nor Jacob, nor even their posterities, are brought here by
the apostle as instances of any personal reprobation from eternity: for,
it is very certain that very many, if not the far greatest part, of
Jacob's posterity were wicked, and rejected by God; and it is not less
certain that some of Esau's posterity were partakers of the faith of
their father Abraham.

From these premises the true sense of the words immediately following,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, [Mal
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002), [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003), fully appears; that is, that what
he had already cited from Moses concerning the two nations, styled by
the names of their respective heads, Jacob and Esau, was but the same in
substance with what was spoken many years after by the Prophet Malachi.
The unthankful Jews had, in Malachi's time, either in words or in their
heart, expostulated with God, and demanded of him wherein he had loved
them? I have loved you, saith the Lord: yet ye say, Wherein hast thou
loved us? [Mal 1:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002). To this the Lord
answers: Was not Esau Jacob's brother? Yet I loved Jacob and hated Esau,
and laid his mountains and his heritage waste for the dragons of the
wilderness. Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished, but we will return
and build the desolate places; thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall
build, but I will throw down; and they shall call them, The border of
wickedness, and, The people against whom the Lord hath indignation for
ever. And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The Lord will be
magnified from the border of Israel.

1\. It incontestably appears from these passages that the prophet does
not speak at all of the person of Jacob or Esau, but of their respective
posterities. For it was not Esau in person that said, We are
impoverished; neither were his mountains nor heritage laid waste. Now,
if the prophet speaks neither of the person of the one nor of the person
of the other, but of their posterity only, then it is evident that the
apostle speaks of them in the same way.

2\. If neither the prophet nor the apostle speaks of the persons of
Jacob or Esau, but of their posterity, then it is evident that neither
the love of God to Jacob, nor the hatred of God to Esau, were such,
according to which the eternal states of men, either in happiness or
misery, are to be determined; nor is there here any Scriptural or
rational ground for the decree of unconditional personal election and
reprobation, which, comparatively, modern times have endeavored to build
on these scriptures. For,

1\. It is here proved that Esau is not mentioned under any personal
consideration, but only as the head of his posterity.

2\. The testimony of Scripture amply proves that all Esau's posterity
were not, even in this sense, reprobated; nor all Jacob's posterity
elected.

3\. Neither does that service, or subjugation to Jacob, which the Divine
oracle imposed on Esau, import any such reprobation as some contend for;
as the servant may be elected, while the master himself is in a state of
reprobation.

4\. Were it even granted that servitude did import such a reprobation,
yet it is certain that Esau, in person, never did serve Jacob.

5\. Nor does the hatred of God against Esau import any such reprobation
of the person of Esau, because it is demonstrable that it related, not
to Esau personally, but to his posterity.

6\. The scope of the apostle's reasoning is to show that God is the
sovereign of his own ways, has a right to dispense his blessings as he
chooses, and to give salvation to mankind, not in the ways of their
devising, but in that way that is most suitable to his infinite wisdom
and goodness.

Therefore,

1\. He chose the Jewish people from all others, and revealed himself to
them. Thus they were the elect, and all the nations of mankind
reprobate.

2\. When the fullness of the time came he revealed himself also to the
Gentiles, who gladly received the Gospel: and the Jews rejecting it,
were cast off. Thus the elect became reprobate, and the reprobate,
elect.

3\. He published to all mankind that the pardon of sin could and should
be obtained Only by faith in his Son Jesus, and not by any obedience to
any law. And the Jews, the descendants of Jacob, who rejected this way
of salvation, became precisely like the Edomites, the descendants of
Esau; they builded, but God pulled down; their mountains and heritage
are Now laid waste for the dragons of the wilderness; and they properly
may now be called the border of wickedness, a people against whom the
Lord hath indignation for ever: they have rejected the Lord that bought
them, and so have brought upon themselves swift destruction.

7\. That no personal, absolute, eternal reprobation of Esau can have
been intended, we learn from this; that he was most amply reconciled to
his brother, who had so deeply wronged and offended him, by depriving
him of his birthright and his blessing: and his having forgiven his
brother his trespasses, was no mean proof that God had forgiven him. See
our Lord's words, [Mat 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#014). Therefore
there can be assigned no competent ground of his damnation, much less of
his personal reprobation from all eternity.

8\. And were such a personal reprobation intended, is it not shocking to
suppose that the God of endless mercy, in whose sight his pious parents
had found favor, should inform them, even before their child was born,
that he had absolutely consigned him, by an irrevocable decree to
eternal damnation? A message of such horrid import coming immediately
from the mouth of God, to a tender, weak, and delicate woman, whose hour
of travail with two children was just at hand, could not have failed to
produce abortion, and destroy her life. But the parents perfectly
understood their God, and saw no decree of reprobation in his message;
two manner of nations are in thy womb - and the elder shall serve the
younger.

9\. There is no reason, worthy the most wise and gracious God, why he
should make known to the world such a thing concerning Esau, who was yet
unborn, that he had reprobated him from all eternity. Such a revelation
could be of no spiritual advantage or edification to mankind, but rather
of a malignant influence, as directly occasioning men to judge hardly of
their Maker, and to conceive of him as no faithful Creator; as having no
care, no love, no bowels of compassion towards the workmanship of his
own hands. See Goodwin's Exposition: and see my notes on Genesis 27
(note).

[Romans 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 9:14</span></span>

What shall we say then? - To what conclusion shall we come on the facts
before us? Shall we suggest that God's bestowing peculiar privileges in
this unequal manner, on those who otherwise are in equal circumstances,
is inconsistent with justice and equity? By no means. Whatever God does
is right, and he may dispense his blessings to whom and or what terms he
pleases.

[Romans 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 9:15</span></span>

For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy, etc. - The words of God to
Moses, [Exo 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019), show that God has a
right to dispense his blessings as he pleases; for, after he had
declared that he would spare the Jews of old, and continue them in the
relation of his peculiar people, when they had deserved to have been cut
off for their idolatry, he said: I will make all my goodness pass before
thee; and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy; and I will have compassion on whom
I will have compassion. As if he had said: I will make such a display of
my perfections as shall convince you that my nature is kind and
beneficent; but know, that I am a debtor to none of my creatures. My
benefits and blessings are merely from my own good will: nor can any
people, much less a rebellious people, challenge them as their due in
justice or equity. And therefore I now spare the Jews; not because
either you, who intercede for them or they themselves have any claim
upon my favor, but of my own free and sovereign grace I choose to show
them mercy and compassion. I will give my salvation in my own way and on
my own terms. He that believeth on my Son Jesus shall be saved; and he
that believeth not shall be damned. This is God's ultimate design; this
purpose he will never change; and this he has fully declared in the
everlasting Gospel. This is the grand Decree of reprobation and
election.

[Romans 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 9:16</span></span>

So then it is not of him that willeth, etc. - I conclude, therefore,
from these several instances, that the making or continuing any body of
men the peculiar people of God, is righteously determined; not by the
judgment, hopes, or wishes of men, but by the will and wisdom of God
alone. For Abraham judged that the blessing ought, and he willed,
desired, that it might be given to Ishmael; and Isaac also willed,
designed, it for his first-born, Esau: and Esau, wishing and hoping that
it might be his, readily went, ran a hunting for venison, that he might
have the blessing regularly conveyed to him: but they were all
disappointed - Abraham and Isaac, who willed, and Esau who ran: for God
had originally intended that the blessing of being a great nation and
distinguished people should, of his mere good pleasure, be given to
Isaac and Jacob, and be confirmed in their posterity; and to them it was
given. And when by their apostasy they had forfeited this privilege, it
was not Moses' willing, nor any prior obligation God was under, but his
own sovereign mercy, which continued it to them.

[Romans 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 9:17</span></span>

For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh - Instead of showing the Israelites
mercy he might justly have suffered them to have gone on in sin, till he
should have signalized his wisdom and justice in their destruction; as
appears from what God in his word declares concerning his dealings with
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, [Exo 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#015),
[Exo 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016) : For now, saith the Lord, I
had stretched forth my hand, (in the plague of boils and blains), and I
had smitten thee and thy people with the pestilence; and thou hadst (by
this plague) been cut off from the earth; (as thy cattle were by the
murrain); but in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up - I have
restored thee to health by removing the boils and blains, and by
respiting thy deserved destruction to a longer day, that I may, in thy
instance, give such a demonstration of my power in thy final overthrow,
that all mankind may learn that I am God, the righteous Judge of all the
earth, the avenger of wickedness. See this translation of the original
vindicated in my notes on [Exo 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#015)
(note), [Exo 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016) (note); and, about
the hardening of Pharaoh, see the notes on those places where the words
occur in the same book.

[Romans 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 9:18</span></span>

Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will - This is the apostle's
conclusion from the facts already laid down: that God, according to his
own will and wisdom, in perfect righteousness, bestows mercy; that is to
say, his blessings upon one part of mankind, (the Jews of old, and the
Gentiles of the present time), while he suffers another part (the
Egyptians of old, and the Jews of the present day) to go on in the abuse
of his goodness and forbearance, hardening themselves in sin, till he
brings upon them a most just and exemplary punishment, unless this be
prevented by their deep repentance and general return to God through
Jesus the promised, the real Messiah.

[Romans 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 9:19</span></span>

Why doth he yet find fault? - The apostle here introduces the Jew making
an objection similar to that in [Rom
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007) : If the truth of God hath more
abounded through my lie unto his glory, that is, if God's faithfulness
is glorified by my wickedness, why yet am I also judged as a sinner? Why
am I condemned for that which brings so much glory to him? The question
here is: If God's glory be so highly promoted and manifested by our
obstinacy, and he suffers us to proceed in our hardness and infidelity,
why does he find fault with us, or punish us for that which is according
to his good pleasure?

[Romans 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 9:20</span></span>

Nay but, O man, who art thou - As if he had said: Weak, ignorant man,
darest thou retort on the infinitely good and righteous God? Reflect on
thyself; and tell me, after thou hast abused the grace of God, and
transgressed his laws, wilt thou cavil at his dispensations? God hath
made, created, formed the Jewish nation; and shall the thing formed,
when it hath corrupted itself, pretend to correct the wise and gracious
Author of its being, and say, Why hast thou made me thus? Why hast thou
constituted me in this manner? Thou hast done me wrong in giving me my
being under such and such conditions.

Old John Goodwin's note on this passage is at least curious: "I scarce
(says he) know any passage of the Scripture more frequently abused than
this. When men, in the great questions of predestination and
reprobation, bring forth any text of Scripture which they conceive makes
for their notion, though the sense which they put upon it be ever so
uncouth and dissonant from the true meaning of the Holy Ghost, yet, if
any man contradict, they frequently fall upon him with - Nay but, O man;
who art thou? As if St. Paul had left them his heirs and successors in
the infallibility of his spirit! But when men shall call a solid answer
to their groundless conceits about the meaning of the Scriptures, a
replying against God, it savours more of the spirit who was seen falling
like lightning from heaven, than of His, who saw him in this his fall."

[Romans 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 9:21</span></span>

Hath not the potter power over the clay - The apostle continues his
answer to the Jew. Hath not God shown, by the parable of the potter,
[Jer 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001), etc., that he may justly
dispose of nations, and of the Jews in particular, according as he in
his infinite wisdom may judge most right and fitting; even as the potter
has a right, out of the same lump of clay, to make one vessel to a more
honorable and another to a less honorable use, as his own judgment and
skill may direct; for no potter will take pains to make a vessel merely
that he may show that he has power to dash it to pieces? For the word
came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Arise, and go down to the
potter's house, and there I will cause thee to hear my words. Then I
went down to the potter's house, and, behold, he wrought a work upon the
wheels. And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hands of
the potter: so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the
potter to make it. It was not fit for the more honorable place in the
mansion, and therefore he made it for a less honorable place, but as
necessary for the master's use there, as it could have been in a more
honorable situation. Then the word of the Lord came to me, saying, O
house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? Behold, as the
clay is in the potter's hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that
nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at what instant I
shall speak concerning a nation - to build and to plant it; is it do
evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the
good wherewith I said I would benefit them. The reference to this
parable shows most positively that the apostle is speaking of men, not
individually, but nationally; and it is strange that men should have
given his words any other application with this scripture before their
eyes.

[Romans 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 9:22</span></span>

What if God, willing to show his wrath - The apostle refers here to the
case of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and to which he applies Jeremiah's
parable of the potter, and, from them, to the then state of the Jews.
Pharaoh and the Egyptians were vessels of wrath - persons deeply guilty
before God; and by their obstinate refusal of his grace, and abuse of
his goodness, they had fitted themselves for that destruction which the
wrath, the vindictive justice of God, inflicted, after he had endured
their obstinate rebellion with much long-suffering; which is a most
absolute proof that the hardening of their hearts, and their ultimate
punishment, were the consequences of their obstinate refusal of his
grace and abuse of his goodness; as the history in Exodus sufficiently
shows. As the Jews of the apostle's time had sinned after the similitude
of the Egyptians, hardening their hearts and abusing his goodness, after
every display of his long-suffering kindness, being now fitted for
destruction, they were ripe for punishment; and that power, which God
was making known for their salvation, having been so long and so much
abused and provoked, was now about to show itself in their destruction
as a nation. But even in this case there is not a word of their final
damnation; much less that either they or any others were, by a sovereign
decree, reprobated from all eternity; and that their very sins, the
proximate cause of their punishment, were the necessary effect of that
decree which had from all eternity doomed them to endless torments. As
such a doctrine could never come from God, so it never can be found in
the words of his apostle.

[Romans 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 9:23</span></span>

And that he might make known - God endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath:

1\. To show his wrath, and to make his power known. And also,

2\. That he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of
mercy.

Which he had afore prepared unto glory - The Jews were fitted for
destruction long before; but the fittest time to destroy them was after
he had prepared the believing Gentiles unto glory. For the rod of the
Messiah's strength was to be sent out of Zion, [Psa
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002). The Jewish nation was to supply
the first preachers of the Gospel, and from Jerusalem their sound was to
go forth into all the earth. Therefore the Jewish state, notwithstanding
its corruptions, was to be preserved till the Messiah came, and even
till the Gospel preached by the apostles had taken deep root in the
Gentile world. Another thing which rendered the time when the Jewish
polity was overthrown the most proper, was this, because then the
immediate occasion of it was the extensiveness of the Divine grace. They
would not have the Gentiles admitted into the Church of God; but
contradicted, and blasphemed, and rejected the Lord that bought them:
thus, then, the extensiveness of the Divine grace occasioned their
infidelity, [Rom 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033); [Rom
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003); [Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011), [Rom
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012), [Rom
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015), [Rom
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028), [Rom
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#030). Thus the Jews were diminished
by that abundance of grace which has enriched the Gentiles. And so the
grace of God was illustrated; or, so God made known the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy - the apostles and primitive believers
among the Jews, and the Gentile world, which received the Gospel by the
preaching of the apostles and their successors.

[Romans 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 9:24</span></span>

Even us, whom he hath called - All the Jews and Gentiles who have been
invited by the preaching of the Gospel to receive justification by faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ, and have come to the Gospel feast on this
invitation.

[Romans 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 9:25</span></span>

As he saith also in Osee - It is a cause of not a little confusion, that
a uniformity in the orthography of the proper names of the Old and New
Testaments has not been preserved. What stranger to our sacred books
would suppose that the Osee above meant the Prophet Hosea, from whom,
[Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023), this quotation is taken: I
will have mercy on her that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to
them which were not my people, Thou art my people. The apostle shows
that this calling of the Gentiles was no fortuitous thing, but a firm
purpose in the Divine mind, which he had largely revealed to the
prophets; and by opposing the calling of the Gentiles, the Jews in
effect renounced their prophets, and fought against God.

[Romans 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 9:26</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, etc. - These quotations are taken out of
Hosea, [Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010), where (immediately
after God had rejected the ten tribes, or kingdom of Israel, [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009), then saith God, Call his name
Lo-ammi; for ye are not my people, and I will not be your God), he adds,
yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the
sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered: and it shall come to pass,
that in the place in which it was said unto them, Ye are not my people;
there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God. As
if he had said: The decrease of numbers in the Church, by God's utterly
taking away the ten tribes, ([Hos
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006)), shall be well supplied by what
shall afterwards come to pass, by calling the Gentiles into it. They,
the rejected Jews, which had been the people of God, should become a
Lo-ammi - not my people. On the contrary, they, the Gentiles, who had
been a Lo-ammi - not my people, should become the children of the living
God. Again, [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023) : I will sow her
(the Jewish Church) unto me in the earth, (alluding probably to the
dispersion of the Jews over all the Roman empire; which proved a
fruitful cause of preparing the Gentiles for the reception of the
Gospel), and, or moreover, I will have mercy upon her, the body of the
believing Gentiles, that had not obtained mercy. See Taylor.

[Romans 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 9:27</span></span>

Esaias also crieth - The apostle pursues his argument, which had for its
object the proof that God, for their infidelity, had rejected the great
body of the Jews, and that but a few of them would embrace the Gospel,
and be saved from that besom of destruction which was now coming to
sweep them and their state away. Dr. Taylor paraphrases this and the
following verses thus: And that but a small remnant of the Jews shall
now be taken into the Church, is agreeable to former dispensations; for
the Prophet Isaiah expressly declares concerning the Israelites, [Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022), [Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023) : Though the number of the
children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, (for the promise to
Abraham has been amply fulfilled), only a remnant shall be saved; the
consumption decreed shall overflow in righteousness. For the Lord God of
hosts shall make a consumption, even determined in the midst of all the
land.

[Romans 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 9:28</span></span>

For he will finish the work, and cut it short, etc. - These appear to be
forensic terms, and refer to the conclusion of a judicial proceeding;
the Lord has tried and found them guilty, and will immediately execute
upon them the punishment due to their transgressions.

[Romans 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 9:29</span></span>

And as Esaias said before - What God designs to do with the Jews at
present, because of their obstinacy and rebellion, is similar to what he
has done before, to which the same prophet refers, [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009) : Except the Lord of hosts had
left unto us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we
should have been like unto Gomorrha: i.e. had not God, who commands and
overrules all the powers in heaven and earth, in mercy preserved a very
small remnant, to keep up the name and being of the nation, it had been
quite cut off and extinct, as Sodom and Gomorrha were. Thus we learn
that it is no new thing with God to abandon the greatest part of the
Jewish nation, when corrupt, and to confine his favor and blessing to a
righteous, believing few.

Instead of remnant, שריד sarid, both the Septuagint and the apostle have
σπερμα, a seed, intimating that there were left just enough of the
righteous to be a seed for a future harvest of true believers. So the
godly were not destroyed from the land; some remained, and the harvest
was in the days of the apostles.

[Romans 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 9:30</span></span>

What shall we say then? - What is the final conclusion to be drawn from
all these prophecies, facts, and reasonings? This: That the Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, etc. This, with the succeeding
verses, together with what belongs to the same subject in the beginning
of the following chapter, I have explained at large in the notes on [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), to which I must refer the
reader; and shall content myself in this place with Dr. Taylor's general
paraphrase. We may suppose the apostle to express himself to the
following effect. Thus I have vindicated the rejection of the Jews and
the calling of the Gentiles, with regard to the Divine veracity and
justice. Now let us turn our thoughts to the true reason and state of
the affair considered in itself. And, in the first place, what just
notion ought we to have of the calling of the Gentiles and the rejection
of the Jews? I answer: The true notion of the calling or inviting of the
Gentiles is this: whereas they had no apprehension of being reinstated
in the privileges of God's peculiar kingdom, and consequently used no
endeavors to obtain that blessing, yet, notwithstanding, they have
attained to justification, to the remission of sins, and the privileges
of God's people: not on account of their prior worthiness and obedience,
but purely by the grace and mercy of God, received by faith on their
part. And so, by embracing the scheme of life published by the Gospel,
they are adopted into the family and Church of God. Thus the Gentiles
are called or invited.

[Romans 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 9:31</span></span>

But Israel, which followed after - But the Jews, who have hitherto been
the people of God, though they have been industrious in observing a rule
by which they supposed they could secure the blessings of God's peculiar
kingdom, yet have not come up to the true and only rule by which those
blessings can be secured.

[Romans 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">rom 9:32</span></span>

Wherefore? - And where lies their mistake? Being ignorant of God's
righteousness - of his method of saving sinners by faith in Christ, they
went about to establish their own righteousness - their own method of
obtaining everlasting salvation. They attend not to the Abrahamic
covenant, which stands on the extensive principles of grace and faith;
but they turn all their regards to the law of Moses. They imagine that
their obedience to that law gives them a right to the blessings of the
Messiah's kingdom. But, finding that the Gospel sets our special
interest in God and the privileges of his Church on a different footing,
they are offended, and refuse to come into it.

[Romans 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">rom 9:33</span></span>

As it is written, Behold, I lay in Sion - Christ, the Messiah, is become
a stone of stumbling to them: and thus what is written in the prophecy
of Isaiah is verified in their case, [Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014); [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016) : Behold, I lay in Sion, i.e. I
shall bring in my Messiah; but he shall be a widely different person
from him whom the Jews expect; for, whereas they expect the Messiah to
be a mighty secular prince, and to set up a secular kingdom, he shall
appear a man of sorrows and acquainted with griefs; and redeem mankind,
not by his sword or secular power, but by his humiliation, passion, and
death. Therefore they will be offended at him and reject him, and think
it would be reproachful to trust in such a person for salvation.

And whosoever believeth on him - But so far shall any be from confusion
or disappointment who believes in Christ; that on the contrary, every
genuine believer shall find salvation - the remission of sins here, and
eternal glory hereafter. See the notes on [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016), and [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017) (note), and Dr. Taylor's
paraphrase and notes.

1\. On the subject of vicarious punishment, or rather the case of one
becoming an anathema or sacrifice for the public good, in illustration
of [Rom 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003), I shall make no apology
for the following extracts, taken from an author whose learning is vast,
and whose piety is unblemished.

"When mankind lost sight of a beneficent Creator, the God of purity, and
consecrated altars to the sun, the moon, the stars; to demons; and to
hero gods, under the names of Moloch, Ashtaroth and Baalim; these
objects of their worship led them to the most horrid acts of cruelty,
and to every species of obscenity; even their sons and their daughters
they burnt in the fire to their gods, more especially in seasons of
distress. Such was the conduct of the king of Moab; for, when he was
besieged in his capital, and expected he should fall into the hands of
his enemies, he took his eldest son, who should have reigned in his
stead, and offered him for a burnt offering on the wall.

With these facts thus related from the Scriptures, all accounts, ancient
and modern, exactly correspond. Homer, who it must be recollected wrote
more than nine hundred years before the Christian era, although he
describes chiefly the common sacrifices of quadrupeds, yet gives one
account of human victims. But in succeeding generations, when it was
conceived that one great and most malignant spirit was the proper object
of their fear, or that subordinate provincial gods, equally malignant,
nesciaque humanis precibus mansuescere corda, disposed of all things in
our world, men bound their own species to the altar, and in
circumstances of national distress presented such as they valued most,
either their children or themselves. Herodotus informs us that, when the
army of Xerxes came to the Strymon, the magi offered a sacrifice of
white horses to that river. On his arrival at the Scamander, the king
ascended the citadel of Priam; and having surveyed it, he ordered a
thousand oxen to be sacrificed to the Trojan Minerva. But on other
occasions he chose human victims; for we are informed that, when, having
passed the Strymon, he reached the nine ways, he buried alive nine young
men and as many virgins, natives of the country. In this he followed the
example of his wife, for she commanded fourteen Persian children, of
illustrious birth, to be offered in that manner to the deity who reigns
beneath the earth. Thus, in the infancy of Rome we see Curtius, for the
salvation of his country, devoting himself to the infernal gods, when,
as it appears, an earthquake occasioned a deep and extensive chasm in
the forum, and the augurs had declared that the portentous opening would
never close until what contributed most to the strength and power of the
Romans should be cast into it; but that by such a sacrifice they would
obtain immortality for their republic. When all men were at a loss how
to understand this oracle, M. Curtius, armed as for battle, presented
himself in the forum, and explained it thus: 'What is more valuable to
Rome than her courage and her arms?' So saying, he urged forward his
impetuous steed, and buried himself in the abyss. His grateful
countrymen admired his fortitude, and attributed the increasing splendor
of their state to the sacrifice he made. Animated by this example,
Decius, in the war between Rome and Latium, having solemnly offered
himself as an expiatory sacrifice, rushed single into the thickest ranks
of the astonished Latins, that by his death he might appease the anger
of the gods, transfer their indignation to the enemy, and secure the
victory to Rome. Conspectus ab utroque acie aliquanto augustior humano
visu, sicut Caelo missus, piaculum omnis deorum irae, qui pestem ab suis
aversam in hostes ferret.

Here we see distinctly marked the notion of vicarious suffering, and the
opinion that the punishment of guilt may be transferred from the guilty
to the innocent. The gods call for sacrifice - the victim bleeds -
atonement is made - and the wrath of the infernal powers falls in its
full force upon the enemy. Thus, while Themistocles at Salamine was
offering sacrifice, three captives, the sons of Sandance, and nephews to
Xerxes, all distinguished for their beauty, elegantly dressed and
decked, as became their birth, with ornaments of gold, being brought on
board his galley, the augur, Euphrantides, observing at the very instant
a bright flame ascending from the altar, whilst one was sneezing on the
right, which he regarded as a propitious omen, he seized the hand of
Themistocles, and commanded that they should all be sacrificed to
Bacchus, (ωμηστῃ Διονυσῳ - cruel and relentless Bacchus! Homer has the
same expression), predicting, on this occasion, safety and conquests to
the Greeks. Immediately the multitude with united voices called on the
god, and led the captive princes to the altar, and compelled
Themistocles to sacrifice them.

So when Aeneas was to perform the last kind office for his friend
Pallas, he sacrificed (besides numerous oxen, sheep, and swine) eight
captives to the infernal gods. In this he followed the example of
Achilles, who had caused twelve Trojans of high birth to bleed by the
sacerdotal knife, over the ashes of his friend Patroclus.

A hundred feet in length, a hundred wide,

The glowing structure spreads on every side,

High on the top the manly course they lay,

And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay;

Achilles covered with their fat the dead,

And the piled victims round the body spread;

Then jars of honey and of fragrant oil

Suspends around, low bending o'er the pile.

Four sprightly coursers with a deadly groan

Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown

Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,

Fell two, selected to attend their lord:

The last of all, and horrible to tell,

Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell;

On these the rage of fire victorious preys,

Involves and joins them in one common blaze.

Smeared with the bloody rites, he stands on high,

And calls the spirit with a cheerful cry,

All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost

Hear, and exult on Pluto's dreary coast.

Pope's Homer, Il. xxiii. ver. 203

How much was it to be lamented, that even civilized natures should
forget the intention for which sacrifices were originally instituted!
The bad effects, however, would not have been either so extensive or so
great, had they not wholly lost the knowledge of Jehovah; and taken, as
the object of their fear, that evil and apostate spirit whose name, with
the utmost propriety is called Apollyon, or the destroyer, and whose
worship has been universally diffused at different periods among all the
nations of the earth.

The practice of shedding human blood before the altars of their gods was
not peculiar to the Trojans and the Greeks; the Romans followed their
example. In the first ages of their republic they sacrificed children to
the goddess Mania; in later periods, numerous gladiators bled at the
tombs of the patricians, to appease the manes of the deceased. And it is
particularly noticed of Augustus, that, after the taking of Perusia, he
sacrificed on the ides of March, three hundred senators and knights to
the divinity of Julius Caesar.

The Carthaginians, as Diodorus Siculus informs us, bound themselves by a
solemn vow to Chronus that they would sacrifice to him children selected
from the offspring of their nobles; but in process of time they
substituted for these the children of their slaves, which practice they
continued, till, being defeated by Agathocles, tyrant of Sicily, and
attributing their disgrace to the anger of the god, they offered two
hundred children, taken from the most distinguished families in
Carthage; besides which, three hundred citizens presented themselves,
that by their voluntary death they might render the deity propitious to
their country. The mode of sacrificing these children was horrid in the
extreme, for they were cast into the arms of a brazen statue, and from
thence dropped into a furnace, as was practised among the first
inhabitants of Latium. It was probably in this manner the Ammonites
offered up their children to Moloch. The Pelasgi at one time sacrificed
a tenth part of all their children, in obedience to an oracle.

The Egyptians, in Heliopolis, sacrificed three men every day to Juno.
The Spartans and Arcadians scourged to death young women; the latter to
appease the wrath of Bacchus, the former to gratify Diana. The Sabian
idolaters in Persia offered human victims to Mithras, the Cretans to
Jupiter, the Lacedemonians and Lusitanians to Mars, the Lesbians to
Bacchus, the Phocians to Diana, the Thessalians to Chiron.

The Gauls, equally cruel in their worship, sacrificed men, originally to
Eso and Teutate, but latterly to Mercury, Apollo, Mars, Jupiter, and
Minerva. Caesar informs us that, whenever they thought themselves in
danger, whether from sickness, or after any considerable defeat in war,
being persuaded that unless life be given for life the anger of the gods
can never be appeased, they constructed wicker images of enormous hulk,
which they filled with men, who were first suffocated with smoke, and
then consumed by fire. For this purpose they preferred criminals; but
when a sufficient number of these could not be found, they supplied the
deficiency from the community at large.

The Germans are said to have differed from the Gauls in having no
druids, and in being little addicted to the service of the altar. Their
only gods were the sun, Vulcan, and the moon; yet, among the objects of
their worship was Tuisco their progenitor and Woden the hero of the
north. It is true that neither Caesar nor Tacitus say any thing of their
shedding blood in sacrifice; yet the probability is, that, like the
Saxons and other northern nations, they not only offered blood, but took
their choicest victims from the human race.

In Sweden the altars of Woden smoked incessantly with blood: this flowed
most abundantly at the solemn festivals celebrated every ninth year at
Upsal. Then the king, attended by the senate and by all the great
officers about his court, entered the temple, which glittered on all
sides with gold, and conducted to the altar nine slaves, or in time of
war nine captives. These met the caresses of the multitude, as being
about to avert from them the displeasure of the gods, and then submitted
to their fate: but in times of distress more noble victims bled; and it
stands upon record that when Aune their king was ill, he offered up to
Woden his nine sons, to obtain the prolongation of his life.

The Danes had precisely the same abominable customs. Every ninth year,
in the month of January, they sacrificed ninety-nine men, with as many
horses, dogs, and cocks; and Hacon, king of Norway, offered his own son
to obtain from Woden the victory over Harold, with whom he was at war.

In Russia the Slavi worshipped a multitude of gods, and erected to them
innumerable altars. Of these deities Peroun, that is, the thunderer, was
the supreme, and before his image many of their prisoners bled. Their
god of physic, who also presided over the sacred fires, shared with him;
and the great rivers, considered as gods, had their portion of human
victims, whom they covered with their inexorable waves. But Suetovid,
the god of war, was the god in whom they most delighted; to him they
presented annually, as a burnt offering, three hundred prisoners, each
on his horse; and when the whole was consumed by fire, the priests and
people sat down to eat and drink till they were drunk. It is worthy of
remark, that the residence of Suetovid was supposed to be in the sun.

To this luminary the Peruvians, before they were restrained by their
Incas, sacrificed their children.

Among the sacred books of the Hindoos, the Ramayuna demands particular
attention, because of its antiquity, the extent of country through which
it is revered, and the view which it exhibits of the religion, doctrine,
mythology, customs, and manners of their remote progenitors.

In this we have a golden age of short duration, succeeded by a state of
universal wickedness and violence, which continued till the deity,
incarnate, slew the oppressors of the human race, and thus restored the
reign of piety and virtue.

This poem contains a description of the Ushwamedha, or most solemn
sacrifice of the white horse, instituted by Swuymbhoo, that is, by the
self-existent. At the celebration of this festival, the monarch, as the
representative of the whole nation, acknowledged his transgressions; and
when the offerings were consumed by the sacrificial fire, he was
considered as perfectly absolved from his offenses. Then follows a
particular account of a human sacrifice, in which the victim,
distinguished for filial piety, for resignation to his father's will,
and for purity of heart, was bound by the king himself and delivered to
the priest; but at the very instant when his blood was to have been
shed, this illustrious youth was by miracle delivered; and the monarch,
as the reward of his intended sacrifice, received virtue, prosperity,
and fame.

It is well known that the Brahmins have in all ages had their human
victims, and that even in our days thousands have voluntarily perished
under the wheels of their god Jaghernaut." - Townsend's character of
Moses, p. 76.

Though in the preceding notes I have endeavored to make every point as
clear and plain as possible; yet it may be necessary, in order to see
the scope of the apostle's design more distinctly, to take a general
survey of the whole. No man has written with more judgment on this
epistle than Dr. Taylor, and from his notes I borrow the principal part
of the following observations.

The principal thing that requires to be settled in this chapter is, what
kind of election and reprobation the apostle is arguing about: whether
election, by the absolute decree and purpose of God, to eternal life;
and reprobation, by a like absolute decree, to eternal misery; or only
election to the present privileges and external advantages of the
kingdom of God in this world; and reprobation, or rejection, as it
signifies the not being favored with those privileges and advantages. I
think it demonstrably clear that it is the latter election and rejection
the apostle is discoursing on, and not the former; as the following
considerations appear to me to demonstrate.

I. The subject of the apostle's argument is manifestly such privileges
as are enumerated, [Rom 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004), [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005) : Who are Israelites, to whom
pertains the adoption, etc. From these privileges he supposes the Jews
had fallen, or would fall; or, that for a long time they would be
deprived of the benefit of them. For it is with regard to the loss of
those privileges that he was so much concerned for his brethren, his
kinsmen according to the flesh, [Rom
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002), [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003). And it is with reference to their
being stripped of these privileges that he vindicates the word and
righteousness of God, [Rom 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024). Not
as though the word of God had taken no effect, or failed, etc.; proving
that God, according to his purpose of election, was free to confer them
upon any branch of Abraham's family: consequently, those privileges were
the singular blessings which by the purpose of God according to
election, not of works, but of him that calleth, were conferred upon
Jacob's posterity. But those privileges were only such as the whole body
of the Israelites enjoyed in this world, while they were the Church and
people of God, and such privileges as they might afterwards lose, or of
which they might be deprived; therefore the election of Jacob's
posterity to those privileges was not an absolute election to eternal
life.

II\. Agreeably to the purpose of God according to election, it was said
unto Rebecca, The elder shall serve the younger, meaning the posterity
of the elder and the younger; [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023) : The Lord said unto her, two
Nations are in thy womb, and two manner of People shall be separated
from thy bowels; and the one People shall be stronger than the other
People; and the elder shall serve the younger. These are the words which
signify the purpose of God according to election: therefore the election
refers to Jacob's posterity, or the whole nation of Israel. But all the
nation of Israel were not absolutely elected to eternal life: therefore
the purpose of God according to election referred to temporal and not to
eternal blessings, and was a privilege of which they might be deprived.

III\. Agreeably to the purpose of God according to election, it was said
to Rebecca, The elder shall serve the younger; but to serve, in
Scripture, never meant to be eternally damned in the world to come:
consequently the opposite blessing, bestowed upon the posterity of the
younger, could not be eternal salvation, but certain privileges in this
life; therefore the purpose according to election refers to those
privileges, and the servitude does not imply everlasting perdition.

IV\. The election the apostle speaks of is not of works, [Rom
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011), but of the mere will of God, who
calls and invites, and refers to no qualifications in the persons thus
elected and called. But in no part of the sacred writings is final
salvation said to be given to any who are not qualified by holiness to
receive and enjoy it; therefore election to eternal glory cannot be what
the apostle speaks of in this epistle.

V. The election of which the apostle speaks took place, first in Abraham
and his seed, before his seed was born; and then (secluding Ishmael and
all his posterity) in Isaac and his seed before they were born. And
then, secluding Esau and all his posterity, in Jacob and his seed before
they were born. But the Scripture no where represents eternal life as
bestowed upon any family or race of men in this manner; therefore this
election mentioned by the apostle cannot be an election unto eternal
life.

VI\. Vessels of mercy, [Rom 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023), are
manifestly opposed to vessels of wrath, [Rom
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022). The vessels of mercy are the
whole body of the Jews and Gentiles, who were called or invited into the
kingdom of God under the Gospel, [Rom
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024); consequently, the vessels of
wrath are the whole body of the unbelieving Jews. So in [Rom
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030), [Rom
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031), the whole body of believing
Gentiles, who, according to God's purpose of election, had attained
justification, are opposed to the whole body of the Israelites, who came
short of it. But men shall not be received into eternal life or
subjected to eternal damnation at the last day in collective bodies, but
according as particular persons in those bodies have acted well or ill;
therefore, this election is not of these particular bodies unto eternal
life, etc.

VII\. Whoever carefully peruses the ninth, tenth, and eleventh chapters,
will find that those who have not believed, [Rom
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#031), are the present rejected Jews,
or that Israel to whom blindness hath happened in part, [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025); the same who fell, and on whom
God hath shown severity, [Rom 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022);
the same with the natural branches whom God spared not, [Rom
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021); who were broken off from the
olive tree, [Rom 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020), [Rom
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#019), [Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017); who were cast away, [Rom
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015); who were diminished and fallen,
[Rom 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012); who had stumbled, [Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011); who were a disobedient and,
gainsaying people, [Rom 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021); who,
being ignorant of God's righteousness, went about to establish their
own, [Rom 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003); because they sought
righteousness, not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law,
[Rom 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032), and therefore had not
attained to the law of righteousness, [Rom
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031); the same people spoken of in all
these places, are the vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, [Rom
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022), and the same for whom Paul had
great heaviness and continual sorrow of heart, [Rom
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002), [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003); - in short, they are the
unbelieving nation, or people of Israel; and it is with regard to the
reprobation or rejection of this people that he is arguing and
vindicating the truth, justice, and wisdom of God in this ninth chapter.

Now, if we turn back and review those three chapters, we shall find that
the apostle, [Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001), heartily
desired and prayed that those same reprobated and rejected people of
Israel might be saved; he affirms that they had not stumbled so as to
fall finally and irrecoverably, [Rom
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011); that they should have again a
fullness, [Rom 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012); that they should
be received again into the Church, [Rom
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016); that a holiness still belonged
to them, [Rom 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016); that if they did
not still abide in unbelief, they should be grafted into their own olive
tree again, [Rom 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#023), [Rom
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024); that blindness had happened
unto them only for a time, till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in,
[Rom 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025); and then he proves from
Scripture, that all Israel - all those nations at present under
blindness, shall be saved, [Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026),
[Rom 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#027); that, as touching the
(original) election, they were still beloved for the fathers', the
patriarchs', sake, [Rom 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#028); that,
in their case, the gifts and calling of God were without repentance,
[Rom 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029); that through our (the
believing Gentiles') mercy, they shall at length obtain mercy, [Rom
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#031). All these several things are
spoken of that Israel, or the body of people concerning whose rejection
the apostle argues in the ninth chapter. And therefore the rejection
which he there argues about cannot be absolute reprobation to eternal
damnation, but to their being, as a nation, stripped of those honors and
privileges of God's peculiar Church and kingdom in this world, to which,
at a certain future period, they shall again be restored.

VIII\. Once more: whoever carefully peruses those three chapters will
find that the people who in times past believed not God, but have Now
obtained mercy through the unbelief of the Jews, [Rom
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#030), are the whole body of the
believing Gentiles; the same who were cut out of the olive tree which is
wild by nature, and were grafted, contrary to nature, into the good
olive tree, [Rom 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024), [Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017); the same to whom God hath shown
goodness, [Rom 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022); the World that
was reconciled, [Rom 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#015); the
Gentiles who were enriched by the diminishing of the Jews, [Rom
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012); to whom salvation came through
their fall, [Rom 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011); the Gentiles
who had attained to righteousness, (justification), [Rom
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030); who had not been God's people,
nor believed; but now were his people, beloved, and children of the
living God, [Rom 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025), [Rom
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026); even US whom he hath called, not
of the Jews only, out also of the Gentiles, [Rom
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024), who are the vessels of mercy, on
whom God has made known the riches of his glory, [Rom
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023); the vessels made unto honor,
[Rom 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021). He speaks of the same body
of men in all these places; namely, of the believing Gentiles
principally, but not excluding the small remnant of the believing Jews,
who were incorporated with them. And it is this body of men, whose
calling and election he is proving, in whose case the purpose of God
according to election stands good, [Rom
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011), and who are the children of the
promise that are counted for the seed, [Rom
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008) : these are the election, or the
elect.

Now, concerning this called or elect body of people, or any particular
person belonging to this body, the apostle writes thus, [Rom
11:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020) : Well, because of unbelief,
they (the Jews) were broken off, (reprobated, rejected), and thou
standest (in the Church among God's called and elect) by faith; be not
high minded, but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, (the
Jews), take heed, lest he also spare not thee, (the Gentiles.) Behold
therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them (the Jews) which
fell, severity; but towards thee (believing Gentiles) goodness, if thou
continue in his goodness; otherwise thou also shalt be cut off,
rejected, reprobated. This proves that the calling, and election, for
which the apostle is arguing in the ninth chapter, is not absolute
election unto eternal life, but to the present privileges of the Church
- the honors and advantages of God's peculiar people; which election,
through unbelief and misimprovement, may be rendered void and come to
nothing. See Dr. Taylor, p. 330, etc.

From thus carefully considering the apostle's discourse, and taking in
his scope and design, and weighing the different expressions he uses, in
connection with the Scripture facts and Scripture phrases employed in
describing those facts, we must be fully convinced that the doctrines of
eternal, absolute, unconditional election and reprobation have no place
here, and that nothing but a pre-established creed, and a total
inattention to the apostles scope and design, could ever have induced
men to bend these scriptures to the above purpose, and thus to endeavor
to establish as articles of faith, doctrines which, far from producing
glory to God in the highest, and peace and good will among men, have
filled the Church of God with contention, set every man's sword against
his brother, and thus done the work of Apollyon in the name of Christ.
If men will maintain these and such like for Scriptural doctrines, it is
but reasonable to request that it be done in the spirit of the Gospel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 10](rom010)

</div>
