<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom002)  [Next](rom004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 3:0</span></span>

The apostle points out the peculiar privileges of the Jews, [Rom
3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md). But shows that they, also, as
well as the Gentiles, had sinned, and forfeited all right and title to
God's especial favor, [Rom 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009.md). The
corrupt state of all mankind, [Rom
3:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md). All the world is guilty
before God, and none can be justified by the works of the law, [Rom
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019.md), [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020.md). God's Mercy in providing
redemption for a lost world, by Jesus Christ, [Rom
3:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021.md). This excludes boasting on the
part both of Jew and Gentile; provides salvation through faith for both;
and does not set aside, but establishes the law, [Rom
3:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027.md).

Dr. Taylor observes: - "In the preceding chapter the apostle has carried
his argument to the utmost length: what remains is to keep the Jew in
temper, to fix his convictions, and to draw the grand conclusion.

"He has shown that the Jews were more wicked than the Gentiles; that
their possession of the law, circumcision, and outward profession of
relation to God, were no ground of acceptance with him. This was in
effect to say that the Jews had forfeited their right to the privileges
of God's peculiar people, and that they were as unworthy to be continued
in the Church as the Gentiles were to be taken into it; and
consequently, in order to their enjoying the privileges of the Church
under the Messiah, they stood in need of a fresh display of grace, which
if they rejected, God would cast them out of the vineyard. The apostle
was sensible that the Jew would understand what he said in this sense;
and that it must be very irritating to him to hear that his law,
circumcision, and all his external advantages, were utterly insufficient
to procure him the favor of God. This at once stripped him of all his
peculiar honors and privileges; and the apostle, who had often argued
with his countrymen on these points, knew what they would be ready to
say on this subject; and, therefore, introduces a dialogue between
himself and a Jew, in which he gives him leave to answer and defend
himself. In this dialogue the apostle undoubtedly refers to the
rejection of the Jews, which he considers at large in the ninth, tenth,
and eleventh chapters. After the dialogue is finished, he resumes his
argument, and proves, by their own Scriptures, that the Jews were guilty
as well as other men; and that no part of mankind could have any right
to the blessings of God's kingdom by any works which they had performed,
but merely through the propitiatory sacrifice offered by Christ; and
that this, far from destroying the law, was just the thing that the law
required, and by which its claims were established.

"The sum and force of the apostle's argument is this: All sorts of men,
Jews as well as Gentiles, have sinned; therefore, none of them can lay
claim to the blessings of his kingdom on the ground of obedience. The
Jew, therefore, stands as much in need of God's grace to give him a
title to those blessings as the Gentile; and, consequently, the Gentile
has as good a title as the Jew. And, when all are in the same
circumstances, it is perfectly absurd for any to pretend to engross it
to themselves, exclusively of others, who are only as bad as they.

"Thus the apostle solidly proves that we, Gentiles, through faith alone,
have a good and firm title to all the blessings of the Gospel covenant -
election, adoption, pardon, privileges, ordinances, the Holy Spirit, and
the hope of eternal life."

As the nine first verses are a dialogue between the apostle and a Jew, I
shall prefix the speakers to their respective questions and answers, to
make the whole the more intelligible to the reader.

[Romans 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 3:1</span></span>

Jew. What advantage then hath the Jew? Or what profit is there of
circumcision? - As if he had said: You lately allowed, ([Rom
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025).md), that circumcision verily
profited; but if circumcision, or our being in covenant with God, raises
us no higher in the Divine favor than the Gentiles; if the virtuous
among them are as acceptable as any of us; nay, and condemn our nation
too, as no longer deserving the Divine regards; pray tell me, wherein
lies the superior honor of the Jew; and what benefit can arise to him
from his circumcision, and being vested in the privileges of God's
peculiar people?

[Romans 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 3:2</span></span>

Apostle. Much every way - The Jews, in reference to the means and
motives of obedience, enjoy many advantages beyond the Gentiles; and,
principally, because to them were committed the oracles of God - that
revelation of his will to Moses and the prophets, containing a treasure
of excellencies, with which no other part of the world has been favored;
though they have most grievously abused these privileges.

[Romans 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 3:3</span></span>

Jew. For what - τι γαρ, What then, if some did not believe, etc. If some
of the Jewish nation have abused their privileges, and acted contrary to
their obligations, shall their wickedness annul the Promise which God
made to Abraham, that he would, by an everlasting covenant, be a God to
him and to his seed after him? [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007.md). Shall God, therefore, by
stripping the Jews of their peculiar honor, as you intimate he will,
falsify his promise to the nation, because some of the Jews are bad men?

[Romans 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 3:4</span></span>

Apostle. God forbid - μη γενοιτο, Let it not be, far from it, by no
means. Yea, let God be true, but every man a liar, etc. We must ever
maintain that God is true, and that if, in any case, his promise appear
to fail, it is because the condition on which it was given has not been
complied with; which is the sense of what is written, [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004.md) : I acknowledge my sin, and
condemn myself that the truth of thy promise ([Sa2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#015.md), [Sa2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016).md) to establish my house and throne
for ever, may be vindicated when thou shalt execute that dreadful
threatening, ([Sa2 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010).md), that the
sword shall never depart from my house, which I own I have brought upon
myself by my own iniquity. Should any man say that the promise of God
had failed toward him, let him examine his heart and his ways, and he
will find that he has departed out of that way in which alone God could,
consistently with his holiness and truth, fulfill the promise.

[Romans 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 3:5</span></span>

Jew. But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God - May
we not suppose that our unrighteousness may serve to commend and
illustrate the mercy of God in keeping and fulfilling to us the promise
which he made to our forefathers? The more wicked we are, the more his
faithfulness to his ancient promise is to be admired. And if so, would
not God appear unjust in taking vengeance and casting us off?

I speak as a man - I feel for the situation both of myself and my
countrymen, and it is natural for one to speak as I do.

[Romans 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 3:6</span></span>

Apostle. God forbid - μη γενοιτο, by no means. God cannot be unjust;
were he unjust, he could not be qualified to judge the world, nor
inflict that punishment on the unfaithful Jews, to which I refer.

[Romans 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 3:7</span></span>

Jew. For if the truth of God, etc. - But to resume my reasoning ([Rom
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005).md): If the faithfulness of God in
keeping his promise made to our fathers is, through our unfaithfulness,
made far more glorious than it otherwise would have been, why should we
then be blamed for that which must redound so much to the honor of God?

[Romans 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 3:8</span></span>

Apostle. And not rather, etc. - And why do you not say, seeing you
assume this ground, that in all cases we should do wickedly, because
God, by freely pardoning, can so glorify his own grace? This is a most
impious sentiment, but it follows from your reasoning; it has, indeed,
been most injuriously laid to the charge of us apostles, who preach the
doctrine of free pardon, through faith, without the merit of works; but
this is so manifest a perversion of the truth that a just punishment may
be expected to fall on the propagators of such a slander.

[Romans 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 3:9</span></span>

Jew. What then? - After all, have not we Jews a better claim to the
privileges of the kingdom of God than the Gentiles have?

Apostle. No, in no wise - For I have already proved that both Jews and
Gentiles are under the guilt of sin; that they are equally unworthy of
the blessings of the Messiah's kingdom; and that they must both,
equally, owe their salvation to the mere mercy of God. From this, to the
end of the 26th verse, the apostle proceeds to prove his assertion, that
both Jews and Gentiles were all under sin; and, that he might enforce
the conviction upon the heart of the Jew, he quotes his own Scriptures,
which he acknowledged had been given by the inspiration of God, and
consequently true.

[Romans 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 3:10</span></span>

As it is written - See [Psa 14:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001.md);
from which this and the two following verses are taken.

There is none righteous - This is true, not only of the Jews, but of the
Gentiles; of every soul of man, considered in his natural and practical
state, previously to his receiving the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ.
There is no righteous principle in them, and, consequently, no righteous
act can be expected from them; see on [Rom
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012) (note.md). God himself is
represented as looking down from heaven to see if there were any that
feared and sought after him; and yet he, who cannot be deceived, could
find none! And therefore we may safely conclude there was none to be
found.

[Romans 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 3:12</span></span>

They are all gone out of the way - παντες εξεκλιναν, they have all
diverged from the right way, they have either abandoned or corrupted the
worship of God: the Jews, in forsaking the law and the prophets, and the
Gentiles, in acting contrary to the law which God had written on their
hearts. And the departure of both from the truth proves the evil
propensity of human nature in general.

They are together become unprofitable - ηχρειωθησαν. They are useless,
good for nothing; or, as the Hebrew has it, נאלחו neelachu, they are
putrid: he views the whole mass of mankind as slain and thrown together,
to putrefy in heaps. This is what is termed the corruption of human
nature; they are infected and infectious. What need of the mercy of God
to save from such a state of degeneracy!

There is none that doeth good - In [Rom
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md) it is said, There is none
righteous; here, There is none that doeth good: the first may refer to
the want of a righteous principle; the second, to the necessary
consequence of the absence of such a principle. If there be no
righteousness within, there will be no acts of goodness without.

[Romans 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 3:13</span></span>

Their throat is an open sepulchre - This and all the following verses to
the end of the 18th are found in the Septuagint, but not in the Hebrew
text; and it is most evident that it was from this version that the
apostle quoted, as the verses cannot be found in any other place with so
near an approximation to the apostle's meaning and words. The verses in
question, however, are not found in the Alexandrian MS. But they exist
in the Vulgate, the Ethiopic, and the Arabic. As the most ancient copies
of the Septuagint do not contain these verses, some contend that the
apostle has quoted them from different parts of Scripture; and later
transcribers of the Septuagint, finding that the 10th, 11th, and 12th,
verses were quoted from the xivth Psalm, imagined that the rest were
found originally there too, and so incorporated them in their copies,
from the apostle's text.

Their throat is an open sepulchre - By their malicious and wicked words
they bury, as it were, the reputation of all men. The whole of this
verse appears to belong to their habit of lying, defamation, slandering,
etc., by which they wounded, blasted, and poisoned the reputation of
others.

[Romans 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 3:14</span></span>

Whose mouth is full of cursing, etc. - They never speak but in profane
oaths, blasphemies, and malice.

[Romans 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 3:15</span></span>

Their feet are swift to shed blood - They make use of every means in
their power to destroy the reputation and lives of the innocent.

[Romans 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 3:16</span></span>

Destruction and misery are in their ways - destruction is their work,
and Misery to themselves and to the objects of their malice is the
consequence of their impious and murderous conduct.

[Romans 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 3:17</span></span>

And the way of peace have they not known - They neither have peace in
themselves, nor do they suffer others to live in quiet: they are
brooders and fomenters of discord.

[Romans 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 3:18</span></span>

There is no fear of God before their eyes - This completes their bad
character; they are downright atheists, at least practically such. They
fear not God's judgments, although his eye is upon them in their evil
ways. There is not one article of what is charged against the Jews and
Gentiles here that may not be found justified by the histories of both,
in the most ample manner. And what was true of them in those primitive
times is true of them still. With very little variation, these are the
evils in which the vast mass of mankind delight and live. Look
especially at men in a state of warfare; look at the nations of Europe,
who enjoy most of the light of God; see what has taken place among them
from 1792 to 1814; see what destruction of millions, and what misery of
hundreds of millions, have been the consequence of Satanic excitement in
fallen, ferocious passions! O Sin, what hast thou done! How many myriads
of souls hast thou hurried, unprepared, into the eternal world! Who,
among men or angels, can estimate the greatness of this calamity! this
butchery of souls! What widows, what orphans, are left to deplore their
sacrificed husbands and parents, and their own consequent wretchedness!
And whence sprang all this? From that, whence come all wars and
fightings; the evil desires of men; the lust of dominion; the insatiable
thirst for money; and the desire to be sole and independent. This is the
sin that ruined our first parents, expelled them from paradise, and
which has descended to all their posterity; and proves fully,
incontestably proves, that we are their legitimate offspring; the fallen
progeny of fallen parents; children in whose ways are destruction and
misery; in whose heart there is no faith; and before whose eyes there is
nothing of the fear of God.

[Romans 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 3:19</span></span>

What things soever the law saith - That the word law, here, does not
mean the pentateuch, is evident from the preceding quotations, not one
of which is taken from that work. Either the term law must here mean the
Jewish writings in general, or that rule of moral conduct which God had
given to both Jews and Gentiles: to the former in their own Scriptures;
to the latter in that law written in their hearts by his own Spirit, and
acknowledged in their written codes, and in their pleadings in every
civil case. Now, according to this great law, this rule of moral
conduct, whether given in a written revelation, as to the Jews, or by
the secret inspiration of his Spirit, as in certain cases to the
Gentiles, every mouth must be stopped, and the whole world, πας ο
κοσμος, both Jews and Gentiles, stand convicted before God: for all
mankind have sinned against this law.

[Romans 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 3:20</span></span>

Therefore, by the deeds of the law - On the score of obedience to this
moral law, there shall no flesh, ου πασα σαρξ, no human being, be
justified; none can be accepted in the sight of God. And why? Because by
the law is the knowledge of sin: it is that which ascertains what sin
is; shows how men have deviated from its righteous demands; and
sentences them to death because they have broken it. Thus the law is
properly considered as the rule of right; and, unless God had given some
such means of discovering what Sin is, the darkened heart of man could
never have formed an adequate conception of it. For, as an acknowledged
straight edge is the only way in which the straightness or crookedness
of a line can be determined, so the moral obliquity of human actions can
only be determined by the law of God; that rule of right which proceeds
from his own immaculate holiness.

[Romans 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 3:21</span></span>

But now the righteousness of God - God's method of saving sinners is now
shown, by the Gospel, to be through his own mere mercy, by Christ Jesus;
without the law - without any right or claim which might result from
obedience to the law; and is evidently that which was intended by God
from the beginning; for it is witnessed by the law and the prophets -
the rites and ceremonies of the one, and the preachings and predictions
of the others, all bearing testimony to the great design of God, and to
the absolute necessity there was for the sacrifice and salvation which
God has provided.

[Romans 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 3:22</span></span>

Even the righteousness of God - That method of saving sinners which is
not of works, but by faith in Christ Jesus; and it is not restrained to
any particular people, as the law and its privileges were, but is unto
all mankind in its intention and offer, and becomes effectual to them
that believe; for God hath now made no difference between the Jews and
the Gentiles.

[Romans 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 3:23</span></span>

For all have sinned : - And consequently are equally helpless and
guilty; and, as God is no respecter of persons, all human creatures
being equally his offspring, and there being no reason why one should be
preferred before another, therefore his endless mercy has embraced All.

And come short of the glory of God - και υστερουνται της δοξης του θεου
These words have been variously translated. Failed of attaining the
glory of God: Have not been able to bring glory to God: Stand in need of
the glory, that is, the mercy of God. The simple meaning seems to be
this: that all have sinned, and none can enjoy God's glory but they that
are holy; consequently both Jews and Gentiles have failed in their
endeavors to attain it, as, by the works of any law, no human being can
be justified.

[Romans 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 3:24</span></span>

Being justified freely by his grace - So far from being able to attain
the glory of God by their obedience, they are all guilty: and, to be
saved, must be freely pardoned by God's grace; which is shown to them
who believe, through the redemption, απολυτρωσεως, the ransom price,
which is in the sacrifice of Christ Jesus. The original is compounded of
απο, from, and λυτροω, I redeem, and properly means the price laid down
for the redemption of a captive. Comprehendit haec Christi απολυτρωσις,
quicquid is docuit, fecit et passus est, eo consilio, ut homines malis
liberati, praecipue peccato, malorum fonte immunes, veram felicitatem
adipiscerentur. - Rosenmuller. This redemption of Christ comprehends
whatsoever he taught, did, or suffered, in order to free men from evil;
especially to free them from sin, the source of evils; that they might
attain true felicity. And that it here means the liberation purchased by
the blood-shedding of Christ, is evident from [Eph
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007.md) : We have Redemption, απολυτρωσιν
δια του αιματος αυτου, Through His Blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace. See also [Col
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014.md), where the same words are found.

Λυτρα according to Suidas, is μισθος, η τα παρεχομενα υπερ ελευθεριας,
επι τω λυτρωσασθαι βαρβαρων δουλειας A reward; or the price given to be
redeemed from the slavery of the barbarians. Schleusner, under the word
απολυτρωσις, says, Negari quidem non potest, hanc vocem proprie notare
redemptionem ejus, qui captivus detinetur, sive bello, sive alio captus
sit modo, quae fit per pretti solutionem; quo sensu verbum απολυτροω
legitur haud raro in Scripp. Graecis. No man certainly can deny that
this word properly means the redemption of a captive, (whether he may
have been taken in war or in any other way), which is procured by the
payment of a price. That the word also means any deliverance, even where
no price is paid down, nobody will dispute; but that it means redemption
by a price laid down, and the redemption of the soul by the price of the
death of Christ, the above scriptures sufficiently prove.

[Romans 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 3:25</span></span>

Whom God hath set forth - Appointed and published to be a propitiation,
ιλαστηριον, the mercy-seat, or place of atonement; because the blood of
the sacrifice was sprinkled on and before that, in order to obtain
remission of sin, punishment, etc. The mercy-seat was the lid or cover
of the ark of the covenant, where God was manifest in the symbol of his
presence, between the cherubim; therefore the atonement that was made in
this place was properly made to God himself. See the note on [Luk
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md).

Through faith in his blood - This shows what we are to understand both
by the απολυτρωσις, redemption, and the ιλαστηριον, propitiation; viz.
that they refer to the sacrificial death of Jesus Christ, as the
atonement made, and the price paid down, for the redemption of the souls
of men.

To declare his righteousness - εις ενδειξις, for the manifestation of
his righteousness; his mercy in saving sinners, by sending Jesus Christ
to make an atonement for them; thereby declaring his readiness to remit
all past transgressions committed both by Jews and Gentiles, during the
time in which his merciful forbearance was exercised towards the world;
and this applies to all who hear the Gospel now: to them is freely
offered remission of all past sins.

[Romans 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 3:26</span></span>

To declare, I say, at this time - To manifest now, by the dispensation
of the Gospel, his righteousness, his infinite mercy; and to manifest it
in such a way, that he might still appear to be the just God, and yet
the justifier, the pardoner, of him who believeth in Jesus. Here we
learn that God designed to give the most evident displays both of his
justice and mercy. Of his justice, in requiring a sacrifice, and
absolutely refusing to give salvation to a lost world in any other way;
and of his mercy, in providing The sacrifice which his justice required.
Thus, because Jesus was an atonement, a ransom price, for the sin of the
world, therefore God can, consistently with his justice, pardon every
soul that believeth in Jesus. This is the full discovery of God's
righteousness, of his wonderful method of magnifying his law and making
it honorable; of showing the infinite purity of his justice, and of
saving a lost world.

Hitherto, from the ninth verse, the apostle had gone on without
interruption, proving that Jew and Gentile were in a state of guilt and
condemnation, and that they could be saved only by the redemption that
is in Christ Jesus. The Jew, finding his boasted privileges all at
stake, interrupts him, and asks: -

[Romans 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 3:27</span></span>

Jew. Where is boasting, then? - 'η καυχησις, This glorying of ours. Have
we nothing in which we can trust for our acceptance with God? No merit
of our own? Nothing accruing to us from our circumcision and being in
covenant with God.

Apostle, It is excluded - εξεκλεισθη, It is shut out; the door of heaven
is shut against every thing of this kind.

Jew. By what law? - By what rule, doctrine, or reason is it shut out? by
the law of works? The rule of obedience, which God gave to us, and by
which obedience we are accepted by him?

Apostle. Nay - Not by the law of works; glorying is not cut off or shut
out by that; it stands in full force as the rule of life; but you have
sinned and need pardon. The law of works grants no pardon, it requires
obedience, and threatens the disobedient with death. But all glorying in
the expectation of salvation, through your own obedience, is excluded by
the law, the doctrine of faith: faith alone, in the mercy of God,
through the propitiation made by the blood of Jesus, ([Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025).md), is that by which you can be
justified, pardoned, and taken into the Divine favor.

[Romans 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 3:28</span></span>

Therefore we conclude, etc. - Seeing these things cannot be denied,
viz., that all have sinned: that all are guilty, that all are helpless:
that none can deliver his own soul, and that God, in his endless mercy,
has opened a new and living way to the holiest by the blood of Jesus,
[Heb 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#019.md), [Heb
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020.md), etc: therefore we, apostles and
Christian teachers, conclude, λογιζομεθα, prove by fair, rational
consequence, that a man - any man, is justified - has his sins blotted
out, and is received into the Divine favor, by faith in Christ's blood,
without the deeds of the law, which never could afford, either to Jew or
Gentile, a ground for justification, because both have sinned against
the law which God has given them, and, consequently, forfeited all right
and title to the blessings which the obedient might claim.

[Romans 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 3:29</span></span>

Is he the God of the Jews only? - Do not begin to suppose that because
you cannot be justified by the works of the law and God has in his mercy
found out a new method of saving you, that therefore this mercy shall
apply to the Jews exclusively. Is not God the maker, preserver, and
redeemer, also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also, as much as of
the Jews; for all have equally sinned and there is no reason, if God be
disposed to show mercy at all, that he should prefer the one to the
other; since they are all equally guilty, sinful, and necessitous.

[Romans 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 3:30</span></span>

Seeing it is one God - επιπερ εις ο θεος. This has been rendered, Seeing
God is one. It however makes little difference in the sense: the
apostle's meaning most evidently is, it is one and the same God who made
both Jews and Gentiles, who shall justify - pardon, the circumcision -
the believing Jews, by faith; and the uncircumcision - the believing
Gentiles, by the same faith; as there is but one Savior and one
atonement provided for the whole.

It is fanciful to suppose that the apostle has one meaning when he says,
εκ πιστεως, By faith, and a different meaning when he says, δια της
πιστεως, Through faith. Both the prepositions are to be understood in
precisely the same sense; only the addition of the article της, in the
last case, extends and more pointedly ascertains the meaning. It is one
and the same God who shall justify the believing Jews by faith; and the
believing Gentiles δια της πιστεως, by That Same faith.

[Romans 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 3:31</span></span>

Do we then make void the law through faith? -

1\. By law here we may understand the whole of the Mosaic law, in its
rites and ceremonies; of which Jesus Christ was the subject and the end.
All that law had respect to him; and the doctrine of faith in Christ
Jesus, which the Christian religion proclaimed, established the very
claims and demands of that law, by showing that all was accomplished in
the passion and death of Christ, for, without shedding of blood, the law
would allow of no remission; and Jesus was that Lamb of God which was
slain from the foundation of the world, in whose blood we have
redemption, even the remission of sins.

2\. We may understand, also, the moral law, that which relates to the
regulation of the manners or conduct of men. This law also was
established by the doctrine of salvation by faith; because this faith
works by love, and love is the principle of obedience: and whosoever
receives salvation through faith in Christ, receives power to live in
holy obedience to every moral precept; for such are God's workmanship,
created anew in Christ Jesus, unto good works; in which they find it
their duty and their interest incessantly to live.

1\. In the notes on the preceding chapter, I have, in general, followed
the plan of Dr. Taylor, and especially in regard to its dialogue form,
but I have often differed much from that very learned and judicious man,
in the application of many words and doctrines. He cannot allow that the
death of Christ should be considered as a price paid down for the
salvation of men and, I confess, I cannot understand the apostle in any
other way. Nor can I see the weight of many of his observations, nor the
force of his conclusions, on any other ground than this, that the
passion and death of Christ were an atonement made to Divine justice in
the behalf of man; and that it is through the merit of that great
sacrifice that God forgives sin. Nor can I see any reason why such great
stress should be laid on faith, but as that lays hold on and takes up
the sacrifice of Christ as a ransom price for the redemption of the soul
from the thraldom and misery of sin and Satan.

2\. This chapter contains a fine and striking synopsis of the whole
Christian system. The wretched state of man is awfully exhibited, from
the 10th to the 18th verse; and the plan of salvation, in the 24th,
25th, and 26th verses. A pious writer calls these the Catechism of
Christian Righteousness. The following points in this catechism are
worthy of high consideration - viz. How is God glorified in us, and we
in him? - By his Grace. What does his grace work in us? - True holiness.
Upon what motive? - Because it is pleasing to him. By whom does he give
us salvation? - By Jesus Christ. How has Christ obtained this for us? -
By redeeming us. What price did he give? - His Blood. What does his
blood effect? - It reconciles us to God. How is it applied? - By Faith.
Who has given this victim of reconciliation? - God the Father. Why did
he choose these means? - To confound the false righteousness of the
Gentiles; to abolish the Figurative righteousness of the Jews; and to
establish his own. What does this grace of God perform? - It pardons sin
and purifies the heart. For whom is this designed? - For all mankind,
both Jews and Gentiles. To whom are these blessings actually
communicated? - To all who repent, turn from their sin, and believe on
the Lord Jesus. Why did not God make known this grand method of
salvation sooner?

1\. To make it the more valued:

2\. To show his fidelity in the performance of his promises: and,

3\. To make known the virtue and efficacy of the blood of Christ, which
sanctifies the present, extends its influence to the past, and continues
the availing sacrifice and way of salvation to all future ages.

3\. On considering this glorious scheme of salvation, there is great
danger, lest, while we stand amazed at what was done For us, we neglect
what must be done In us. Guilt in the conscience and sin in the heart
ruin the man. Pardon in the conscience and Christ in the heart save the
soul. Christ has done much to save us, and the way of salvation is made
plain; but, unless he justify our conscience from dead works, and purify
our hearts from all sin, his passion and death will profit us nothing.
While we boast in Christ Jesus, let us see that our rejoicing, καυχησις,
our boasting, be this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the
grace of God, we have our conversation in the world, [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012.md).

4\. We must beware of Antinomianism; that is, of supposing that, because
Christ has been obedient unto death, there is no necessity for our
obedience to his righteous commandments. If this were so, the grace of
Christ would tend to the destruction of the law, and not to its
establishment. He only is saved from his sins who has the law of God
written in his heart; and he alone has the law written in his heart who
lives an innocent, holy, and useful life. Wherever Christ lives he
works: and his work of righteousness will appear to his servants, and
its effect will be quietness and assurance for ever. The life of God in
the soul of man is the principle which saves and preserves eternally.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 4](rom004.md)

</div>
