<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom009)  [Next](rom011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 10:0</span></span>

The apostle expresses his earnest desire for the salvation of the Jews,
[Rom 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001.md). Having a zeal for God, but
not according to knowledge, they sought salvation by works, and not by
faith in Christ, [Rom 10:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002.md). The
righteousness which is of the law described, [Rom
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005.md). That which is by faith described
also, [Rom 10:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006.md). He that believes
and calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved, [Rom
10:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011.md). What is necessary to
salvation, believing, hearing, preaching, a Divine mission, the Gospel,
and obedience to its precepts, [Rom
10:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014.md). Faith comes by hearing, [Rom
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017.md). The universal spread of the
Gospel predicted by the prophets, [Rom
10:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018.md). The ingratitude and
disobedience of the Israelites, [Rom
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021.md).

[Romans 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 10:1</span></span>

My heart's desire, etc. - Though the apostle knew that the Jews were now
in a state of rejection, yet he knew also that they were in this state
through their own obstinacy, and that God was still waiting to be
gracious, and consequently, that they might still repent and turn to
him. Of his concern for their salvation he had already given ample
proof, when he was willing to become a sacrifice for their welfare, see
[Rom 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003.md).

[Romans 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 10:2</span></span>

They have a zeal of God - They believe their law to have come
immediately from God himself, and are jealous of its glory and
excellence; they conscientiously observe its rites and ceremonies, but
they do not consider the object and end of those rites; they sin more
through ignorance than malice; and this pleads in their excuse. By this
fine apology for them, the apostle prepares them for the harsher truths
which he was about to deliver.

[Romans 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 10:3</span></span>

For - being ignorant of God's righteousness - Not knowing God's method
of saving sinners, which is the only proper and efficient method: and
going about to establish their own righteousness - seeking to procure
their salvation by means of their own contriving; they have not
submitted - they have not bowed to the determinations of the Most High,
relative to his mode of saving mankind, viz. through faith in Jesus
Christ, as the only available sacrifice for sin - the end to which the
law pointed.

[Romans 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 10:4</span></span>

For Christ is the end of the law - Where the law ends, Christ begins.
The law ends with representative sacrifices; Christ begins with the real
offering. The law is our schoolmaster to lead us to Christ; it cannot
save, but it leaves us at his door, where alone salvation is to be
found. Christ as an atoning sacrifice for sin, was the grand object of
the whole sacrificial code of Moses; his passion and death were the
fulfillment of its great object and design. Separate this sacrificial
death of Christ from the law, and the law has no meaning, for it is
impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins:
wherefore the Messiah is represented as saying, Sacrifice and observing
thou didst not desire; burnt-offering and sin-offering thou hast not
required; then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will; a body hast thou
prepared me, [Psa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006.md), [Psa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007.md); [Heb
10:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#004.md); which proves that God never
designed that the sacrifices of the law should be considered the
atonement for sin, but a type or representative of that atonement; and
that The atonement was the sacrifice offered by Christ. Thus he was the
End of the law, in respect to its sacrifices. And, as sacrifices were
offered merely to procure pardon of sin, righteousness, or
justification, Christ is the end of the law for this justification to
every one that believeth on him, as dying for their offenses, and rising
again for their justification, having made peace through the blood of
his cross. Therefore every Jew who rejected Christ rejected salvation,
and that very salvation which the law witnessed and required, and which
could not be had but through Christ alone.

[Romans 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 10:5</span></span>

For Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law - The place
to which the apostle refers, seems to be [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005.md) : Ye shall therefore keep my
statutes and my judgments; which if a man do, he shall live in them.
These words seem to be spoken in answer to an objection which might be
made by a Jew: "Did not Moses give us a law, the observance of which
should secure our salvation?" Such a law Moses undoubtedly gave, and
that law promises life to those who perform its precepts: but who can
plead for life on this ground, who rejects that Christ who is the end of
the law? No man ever did, nor ever can, fulfill that law, so as to merit
salvation by the performance of it: for, as all have sinned and come
short of the glory of God, they are all under the curse of the law,
which says: Cursed is every one who continueth not in all the things
that are written in the book of the law to do them, [Deu
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026.md); [Gal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010.md); therefore by the deeds of this
law none can be justified, because all are in a state of condemnation
for transgressions already committed against it. If, therefore, there
were not such a provision as is made by the death of Christ, no soul
could be saved.

[Romans 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 10:6</span></span>

But the righteousness which is of faith - As it is most evident that
there can be no justification by works, as all are sinful and all in a
guilty state; if God will grant salvation at all, it must be by faith:
but faith must have an object and a reason for its exercise; the object
is Jesus Christ - the reason is the infinite merit of his passion and
death.

Who shall ascend unto heaven? etc. - As Christ is the end of the law for
justification to every one that believes, no observance of the law can
procure him. Who, by the practice of the law, can bring Christ down from
heaven? or, when brought down, and crucified and buried, as a sacrifice
for sin, who can bring him up again from the dead? And both his death
and resurrection are essentially necessary for the salvation of a lost
world. Or the sense of the apostle may be this: They who will not
believe in Christ crucified must in effect be seeking another Messiah to
come down from heaven with a different revelation; or they who will not
credit the doctrine that we preach concerning his resurrection seem in
effect to say, Christ yet remains to be raised from the dead, and reign
over the Jews as a mighty secular sovereign, subjecting the Gentile
world to the sway of his righteous scepter.

[Romans 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 10:8</span></span>

But what saith it? The word is nigh thee - There is no occasion to seek
high or low for the saving power; the word of reconciliation is nigh.
The way of salvation is now both plain and easy. The law is magnified
and made honorable by the death of Christ; and the doctrine of faith in
his death and resurrection is fully proclaimed, and amply proved to be
effectual to the purpose for which it was revealed. By the preaching of
the Gospel the doctrine of salvation is nigh thee, and the saving
influence is at hand: it is in thy mouth, easy to be understood, easy to
be professed: and in thy heart, if thou art upright before God,
sincerely desiring to be saved on his own terms, not striving to
establish thy own method of justification by the law, which must for
ever be ineffectual, but submitting to the method of justification which
God has devised.

[Romans 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 10:9</span></span>

That if thou shalt confess, etc. - Acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ as
the only Savior. Believe in thy heart that he who died for thy offenses
has been raised for thy justification; and depend solely on him for that
justification, and thou shalt be saved.

[Romans 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 10:10</span></span>

For with the heart man believeth, etc. - And be sincere in this: for
with the heart, duly affected with a sense of guilt, and of the
sufficiency of the sacrifice which Christ has offered, man believeth
unto righteousness, believeth to receive justification; for this is the
proper meaning of the term here, and in many other parts of this
epistle; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. He who
believes aright in Christ Jesus will receive such a full conviction of
the truth, and such an evidence of his redemption, that his mouth will
boldly confess his obligation to his Redeemer, and the blessed
persuasion he has of the remission of all his sins through the blood of
the cross. One grand object of the apostle is to show the simplicity of
the Gospel scheme of salvation; and at the same time, its great
efficacy, it is simple, and very unlike the law, which was full of
rites, ordinances, ceremonies, etc., each of which required to be
perfectly fulfilled: and yet, after all, even those who had the utmost
zeal for God, and, as conscientiously as possible, observed all the
precepts of the law, had not attained to justification nor peace of
conscience. Whereas both Jews and Gentiles, who had believed on the Lord
Jesus according to the simple declarations of the Gospel, were freely
justified from all things from which they could not be justified by the
law of Moses: and they had the witness in themselves that they were
passed from death to life.

[Romans 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 10:11</span></span>

For the Scripture saith - And howsoever the Jews may despise this
Gospel, because it comes not unto them with pomp and ceremony, it puts
those who receive it into possession of every heavenly blessing: and
this is according to the positive declarations of the prophets; for it
is written, [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md); [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md) : Whosoever believeth on him
shall not be ashamed. He shall neither be disappointed of his hope, nor
ashamed of his confidence; because he has that faith which is the
evidence of things not seen, the subsistence of things hoped for, [Heb
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001.md). See note on [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016.md).

[Romans 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 10:12</span></span>

For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek - All are
equally welcome to this salvation. Here the Jew has no exclusive
privilege; and from this the Greek is not rejected. One simple way of
being saved is proposed to all, viz. faith in the Lord Jesus Christ;
because he is the same Lord who has made all and governs all, and is
rich in mercy to all that call upon him.

[Romans 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 10:13</span></span>

For whosoever shall call, etc. - Nor shall any one who hears this
doctrine of salvation, and credits it as he is commanded, be permitted
to pray or supplicate the throne of grace in vain: for the Prophet Joel
hath declared, [Joe 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032.md) : Whosoever
shall call upon, invoke, the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior
of sinners, shall be saved - shall have his guilt pardoned, his heart
purified; and if he abide in the faith, rooted and grounded in him,
showing forth the virtues of him who was called him out of darkness into
his marvellous light, he shall be saved with all the power of an eternal
life.

"Believing in Christ, or God, [Rom
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011.md), and calling upon God, [Rom
10:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012.md), are in effect the same
thing; as calling upon God necessarily connects and supposes faith in
him: and he who duly believes in Christ has such a sense of his
dependence upon Divine grace, that he looks unto God and trusts in his
power and goodness alone for happiness: which is the true religion of
the Gospel." Dr. Taylor.

It is evident that St. Paul understood the text of Joel as relating to
our blessed Lord; and therefore his word κυριος must answer to the
prophet's word יהוה Yehovah, which is no mean proof of the Godhead of
Jesus Christ. If the text be translated, Whosoever shall invoke in the
name of the Lord, which translation יקרא בשם יהוה yikra beshem Yehovah
will certainly bear, yet still the term Yehovah, the incommunicable
name, is given to Christ; because invoking in the name signifies
soliciting one in the name or on the account of another. He who is
invoked is God; he, in whose name he is invoked, is Jesus Christ, who is
here called Yehovah. He who asks mercy from God, in the name and for the
sake of Jesus Christ, shall get his soul saved.

[Romans 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 10:14</span></span>

How then shall they call on him - As the apostle had laid so much stress
on believing in order to salvation, and as this doctrine, without
farther explanation, might be misunderstood, it was necessary to show
how this faith was produced; and therefore he lays the whole doctrine
down in a beautifully graduated order.

1\. There can be no salvation without the Gospel: a dispensation of
mercy and grace from God alone, here called, [Rom
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015.md), the Gospel of peace; glad
tidings of good things.

2\. This must be preached, proclaimed in the world for the obedience of
faith.

3\. None can effectually preach this unless he have a Divine mission;
for how shall they preach except they be Sent, [Rom
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015.md). The matter must come from God;
and the person mho proclaims it must have both authority and unction
from on high.

4\. This Divinely-commissioned person must be heard: it is the duty of
all, to whom this message of salvation is sent, to hear it with the
deepest reverence and attention.

5\. What is heard must be credited; for they who do not believe the
Gospel as the record which God has given of his Son cannot be saved,
[Rom 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014.md).

6\. Those who believe must invoke God by Christ, which they cannot do
unless they believe in him; and in this way alone they are to expect
salvation. Professing to believe in Christ, without earnest, importunate
prayer for salvation, can save no man. All these things the apostle lays
down as essentially necessary; and they all follow from his grand
proposition, Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved. But, says the apostle, How shall they Call upon him in whom they
have not believed? And how shall they Believe in him of whom they have
not heard? And how shall they Hear without a preacher? And how shall
they Preach except they be sent? And with what message which can bring
salvation can they be sent, but with the Gospel of Peace, the Glad
Tidings Of Good Things. When, therefore, there is:

1st, a proper Message;

2ndly, a proper Messenger;

3rdly, the message Preached, proclaimed, or properly delivered by him;

4thly, the proclamation properly Heard and attentively considered by the
people;

5thly, the message which they have heard, conscientiously Believed;

6thly, the name of the Lord Jesus, by whom alone this salvation is
provided, most fervently Invoked; then,

7thly, salvation, or redemption from sin and misery, and the enjoyment
of peace and happiness, will be the result of such calling, believing,
hearing, preaching, sending, and message sent: - and thus the doctrine
of salvation by grace through faith is guarded from abuse.

[Romans 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 10:15</span></span>

How beautiful are the feet of them that preach - Dr. Taylor remarks on
this quotation, which is taken from [Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md), that "feet are variously used in
Scripture, and sometimes have respect to things internal and spiritual.
For as the life of man and the practice of piety are compared to
walking, [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md), so his feet may
signify the principles on which he acts, and the dispositions of his
mind. [Ecc 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#001.md) : Keep thy foot when
thou goest to the house of God. Agreeably to this, the feet of the
messengers in Isaiah and of the apostles in this verse, may signify the
validity of their mission - the authority upon which they acted, and any
character or qualifications with which they were invested."

[Romans 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 10:16</span></span>

But they have not all obeyed the Gospel - This seems to be the objection
of a Jew; as if he had said: A Divine mission would be attended with
success; whereas there are numbers who pay no attention to the glad
tidings you preach. To this the apostle answers, that the Spirit of God,
by Isaiah, [Isa 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), foretold it
would be so, even in the case of the Jews themselves, where he said,
Lord, who hath believed our report? For although God brings the message
of salvation to men, he does not oblige them to embrace it.

It is proposed to their understanding and conscience; but it does not
become the means of salvation unless it be affectionately credited.

[Romans 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 10:17</span></span>

So then faith cometh by hearing - Preaching the Gospel is the ordinary
means of salvation; faith in Christ is the result of hearing the word,
the doctrine of God preached. Preaching, God sends; if heard
attentively, faith will be produced; and if they believe the report, the
arm of the Lord will be revealed in their salvation.

[Romans 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 10:18</span></span>

But I say, have they not heard? - But to return to the objection: You
say they have not all Believed; I ask: Have they not all Heard? Have not
the means of salvation been placed within the reach of every Jew in
Palestine, and within the reach of all those who sojourn in the
different Gentile countries where we have preached the Gospel, as well
to the Jews as to the Gentiles themselves? Yes: for we may say of the
preaching of the Gospel what the psalmist has said ([Psa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004).md) of the heavenly bodies: Their
sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world. As the celestial luminaries have given testimony of the eternal
power and Godhead of the Deity to the habitable world, the Gospel of
Christ has borne testimony to his eternal goodness and mercy to all the
land of Palestine, and to the whole Roman empire. There is not a part of
the promised land in which these glad tidings have not been preached;
and there is scarcely a place in the Roman empire in which the doctrine
of Christ crucified has not been heard: if, therefore, the Jews have not
believed, the fault is entirely their own; as God has amply furnished
them with the means of faith and of salvation.

In [Psa 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004.md), the psalmist has קום
kauuam, their line, which the Septuagint, and the apostle who quotes
from them, render φθογγος, sound; and hence some have thought that the
word in the Psalm was originally קולם kolam, voice. But that קו kau is
used for word or speech is sufficiently evident from [Isa
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010.md), line upon line, precept upon
precept, etc., where קו is analogous to word or direction. It is very
remarkable that these words of David, quoted by St. Paul, are mentioned
in Sohar. Genes. fol. 9, where it is said: עבדי משיחא אינון מלין Abdey
mashicha innun millin. "These words are the servants of the Messiah, and
measure out both the things above and the things beneath." To this
notion of them the apostle may refer in his use of them in this place,
and to a Jew the application would be legitimate.

[Romans 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 10:19</span></span>

But I say, Did not Israel know? - You object to this preaching among the
Gentiles; but is not this according to the positive declaration of God?
He, foreseeing your unbelief and rebellion, said by Moses, [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md), I will provoke you to jealousy
by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger you. As
you have provoked me to jealousy with worshipping those that are no
gods, I will provoke you to jealousy by those which are no people. This
most evidently refers to the calling or inviting of the Gentiles to
partake of the benefits of the Gospel; and plainly predicts the envy and
rage which would be excited in the Jews, in consequence of those offers
of mercy made to the Gentiles.

[Romans 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 10:20</span></span>

But Esaias (the Greek orthography for Isaiah) is very bold - Speaks out
in the fullest manner and plainest language, [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md), notwithstanding the danger to
which such a declaration exposed him, among a crooked, perverse, and
dangerous people: I was found of them that sought me not; I put my
salvation in the way of those (the Gentiles) who were not seeking for
it, and knew nothing of it: thus, the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness have attained to the law of righteousness, [Rom
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030.md), and they have found that
redemption which the Jews have rejected.

[Romans 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 10:21</span></span>

But to Israel he saith - In the very next verse, ([Isa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002).md), All day long have I stretched
forth my hands, manifesting the utmost readiness and willingness to
gather them all together under my protecting care; but I stretched forth
my hands in vain, for they are a disobedient and gainsaying people. They
not only disobey my command, but they gainsay and contradict my
prophets. Thus the apostle proves, in answer to the objection made [Rom
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md), that the infidelity of the Jews
was the effect of their own obstinacy; that the opposition which they
are now making to the Gospel was foretold and deplored 700 years before;
and that their opposition, far from being a proof of the insufficiency
of the Gospel, proved that this was the grand means which God had
provided for their salvation; and having rejected this, they could
expect no other. And this gives the apostle opportunity to speak largely
concerning their rejection in the following chapter.

I. In the preceding chapter are several quotations from the law, the
prophets, and the Psalms; and as the apostle seems to take them with
considerable latitude of meaning, it has been thought that he only uses
their words as being well calculated to express his sense, without
paying any attention to their original import. This principle is too lax
to be introduced in such solemn circumstances. Dr. Taylor has made some
judicious and useful distinctions here. After observing that, if we
allow this principle, no argument can be built on any of the apostle's
quotations; and that it must have been an indifferent thing with him
whether he did or did not understand the Scripture - as, on this
supposition, they would serve him as well without as with the true
meaning - he adds: the apostle was a strict and close quoter of the
Scripture; but he did not always quote them in the same manner, or for
the same purpose.

1\. Sometimes his intention goes no farther than using the same strong
expressions, as being equally applicable to the point in hand. So, [Rom
10:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006.md), he uses the words of Moses,
not to prove any thing, nor as if he thought Moses spoke of the same
subject, but only as intimating that the strong and lively expressions
which Moses used concerning the doctrine he taught, were equally
applicable to the faith of the Gospel. So, in the same manner, [Rom
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018.md), he quotes [Psa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004.md), though it is likely (see the
note on [Rom 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018).md) that those
expressions were used by the ancient Jews in application to the Messiah
as the apostle applies them.

2\. Sometimes the design of the quotation is only to show that the cases
are parallel: or, that what happened in his times corresponded with what
happened in former days. So [Rom 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024.md);
[Rom 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036.md); [Rom
9:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027.md); [Rom
11:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002.md), [Rom
11:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#008.md); [Rom
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#021.md).

3\. Sometimes the quotation is only intended to explain a doctrinal
point, as [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md); [Rom
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006.md), [Rom
4:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018.md); [Rom
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020.md), [Rom
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021.md); [Rom
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015.md); [Rom
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003.md).

4\. Sometimes the quotation is designed to prove a doctrinal point. [Rom
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004.md), [Rom
3:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010.md); [Rom
4:3-17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003.md); [Rom
5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012.md); [Rom
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007.md), [Rom
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009.md), [Rom
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012.md), [Rom
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013.md), [Rom
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015.md), [Rom
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017.md); [Rom
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005.md), [Rom
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011.md), [Rom
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013.md); [Rom
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019.md), [Rom
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020.md); [Rom
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md); [Rom
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011.md).

5\. Sometimes it is the intention of the quotation to prove that
something was predicted, or properly foretold in the prophetic writings,
as [Rom 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025.md), [Rom
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026.md), [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033.md); [Rom
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md), [Rom
10:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019.md); [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026.md), [Rom
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#027.md); [Rom
15:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009.md).

These things duly considered, it will appear that the apostle has every
where shown a just regard to the true sense of the Scripture he quotes,
in the view in which he quotes it.

These rules may help to vindicate the quotations in all the apostolic
writings. And it is evident that we cannot form a true judgment upon any
quotation, unless we take in the intention of the writer, or the view in
which he quotes.

II\. The apostle here makes a just and proper distinction between the
righteousness or justification that is of the law, and that which is by
faith in Christ. And, in his view of the former, shows it to be
absolutely impossible; for if no man is to live thereby - to have
spiritual and eternal life, but he who does these things; then salvation
on that ground must be impossible; for,

1\. The law makes no provision for the pardon of sin.

2\. It affords no helps for the performance of duty.

3\. It makes no allowances for imperfections in duty, or for
imperfections is our nature.

4\. Its commandments, necessarily, suppose a righteous soul, and a
vigorous body; and it does not lower its claims to the fallen state of
man.

5\. It requires perfect obedience, not only in all things, but in all
places and circumstances. The man who comes up to this standard, has
ever been in it, and has never swerved from it, shall, by the law, live
for ever. But no man, since the fall, ever did so or ever can do so:
therefore, salvation by the works of the law is absolutely impossible.
But,

1\. The righteousness or justification, which is by faith, receives
Christ as an atoning sacrifice, by which all past sin is pardoned.

2\. Receives continual supplies of grace from Christ by the eternal
Spirit, through which the man is enabled to love God with all his heart,
soul, mind, and strength, and his neighbor as himself.

3\. This grace is afforded in sufficient degrees suited to all places,
times, and circumstances, so that no trial can happen too great to be
borne, as the grace of Christ is ever at hand to support and to save to
the uttermost. The law is the letter that killeth; the Gospel is the
spirit that giveth life. Reader, let thy whole soul say with the
apostle, Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 11](rom011.md)

</div>
