<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ruth Index](rut.md)  
  [Previous](rut002)  [Next](rut004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001.md)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 3:0</span></span>

Naomi's advice to Ruth, how to procure herself a marriage with Boaz,
[Rut 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001.md). She acts according to her
mother-in-law's direction, and is kindly received by Boaz, who promises
to marry her, should her nearer kinsman refuse, [Rut
3:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#006.md). He gives her six measures of
barley, and sends her away privately to her mother-in-law, who augurs
favorably of the issue of the plan she had laid, [Rut
3:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#014.md).

[Ruth 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 3:1</span></span>

Shall I not seek rest for thee - That is, Shall I not endeavor to
procure thee a proper husband? See [Rut
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#009.md), and the observations at the end
of that chapter.

[Ruth 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rut 3:2</span></span>

He winnoweth barley tonight - It is very likely that the winnowing of
grain was effected by taking up, in a broad thin vessel or sieve, a
portion of the corn, and letting it down slowly in the wind; thus the
grain would, by its own weight, fall in one place, while the chaff,
etc., would be carried to a distance by the wind. It is said here that
this was done at night; probably what was threshed out in the day was
winnowed in the evening, when the sea breeze set in, which was common in
Palestine; and as this took place in the evening only, that was the time
in which they would naturally winnow their corn.

[Ruth 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rut 3:3</span></span>

Wash thyself, therefore - She made Ruth put on her best dress, that Boaz
might, in the course of the day, be the more attracted by her person,
and be the better disposed to receive her as Naomi wished.

[Ruth 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rut 3:4</span></span>

Uncover his feet, and lay thee down - It is said that women in the East,
when going to the bed of their lawful husbands, through modesty, and in
token of subjection, go to the bed's foot, and gently raising the
clothes, creep under them up to their place. See Calmet.

On the whole, we must say, had not Boaz been a person of extraordinary
piety, prudence, and continence, this experiment might have been fatal
to Ruth. We cannot easily account for this transaction, probably Naomi
knew more than she revealed to her daughter-in-law. The experiment
however was dangerous, and should in no sense be imitated.

He will tell thee what thou shalt do - The Targum reads the clause thus:
Thou shalt ask counsel from him, "and he shall tell thee what thou
shouldest do."

[Ruth 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rut 3:7</span></span>

When Boaz had eaten and drunk - The Targum adds, "He blessed the name of
the Lord, who had heard his prayer, and removed famine from the land of
Israel."

Went to lie down - As the threshing-floors of the Eastern nations are in
general in the open air, it is very likely that the owner or some
confidential person continued in the fields till the grain was secured,
having a tent in the place where the corn was threshed and winnowed.
Boaz seems to have acted thus.

[Ruth 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rut 3:8</span></span>

The man was afraid, and turned himself - The verb ילפת yillapheth, which
we render he turned himself, has puzzled even the Targumist, who
translates the clause thus: "The man trembled, and his flesh became like
a (boiled) turnip through fear." It is fully evident Boaz had no
intimation of the present proceedings. To this verse the Targumist adds
much; he says, "Boaz subdued his concupiscence, and acted towards her as
Joseph did to the Egyptian wife of his master, and as Pelatiel, the son
of Laish the pious, did to Michal, the daughter of Saul, the wife of
David, who put a sword between Michal and himself, because he would not
approach to her."

[Ruth 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rut 3:9</span></span>

Spread therefore thy skirt over thine hand maid - Hebrew, Spread thy
wing. The wing is the emblem of protection, and is a metaphor taken from
the young of fowls, which run under the wings of their mothers, that
they may be saved from birds of prey. The meaning here is, Take me to
thee for wife; and so the Targum has translated it, Let thy name be
called on thy handmaid to take me for wife, because thou art the
redeemer; i.e., thou art the גאל goel, the kinsman, to whom the right of
redemption belongs. See on [Rut 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#020.md)
(note). Even to the present day, when a Jew marries a woman, he throws
the skirt or end of his talith over her, to signify that he has taken
her under his protection.

[Ruth 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rut 3:10</span></span>

In the latter end than at the beginning - It is not easy to find out
what Boaz means. Perhaps חסד chesed, which we translate kindness, means
piety; as if he had said: Thou hast given great proof of thy piety in
this latter instance, when thou hast avoided the young, and those of thy
own age, to associate thyself with an elderly man, merely for the
purpose of having the Divine injunction fulfilled, viz., that the
brother, or next akin, might take the wife of the deceased, and raise a
family to him who had died childless, that his name might not become
extinct in Israel: this latter act is a greater proof of thy piety and
sincerity than any thing that could be inferred from thy becoming a
proselyte.

Whether poor or rich - So it appears from this that it was not to mend
her condition in life that Ruth endeavored to get Boaz for her husband,
for she might have had a rich young man, but she preferred the building
up the house of her deceased husband. See above.

[Ruth 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rut 3:12</span></span>

There is a kinsman nearer than I - It is very likely that Naomi was not
acquainted with this circumstance. Some have supposed that there was a
brother of Elimelech remaining, who was nearer than Boaz, who is
supposed to have been only a nephew; the former, therefore, must have a
prior right.

[Ruth 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rut 3:13</span></span>

As the Lord liveth - Thus he bound himself by an oath to take her to
wife if the other should refuse.

[Ruth 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 3:15</span></span>

Bring the veil - המט פחת hammit pachath; this seems to have been a
cloak, plaid, or what the Arabs call hayk, which has been largely
explained elsewhere. See [Jdg 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012.md).

Six measures of barley - We supply the word measures, for the Hebrew
mentions no quantity. The Targum renders six seahs, שית סאין shith sein,
which, as a seah was about two gallons and a half, must have been a very
heavy load for a woman; and so the Targumist thought, for he adds, And
she received strength from the Lord to carry it. If the omer be meant,
which is about six pints, the load would not be so great, as this would
amount to but about four gallons and a half; a very goodly present. The
Targum says, that on receiving these six measures "it was said in the
spirit of prophecy, that from her should proceed the six righteous
persons of the world, viz., David, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego,
and the King Messiah; each of whom should be blessed with six
benedictions." It is, however, remarkable, that the Targum makes the
Messiah to spring from her through the line of David, and goes down to
Daniel and his companions; which Daniel prophesied so clearly, not only
of the advent of Messiah the prince, but also of the very time in which
he was to come, and the sacrificial death he was to die.

[Ruth 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rut 3:18</span></span>

Until thou know how the matter will fall - That is, whether he who is
nearer of kin than Boaz will take thee to wife; do not return again till
this thing is determined. Boaz lost no time to bring this to an issue,
as we shall see in the following chapter, Ruth 4 (note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 4](rut004.md)

</div>
