<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](jdg021)  [Next](rut001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the Book of Ruth

When and by whom the book of Ruth was written, are points not agreed on
among critics and commentators.

As to the transactions recorded in it, they are variously placed. In the
book itself there is no other notation of time than merely this, that
the things came to pass in the days when the judges ruled; therefore
some have placed these transactions under Ehud; others, under Gideon;
others, under Barak; others, under Abimelech; and others, under Shamgar.
This last is the opinion of Archbishop Usher; and most chronologers
adopt it. The book is evidently an Appendix to the book of Judges, and
contains a perfect history in itself; and therefore should not be
inserted in any part of that book. It also seems to be an Introduction
to the books of Samuel, in which the history of David is contained, as
it gives the genealogy of this prince. It is also not without its use in
matters which respect the Gospels, as it ascertains the line by which
Jesus Christ came.

As to the author, he is as uncertain as the time. It has been attributed
to Hezekiah, to Ezra, and to Samuel; and it is most likely that the
author of the two books of Samuel was also the writer of this little
book, as it seems necessary to complete his plan of the history of
David. See the preface to the first book of Samuel.

The sum of the history contained in this book is the following: A man of
Bethlehem, named Elimelech, with his wife Naomi, and his two sons Mahlon
and Chilion, left his own country in the time of a famine, and went to
sojourn in the land of Moab. There he died; and Naomi married her two
sons to two Moabitish women: Mahlon married Ruth, who is the chief
subject of this book; and Chilion married one named Orpah. In about ten
years both these brethren died; and Naomi, accompanied by her two
daughters-in-law, set out to return to the land of Judah, she having
heard that plenty was again restored to her country. On the way she
besought her daughters to return to their own country and kindred. Orpah
took her advice, and, after an affectionate parting, returned; but Ruth
insisted on accompanying her mother-in-law. They arrived in Bethlehem
about the time of harvest; and Ruth went into the fields to glean for
their support. The ground on which she was accidentally employed
belonged to Boaz, one of the relatives of Elimelech, her father-in-law;
who, finding who she was, ordered her to be kindly treated, and
appointed her both meat and drink with his own servants. Finding that
she was by marriage his kinswoman, he purposed to take her to wife, if a
nearer kinsman who was then living should refuse. He was accordingly
applied to, refused to take Ruth, and surrendered his right to her,
according to the custom of those times, at the gate of Bethlehem, before
the elders of the city. Boaz then took her to wife, by whom she had
Obed, who was father to Jesse, the father of David.

To the questions, Who was Boaz? and, Who was Ruth? no satisfactory
answer can be given: all we know for certain is, that Boaz was an
Ephraimite of Bethlehem; and Ruth a Moabitess, and consequently educated
a heathen. But what we want in certainty several have attempted to
supply by conjecture; with them Boaz was the same as Ibzan, [Jdg
12:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008); and Ruth was the daughter of
Eglon, king of Moab. This is the opinion maintained by the Chaldee
Targum on this book; to which I shall, in the course of the notes, have
farther occasion to refer. The rabbins say that Elimelech was brother to
Salmon, who married Rahab; and that Naomi was his niece.

The genealogy of David, as stated in this book, is as follows: -

A.M. 2236 Judah Pharez Ezron, called also Hezron Aram, called also Ram
Amminadab Nahshon Salmon, who married Rahab Boaz, who married Ruth Obed,
who begat Jesse A.M. 2919 David born

This chronology is according to Archbishop Usher; and includes, from
Judah to David six hundred and seventy years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 1](rut001)

</div>
