<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ruth Index](rut.md)  
  [Previous](rut000)  [Next](rut002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md)

Elimelech, his wife Naomi, and their two sons, Mahlon and Chilion, flee
from a famine in the land of Israel, and go to sojourn in Moab, [Rut
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md), [Rut
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#002.md). Here his two sons marry; and, in
the space of ten years, both their father and they die, [Rut
1:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#003.md). Naomi sets out on her return to
her own country, accompanied by her daughters-in-law Orpah and Ruth;
whom she endeavors to persuade to return to their own people, [Rut
1:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#007.md). Orpah returns, but Ruth
accompanies her mother-in-law, [Rut
1:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#014.md). They arrive at Beth-lehem in
the time of the barley harvest, [Rut
1:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019.md).

[Ruth 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 1:1</span></span>

When the judges ruled - We know not under what judge this happened; some
say under Ehud, others under Shamgar. See the preface.

There was a famine - Probably occasioned by the depredations of the
Philistines, Ammonites, etc., carrying off the corn as soon as it was
ripe, or destroying it on the field.

The Targum says: "God has decreed ten grievous famines to take place in
the world, to punish the inhabitants of the earth, before the coming of
Messiah the king. The first in the days of Adam; the second in the days
of Lamech; the third in the days of Abraham; the fourth in the days of
Isaac; the fifth in the days of Jacob; the sixth in the days of Boaz,
who is called Abstan, (Ibzan), the just, of Beth-lehem-judah; the
seventh in the days of David, king of Israel; the eighth in the days of
Elijah the prophet; the ninth in the days of Elisha, in Samaria; the
tenth is yet to come, and it is not a famine of bread or of water but of
hearing the word of prophecy from the mouth of the Lord; and even now
this famine is grievous in the land of Israel."

[Ruth 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rut 1:2</span></span>

Elimelech - That is, God is my king.

Naomi - Beautiful or amiable.

Mahlon - Infirmity.

Chilion - Finished, completed.

[Ruth 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rut 1:3</span></span>

Elimelech - died - Probably a short time after his arrival in Moab.

[Ruth 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rut 1:4</span></span>

And they took them wives - The Targum very properly observes, that they
transgressed the decree of the word of the Lord, and took to themselves
strange women.

[Ruth 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rut 1:5</span></span>

And Mahlon and Chilion died - The Targum adds, And because they
transgressed the decree of the word of the Lord, and joined affinity
with strange people, therefore their days were cut off. It is very
likely that there is more here than conjecture.

[Ruth 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rut 1:6</span></span>

She had heard - By the mouth of an angel, says the Targum.

The Lord had visited his people - "Because of the righteousness of Ibzan
the judge, and because of the supplications of pious Boaz." - Targum.

It is imagined, and not without probability, that Mahlon and Chilion are
the same with Joash and Saraph, mentioned [Ch1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#022.md), where the Hebrew should be thus
translated, and Joash and Saraph, who married in Moab, and dwelt in
Lehem. See the Hebrew.

[Ruth 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rut 1:11</span></span>

Are there yet any more sons - This was spoken in allusion to the custom,
that when a married brother died without leaving posterity, his brother
should take his widow; and the children of such a marriage were
accounted the children of the deceased brother. There is something very
persuasive and affecting in the address of Naomi to her
daughters-in-law. Let us observe the particulars: -

1\. She intimates that she had no other sons to give them.

2\. That she was not with child; so there could be no expectation.

3\. That she was too old to have a husband.

4\. That though she should marry that night, and have children, yet they
could not wait till such sons were marriageable; she therefore begs them
to return to their own country where they might be comfortably settled
among their own kindred.

[Ruth 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rut 1:14</span></span>

And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law - The Septuagint add, Και επεστρεψεν
εις τον λαον αυτης, And returned to her own people. The Vulgate, Syrian,
and Arabic, are to the same purpose.

[Ruth 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 1:15</span></span>

Gone back - unto her gods - They were probably both idolaters, their
having been proselytes is an unfounded conjecture. Chemosh was the grand
idol of the Moabites. The conversion of Ruth probably commenced at this
time.

[Ruth 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rut 1:16</span></span>

And Ruth said - A more perfect surrender was never made of friendly
feelings to a friend: I will not leave thee - I will follow thee: I will
lodge where thou lodgest - take the same fare with which thou meetest;
thy people shall be my people - I most cheerfully abandon my own
country, and determine to end my days in thine. I will also henceforth
have no god but thy God, and be joined with thee in worship, as I am in
affection and consanguinity. I will cleave unto thee even unto death;
die where thou diest; and be buried, if possible, in the same grave.
This was a most extraordinary attachment, and evidently without any
secular motive.

The Targum adds several things to this conversation between Naomi and
Ruth. I shall subjoin them: "And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave
thee," for I desire to become a proselyte. And Naomi said, We are
commanded to keep the Sabbath and other holy days; and on it not to
travel more than two thousand cubits. And Ruth said, "Whither thou
goest, I will go." And Naomi said, We are commanded not to lodge with
the Gentiles. Ruth answered, "Where thou lodgest, I will lodge." And
Naomi said, We are commanded to observe the one hundred and thirteen
precepts. Ruth answered, What thy people observe, that will I observe;
as if they had been my people of old. And Naomi said, We are commanded
not to worship with any strange worship. Ruth answered, "Thy God shall
be my God." Naomi said, We have four kinds of capital punishment for
criminals; stoning, burning, beheading, and hanging. Ruth answered, "In
whatsoever manner thou diest, I will die." Naomi said, We have a house
of burial. Ruth answered, "And there will I be buried."

It is very likely that some such conversation as this took place between
the elders and those who were becoming proselytes. This verse is famous
among those who strive to divine by the Bible. I should relate the
particulars, but am afraid they might lead to a continuance of the
practice. In my youth I have seen it done, and was then terrified.

[Ruth 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rut 1:17</span></span>

The Lord do so to me, and more - May he inflict any of those punishments
on me, and any worse punishment, if I part from thee till death. And it
appears that she was true to her engagement; for Naomi was nourished in
the house of Boaz in her old age, and became the fosterer and nurse of
their son Obed, [Rut 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#015.md), [Rut
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#016.md).

[Ruth 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rut 1:19</span></span>

All the city was moved about them - It appears that Naomi was not only
well known, but highly respected also at Bethlehem; a proof that
Elimelech was of high consideration in that place.

[Ruth 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rut 1:20</span></span>

Call me not Naomi - That is, beautiful or pleasant.

Call me Mara - That is, bitter; one whose life is grievous to her.

The Almighty - שדי Shaddai, He who is self-sufficient, has taken away
the props and supports of my life.

[Ruth 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rut 1:21</span></span>

I went out full - Having a husband and two sons.

The Lord hath brought me home again empty - Having lost all three by
death. It is also likely that Elimelech took considerable property with
him into the land of Moab; for as he fled from the face of the famine,
he would naturally take his property with him; and on this Naomi
subsisted till her return to Bethlehem, which she might not have thought
of till all was spent.

[Ruth 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rut 1:22</span></span>

In the beginning of barley harvest - This was in the beginning of
spring, for the barley harvest began immediately after the passover, and
that feast was held on the 15th of the month Nisan, which corresponds
nearly with our March.

The Targum says, "They came to Beth-lehem on that day in which the
children of Israel began to mow the sheaf of barley which was to be
waved before the Lord." This circumstance is the more distinctly marked,
because of Ruth's gleaning, mentioned in the succeeding chapter.

1\. The native, the amiable simplicity, in which the story of the
preceding chapter is told, is a proof of its genuineness. There are
several sympathetic circumstances recorded here which no forger could
have invented. There is too much of nature to admit any thing of art.

2\. On the marriage of Orpah and Ruth, and the wish of Naomi that they
might find rest in the house of their husbands, there are some pious and
sensible observations in Mr. Ness's History and Mystery of the Book of
Ruth, from which I shall lay the following extract before my readers: -

"A married estate is a state of rest; so it is called here, and in [Rut
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#001.md). Hence marriage is called portus
juventutis, the port or haven of young people; whose affections, while
unmarried, are continually floating or tossed to and fro, like a ship
upon the waters, till they come into this happy harbour. There is a
natural propension in most persons towards nuptial communion, as all
created beings have a natural tendency towards their proper center,
(leve sursum, et grave deorsum), and are restless out of it, so the
rabbins say, Requiret vir costam suam, et requiret femina sedem suam,
'The man is restless while he misses his rib that was taken out of his
side; and the woman is restless till she get under the man's arm, from
whence she was taken.' O! look up to God then, ye unmarried ones, and
cry with good Naomi, The Lord grant me rest for my roving affections in
the house of some good consort, that I may live in peace and plenty,
with content and comfort all my days. Know that your marriage is, of all
your civil affairs, of the greatest importance, having an influence upon
your whole life. It is either your making or marring in this world; 'tis
like a stratagem in war, wherein a miscarriage cannot be recalled when
we will, for we marry for life. I am thine, and thou art mine, brevis
quidem cantiuncula est, 'is a short song;' sed longum habet epiphonema,
'but it hath a long undersong.' So an error here is irrecoverable; you
have need of Argus's hundred eyes to look withal before you leap."

This is good advice; but who among the persons concerned will have grace
enough to take it?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 2](rut002.md)

</div>
