<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1009)  [Next](sa1011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 10:0</span></span>

Samuel anoints Saul captain of the Lord's inheritance, [Sa1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001.md). Instructs him concerning his
return home, whom he should meet, and what he should do, [Sa1
10:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002.md). Saul meets a company of
prophets, the Spirit of the Lord comes on him, and he prophesies among
them, [Sa1 10:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009.md). He meets his
uncle, and converses with him, [Sa1
10:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#014.md). Samuel calls the people
together to Mizpeh, and upbraids them for having rejected the Lord as
their king, [Sa1 10:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017.md). Lots are
cast to find out the person proper to be appointed king; Saul is chosen,
[Sa1 10:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#020.md). Samuel shows the manner
of the king, and writes it in a book, [Sa1
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#025.md). Saul goes to Gibeah; and
certain persons refuse to acknowledge him as king, [Sa1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026.md), [Sa1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#027.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 10:1</span></span>

Took a vial of oil - The reasons of this rite the reader will find
largely stated in the note on [Exo
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#007.md). The anointing mentioned here
took place in the open field. See the preceding chapter, [Sa1
9:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#026) (note.md). How simple was the
ancient ceremony of consecrating a king! A prophet or priest poured oil
upon his head, and kissed him; and said, Thus the Lord hath anointed
thee to be captain over his inheritance. This was the whole of the
ceremony. Even in this anointing, Saul is not acknowledged as king, but
simply נגיד nagid, a captain - one who goes before and leads the people.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 10:2</span></span>

Rachel's sepulcher - This was nigh to Bethlehem. See [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019.md).

At Zelzah - If this be the name of a place, nothing is known of it.

The Hebrew בצלצח betseltsach is translated by the Septuagint ἁλλομενους
μεγαλα, dancing greatly: now this may refer to the joy they felt and
expressed on finding the asses, or it may refer to those religious
exultations, or playing on instruments of music, mentioned in the
succeeding verses.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 10:3</span></span>

Three men going up to God to Bethel - Jacob's altar was probably there
still, [Gen 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019.md). However this might
be, it was still considered, as its name implies, the house of God; and
to it they were now going, to offer sacrifice.

The three kids were for sacrifice; the three loaves of bread to be
offered probably as a thank-offering; and the bottle or skin full of
wine, for a libation. When the blood was poured out before the Lord,
then they feasted on the flesh and on the bread; and probably had a
sufficiency of the wine left for their own drinking.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 10:4</span></span>

And they will salute thee - ושאלו לך לשלום veshaalu lecha leshalom, "And
they will inquire of thee concerning peace," i.e., welfare. In the East,
if this salutation be given, then the person or persons giving it may be
reckoned friends; if the others return it, then there is friendship on
both sides. Salaam alicum, Peace to you! is the mode of compellation:
Alicum essalaam, To you be peace! is the return. If you give the former
and receive not the latter, you may expect hostility. The meaning of the
prophet is, When you come to the plain of Tabor, ye shall meet three
men; you need not be afraid of them, for they are friends; and they will
show this friendship, not only by bidding you good speed, but by giving
you two loaves of bread, a provision which you will need for the
remaining part of your journey.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 10:5</span></span>

The hill of God - The Targum says, "The hill on which the ark of the
Lord was. Calmet supposes it to be a height near Gibeah.

The garrison of the Philistines - Probably they kept a watch on the top
of this hill, with a company of soldiers to keep the country in check.

A company of prophets - A company of scribes, says the Targum. Probably
the scholars of the prophets; for the prophets seem to have been the
only accredited teachers, at particular times, in Israel; and at this
time there does not appear to have been any other prophet besides Samuel
in this quarter. Probably the teacher of this school was not an inspired
man, but one acting under the direction of Samuel. Mr. Harmer thinks
that the following custom among the Mohammedans greatly illustrates this
obscure place: "When the children have gone through the Koran, their
relations borrow a fine horse and furniture, and carry them about the
town in procession, with the book in their hand, the rest of their
companions following, and all sorts of music of the country going
before. Dr. Shaw, in p. 195, mentions the same custom; adding the
acclamations of their school-fellows, but taking no notice of the music.
We have no reason, however, to doubt the fact on account of the doctor's
silence; especially as it relates to another part of Barbary, and is
given us by those who resided some years in that country. The doctor
makes no use of this circumstance relating to the education of youth in
Barbary; but the account of the procession above given seems to be a
lively comment on that ancient Jewish custom mentioned in these verses.
That the word prophet often signifies sons or scholars of the prophets,
and that prophesying often implies singing, has been already remarked;
but no author that I know of has given any account of the nature of this
procession, or its design. We are sometimes told that high places were
used for sacrifices; and in one case music, it is certain, played before
them when they went up to worship, [Isa
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#029.md). But did they not also return
from sacrifice with it? We are told that music was used by the prophets
to calm and compose them, and to invite the Divine influences; which is
indeed very true. But is it to the purpose? Did they go forth in this
manner from their college into the noise and interruptions of the world,
to call down the prophetic impulse? But if we consider them as a company
of the sons of the prophets, going in procession with songs of praise
and music playing before them, and recollect that it is usual in this
day for young scholars to go in procession with acclamations and music,
the whole mystery seems to be unravelled. To which may be added, that
Saul was to meet them, and find himself turned into another man; into a
man, perhaps, who is instantaneously made as knowing in the law of God
as the youth to whom they were doing the above honors, or any of his
convoy; which acquaintance with the law of God was very necessary for
one who was to judge among his brethren as their king. For this reason
the Jewish kings were to write out a copy of the law of God, and read it
continually, that they might be perfect masters of it, [Deu
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018.md), [Deu
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#020.md), which accomplishment some youth
had gained whom Saul met with, and who was honored with the solemnity
the sacred historian speaks of, if the customs of South Barbary may be
supposed to be explanatory of those of Judea."

On the word prophet, and the general account given here, I shall
introduce the following illustrations from another work: -

"The word prophet generally conveys the idea of a person so far
acquainted with futurity as to discern some purpose of the Divine Being
relative to his government of the natural and moral world, but which is
not sufficiently matured by the economy of Providence to make, as yet,
its public appearance among men, and to prophesy is usually understood
to imply the foretelling such an event, the time of its appearance, and
the place of its operation, with some preceding and subsequent
circumstances. But that this was the original and only meaning of the
word prophet or prophesy, is very far from being clear. The first place
the word occurs in is [Gen 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007.md), where
the Lord says of Abraham to Abimelech, He is a prophet, (נביא הוא nabi
hu), and will pray (ויתפלל veyith-pallel, will make earnest
intercession) for thee. In the common acceptation of the word it is
certain Abraham was no prophet; but here it seems to signify a man well
acquainted with the Supreme Being, capable of teaching others in Divine
things, and especially a man of prayer - one who had great influence
with the God he worshipped, and whose intercessions were available in
the behalf of others. And in this sense the original word נביא nabi is
used in several places in the Old Testament.

"It was through inattention to this meaning of the word, which appears
to me to be the true, original, and ideal one, that all the commentators
and critics that I have met with have been so sadly puzzled with that
part of the history of Saul which is related [Sa1
10:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009.md); [Sa1
19:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020.md). In these passages the sacred
historian represents Saul, who was neither a prophet nor the son of one,
associating with the prophets, and prophesying among them, to which he
was led by the Spirit of the Lord which came upon him.

"That this can mean no more here than prayer and supplication to God,
accompanied probably with edifying hymns of praise and thanksgiving,
(for they had instruments of music, [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005).md), needs, in my opinion, little
proof. If Saul had prophesied in the common acceptation of the word, it
is not likely that we should have been kept absolutely in the dark
concerning the subject and design of his predictions, of which, by the
way, not one syllable is spoken in the oracles of God. The simple fact
seems to have been this: God, who had chosen this man to govern Israel,
designed to teach him that the Most High alone is the fountain of power,
and that by him only kings could reign so as to execute justice
properly, and be his ministers for good to the people. To accomplish
this gracious purpose, he gave him another heart ([Sa1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009).md)-a disposition totally different
from what he had ever before possessed, and taught him to pray.

"Coming among the sons of the prophets, on whom the Spirit of the Lord
rested, and who were under the instruction of Samuel, ([Sa1
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020).md), while they worshipped God with
music and supplication, Saul also was made a partaker of the same Divine
influence, and prophesied, i.e., made prayer and supplication among
them. To see one who did not belong to the prophetic school thus
incorporated with the prophets, pouring out his soul in prayer and
supplication, was an unusual sight, which could not pass unnoticed,
especially by those of Saul's acquaintance who probably knew him in
times past to have been as careless and ungodly as themselves, (for it
was only now he got that other good Spirit from God, a sufficient proof
that he had it not before). These companions of his, being unacquainted
with that grace which can in a moment influence and change the heart,
would, according to an invariable custom, express their astonishment
with a sneer: Is Saul also among the prophets? That is, in modern
language, 'Can this man pray or preach? He whose education has been the
same as our own, employed in the same secular offices, and formerly
companion with us in what he now affects to call folly and sin? Can such
a person be among the prophets?' Yes, for God may have given him a new
heart; and the Spirit of God, whose inspiration alone can give sound
understanding in sacred things, may have come upon him for this very
purpose, that he might announce unto you the righteousness of the Lord,
and speak unto your ruined souls to edification, and to exhortation, and
to comfort.

"The history of Elijah and the priests of Baal, mentioned in 1 Kings
18:17-40, throws farther light on this subject. In [Kg1
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026.md) it is said, 'They (the priests
of Baal) took a bullock and dressed it, and called on the name of Baal,
from morning to noon, saying, O Baal, hear us! And they leaped upon the
altar, and cried aloud, and cut themselves with knives, till the blood
gushed out; and they prophesied (ויתנבאו vaiyithnabbeu, and they made
supplication) until the time of the evening sacrifice.' From the whole
context it is plain that earnest, importunate prayer, is alone what is
meant by prophesying in this text. See also [Co1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003) (note.md).

"And as all the prophets of God, whose principal business it was to
instruct the people in the way of righteousness, were men of prayer, who
were continually interceding with God in behalf of those to whom they
ministered, the term נביא nabi became their proper appellative; and thus
a part of their office, intercessors for the people, might have given
rise to that name by which the Spirit of God thought proper in after
times to distinguish those whom he sent, not only to pray for and
instruct the people, but also to predict those future events which
concerned the punishment of the incorrigible and the comfort and
exaltation of his own servants." See a sermon which I have printed on
[Co1 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#003.md), entitled, "The Christian
Prophet and his Work;" and see the note on [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007.md).

A psaltery - נבל nebel. As the word signifies in other places a bottle
or flagon, it was probably something like the utricularia tibia or
Bag-Pipe. It often occurs both with the Greeks and Romans, and was
evidently borrowed from the Hebrews.

A tabret - תף toph; a sort of drum or cymbal.

A pipe - חליל chalil, from חל chal, to make a hole or opening; a sort of
pipe, flute, hautboy, clarionet, or the like.

A harp - כנור kinnor; a stringed instrument similar to our harp, or that
on the model of which a harp was formed. On these different instruments
I shall have occasion to speak more at large when I come to the Psalms.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 10:7</span></span>

Thou do as occasion serve thee - After God has shown thee all these
signs that thou art under his especial guidance, fear not to undertake
any thing that belongs to thy office, for God is with thee.

What a number of circumstances thus precisely foretold! Does not this
prove that Samuel was under the continual inspiration of the Almighty?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 10:8</span></span>

Seven days shalt thou tarry - I will come to thee within seven days,
offer sacrifices, receive directions from the Lord, and deliver them to
thee. It is likely that these seven days referred to the time in which
Samuel came to Saul to Gilgal, offered sacrifices, and confirmed the
kingdom to him, after he had defeated the Ammonites. See [Sa1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#014.md), [Sa1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 10:10</span></span>

Behold, a company of prophets - See on [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005) (note.md), etc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 10:12</span></span>

But who is their father? - The Septuagint, in its principal editions,
adds ου Κεις; is it not Kish? This makes the sense more complete.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 10:13</span></span>

He came to the high place - I suppose this to mean the place where
Saul's father lived; as it is evident the next verse shows him to be at
home.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 10:14</span></span>

Saul's uncle - The word דוד dod signifies a beloved one, love, a lover,
friend, etc.; and is the same as David. It is supposed to mean uncle
here; but I think it means some familiar friend.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 10:18</span></span>

I brought up Israel out of Egypt - These are similar to the upbraidings
in [Sa1 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007.md), etc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 10:19</span></span>

Present yourselves - by your tribes - It appears that, in order to find
out the proper person who should be made their king, they must determine
by lot:

1\. The tribe.

2\. The thousands or grand divisions by families.

3\. The smaller divisions by families. And,

4\. The individual.

When the lot was cast for the tribe, Benjamin was taken; when for the
thousand, the division of Matri was taken; when for the family, the
family of Kish was taken; when for the individual, Saul, the son of
Kish, was taken.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 10:21</span></span>

When they sought him, he could not be found - Through modesty or fear he
had secreted himself.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 10:22</span></span>

The Lord answered - What a continual access to God! and what
condescension in his attention to all their requests!

The stuff among which he had secreted himself may mean the carts,
baggage, etc., brought by the people to Mizpeh.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 10:24</span></span>

God save the king - There is no such word here; no, nor in the whole
Bible; nor is it countenanced by any of the versions. The words which we
thus translate here and elsewhere are simply יחי המלך yechi hammelech,
"May the king live;" and so all the versions, the Targum excepted, which
says, May the king prosper! The French Vive le roi! is a proper version
of the Hebrew.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 10:25</span></span>

The manner of the kingdom - It is the same word as in [Sa1
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#009.md); and doubtless the same thing is
implied as is there related. But possibly there was some kind of compact
or covenant between them and Saul; and this was the thing that was
written in a book, and laid up before the Lord, probably near the ark.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 10:26</span></span>

A band of men - Not a military band, as I imagine, but some secret
friends, or companions, who were personally attached to him. Others
think that all the men fit to bear arms are intended; but this seems
inconsistent with the life that Saul led for some time afterwards; for
he appears to have gone into his agricultural concerns, and waited for a
call from the Divine providence. See [Sa1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#005.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 10:27</span></span>

Brought him no presents - They gave him no proofs that they acknowledged
either the Divine appointment or his authority. The Arab chiefs are, to
this day, when on a march or excursion of any kind, supplied with every
necessary by the free-will offerings or presents of the people in the
villages or places where they encamp. Saul was now a public character,
and had a right to support from the public. These sons of Belial refused
to bear their part; they brought him no presents. He marked it, but at
present held his peace; he was as if he were deaf: so says the text. He
was prudent, and did not immediately assume all the consequence to which
his office entitled him. It is probable, however, that tribute is meant
by the word present. The people in general finding they had now a king,
took it for granted that they must pay tribute or taxes to him. This was
a part of the manner of the king which Samuel had shown them; the great
majority had done so, but certain refractory people refused to pay any
thing, on the pretense that such a person as Saul could not be a
deliverer of Israel. How, say they, shall this man save us?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](sa1011.md)

</div>
