<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1016)  [Next](sa1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 17:0</span></span>

The Philistines gather together against Israel at Ephes-dammim, and Saul
and his men pitch their camp near the valley of Elah, [Sa1
17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001). Goliath of Gath, a gigantic
man, whose height was six cubits and a span, defies the armies of
Israel, and proposes to end all contests by single combat; his armor is
described, [Sa1 17:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#004). Saul and his
host are greatly dismayed, [Sa1 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012).
David, having been sent by his father with provisions to his brethren in
the army, hears the challenge, inquires into the circumstances, thinks
it a reproach to Israel that no man can be found to accept the
challenge, is brought before Saul, and proposes to undertake the combat,
vv. 13-32. Saul objects to his youth and inexperience, [Sa1
17:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#033). David shows the grounds on
which he undertakes it, [Sa1 17:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034).
Saul arms him with his own armor: but David, finding them an
encumbrance, puts them off, and takes his staff, his sling, and five
stones out of the brook, and goes to meet Goliath, [Sa1
17:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#038). The Philistine draws near,
despises, defies, and curses him, [Sa1
17:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#041). David retorts his defiance,
[Sa1 17:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#045). They draw near to each
other, and David slings a stone, hits Goliath in the forehead, slays
him, and cuts off his head with his own sword, [Sa1
17:48-51](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#048). The Philistines flee, and
are pursued by the Israelites, [Sa1
17:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#052), [Sa1
17:53](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#053). David brings the head of the
Philistine to Jerusalem, [Sa1 17:54](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#054).
Conversation between Saul and Abner concerning David, who is in
consequence brought before Saul, [Sa1
17:55-58](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#055).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 17:1</span></span>

Now the Philistines gathered together - Calmet thinks that this war
happened eight years after the anointing of David, and ten or twelve
years after the war with the Amalekites. We have already seen that there
was war between Saul and the Philistines all his days. See [Sa1
14:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#052).

Shochoh and Azekah - Places which lay to the south of Jerusalem and to
the west of Bethlehem; about five leagues from the former. Ephes-dammim
was somewhere in the vicinity, but it is not known where. See Calmet.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 17:2</span></span>

The valley of Elah - Some translate this the turpentine valley, or the
valley of the terebinth trees; and others, the valley of oaks. The
situation of this valley is well known.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 17:3</span></span>

The Philistines stood on a mountain - These were two eminences or hills,
from which they could see and talk with each other.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 17:4</span></span>

There went out a champion - Our word champion comes from campus, the
field; Campio est enim ille qui pugnat in campo, hoc est, in castris,
"Champion is he, properly, who fights in the field; i.e., in camps." A
man well skilled in arms, strong, brave, and patriotic.

But is this the meaning of the original איש הבנים ish habbenayim, a
middle man, the man between two; that is, as here, the man who
undertakes to settle the disputes between two armies or nations. So our
ancient champions settled disputes between contending parties by what
was termed camp fight, hence the campio or champion. The versions know
not well what to make of this man. The Vulgate calls him sir spurius, "a
bastard;" the Septuagint, ανηρ δυνατος, "a strong or powerful man;" the
Targum, גברא מביניהון gabra mibbeyneyhon, "a man from between them;" the
Arabic, rujil jibar, "a great or gigantic man;" the Syriac is the same;
and Josephus terms him ανηρ παμμεγεθιστατος, "an immensely great man."
The Vulgate has given him the notation of spurius or bastard, because it
considered the original as expressing a son of two, i.e., a man whose
parents are unknown. Among all these I consider our word champion, as
explained above, the best and most appropriate to the original terms.

Whose height was six cubits and a span - The word cubit signifies the
length from cubitus, the elbow, to the top of the middle finger, which
is generally rated at one foot six inches. The span is the distance from
the top of the middle finger to the end of the thumb, when extended as
far as they can stretch on a plain; this is ordinarily nine inches. Were
we sure that these were the measures, and their extent, which are
intended in the original words, we could easily ascertain the height of
this Philistine; it would then be nine feet nine inches, which is a
tremendous height for a man.

But the versions are not all agreed in his height. The Septuagint read
τεσσαρων πηχεων και σπιθαμης, four cubits and a span; and Josephus reads
the same. It is necessary however to observe that the Septuagint, in the
Codex Alexandrinus, read with the Hebrew text. But what was the length
of the ancient cubit? This has been variously computed; eighteen inches,
twenty inches and a half, and twenty-one inches. If we take the first
measurement, he was nine feet nine; if the second, and read palm instead
of span, with the Vulgate and others, he was ten feet seven inches and a
half; if we take the last, which is the estimate of Graevius, with the
span, he was eleven feet three inches; or if we go to the exactest
measurement, as laid down in Bishop Cumberland's tables, where he
computes the cubit at 21.888 inches, the span at 10.944 inches, and the
palm at 3.684 inches, then the six cubits and the span will make exactly
11 feet 10.272 inches. If we take the palm instead of the span, then the
height will be 11 feet 3.012 inches. But I still think that the nine
feet nine inches is the most reasonable.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 17:5</span></span>

He was armed with a coat of mail - The words in the original, שרון
קשקשים shiryon kaskassim, mean a coat of mail formed of plates of brass
overlapping each other, like the scales of a fish, or tiles of a house.
This is the true notion of the original terms.

With thin plates of brass or iron, overlapping each other, were the
ancient coats of mail formed in different countries; many formed in this
way may be now seen in the tower of London.

The weight - five thousand shekels - Following Bishop Cumberland's
tables, and rating the shekel at two hundred and nineteen grains, and
the Roman ounce at four hundred and thirty-eight grains, we find that
Goliath's coat of mail, weighing five thousand shekels, was exactly one
hundred and fifty-six pounds four ounces avoirdupois. A vast weight for
a coat of mail, but not all out of proportion to the man.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 17:6</span></span>

Greaves of brass upon his legs - This species of armor may be seen on
many ancient monuments. It was a plate of brass (though perhaps
sometimes formed of laminae or plates, like the mail) which covered the
shin or fore part of the leg, from the knee down to the instep, and was
buckled with straps behind the leg. From ancient monuments we find that
it was commonly worn only on one leg. Vegetius, de Re Militari, says,
Pedites Scutati etiam ferreas ocreas in dextris cruribus copebantur
accipere. "The foot soldiers, called Scutati, from their particular
species of shield, were obliged to use iron greaves on their right
legs." One of these may be seen in the monument of the gladiator Buto,
in Montfaucon; and another in the Mosaic pavement at Bognor, in Surrey.

A target of brass between his shoulders - When not actually engaged,
soldiers threw their shields behind their back, so that they appeared to
rest or hang between the shoulders.

There are different opinions concerning this piece of armor, called here
כידון kidon. Some think it was a covering for the shoulders; others,
that it was a javelin or dart; others, that it was a lance; some, a
club; and others, a sword. It is certainly distinguished from the
shield, [Sa1 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#041), and is translated
a spear, [Jos 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 17:7</span></span>

The staff on his spear was like a weaver's beam - Either like that on
which the warp is rolled, or that on which the cloth is rolled. We know
not how thick this was, because there were several sorts of looms, and
the sizes of the beams very dissimilar. Our woollen, linen, cotton, and
silk looms are all different in the size of their beams; and I have seen
several that I should not suppose too thick, though they might be too
short, for Goliath's spear.

His spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron - That is, his
spear's head was of iron, and it weighed six hundred shekels; this,
according to the former computation, would amount to eighteen pounds
twelve ounces.

And one bearing a shield - הצנה hatstsinnah, from צן tsan, pointed or
penetrating, if it do not mean some kind of a lance, must mean a shield,
with what is called the umbo, a sharp protuberance, in the middle, with
which they could as effectually annoy their enemies as defend
themselves. Many of the old Highland targets were made with a projecting
dagger in the center. Taking the proportions of things unknown to those
known, the armor of Goliath is supposed to have weighed not less than
two hundred and seventy-two pounds thirteen ounces! Plutarch informs us
that the ordinary weight of a soldier's panoply, or complete armor, was
one talent, or sixty pounds; and that one Alcimus, in the army of
Demetrius, was considered as a prodigy, because his panoply weighed two
talents, or one hundred and twenty pounds.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 17:8</span></span>

I a Philistine - The Targum adds much to this speech. This is the
substance: "I am Goliath the Philistine of Gath, who killed the two sons
of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas the priests; and led into captivity the ark
of the covenant of Jehovah, and placed it in the temple of Dagon my god;
and it remained in the cities of the Philistines seven months. Also, in
all our battles I have gone at the head of the army, and we conquered
and cut down men, and laid them as low as the dust of the earth; and to
this day the Philistines have not granted me the honor of being chief of
a thousand men. And ye, men of Israel, what noble exploit has Saul, the
son of Kish, of Gibeah, done, that ye should have made him king over
you? If he be a hero, let him come down himself and fight with me; but
if he be a weak or cowardly man, then choose you out a man that he may
come down to me."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 17:9</span></span>

Then will we be your servants - Of this stipulation we hear nothing
farther.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 17:10</span></span>

I defy - אני חרפתי ani cheraphti, "I strip and make bare," the armies of
Israel; for none dared to fight him. From the Dhunoor Veda Shastra it
appears that, among the Hindoos, it was common, before the commencement
of an engagement, to challenge the enemy by throwing out some terms of
abuse, similar to those used by Goliath. We find this also in Homer: his
heroes scold each other heartily before they begin to fight. See on [Sa1
17:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#043) (note).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 17:11</span></span>

Saul and all Israel - were dismayed - They saw no man able to accept the
challenge.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 17:12</span></span>

The 12th verse, to the 31st inclusive, are wanting in the Septuagint; as
also the 41st verse; and from the 54th to the end; with the first five
verses of 1 Samuel 18, and the 9th, 10th, 11th, 17th, 18th, and 19th of
the same.

All these parts are found in the Codex Alexandrinus; but it appears that
the MS. from which the Codex Alexandrinus was copied, had them not. See
observations at the end of this chapter, [Sa1
17:58](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#058) (note). Dr. Kennicott has
rendered it very probable that these portions are not a genuine part of
the text.

Notwithstanding what Bishop Warburton and others have done to clear the
chronology of the present printed Hebrew, it is impossible to make a
clear consistent sense of the history, unless these verses are omitted.
Let any one read the eleventh verse in connection with the
thirty-second, leave out the forty-first, and connect the fifty-fourth
with the sixth of 1 Samuel 18, and he will be perfectly convinced that
there is nothing wanting to make the sense complete; to say nothing of
the other omissions noted above. If the above be taken in as genuine,
the ingenuity of man has hitherto failed to free the whole from apparent
contradiction and absurdity. I must confess that where every one else
has failed, I have no hope of succeeding: I must, therefore, leave all
farther attempts to justify the chronology; and refer to those who have
written for and against the genuineness of this part of the common
Hebrew text. At the end of the chapter I shall introduce some extracts
from Kennicott and Pilkington: and leave the whole with the unprejudiced
and discerning reader.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 17:18</span></span>

Carry these ten cheeses - Cheeses of milk, says the margin. In the East
they do not make what we call cheese: they press the milk but slightly,
and carry it in rush baskets. It is highly salted, and little different
from curds.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 17:19</span></span>

Fighting with the Philistines - See at the end of the chapter, [Sa1
17:58](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#058) (note).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 17:29</span></span>

Is there not a cause? - הלוא דבר הוא halo dabar hu. I believe the
meaning is what several of the versions express: I have spoken but a
word. And should a man be made an offender for a word?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 17:32</span></span>

And David said - This properly connects with the eleventh verse.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa1 17:33</span></span>

Thou art but a youth - Supposed to be about twenty-two or twenty-three
years of age.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">sa1 17:34</span></span>

Thy servant kept his father's sheep - He found it necessary to give Saul
the reasons why he undertook this combat; and why he expected to be
victorious.

1\. I have courage to undertake it, and strength to perform it.

2\. Both have been tried in a very signal manner:

(1). A lion came upon my flock, and seized a lamb; I ran after him, he
attacked me, I seized hold of him by his shaggy locks, smote and slew
him, and delivered the lamb.

(2). A bear came in the same way, and I attacked and slew him.

3\. This, with whom I am to fight, is a Philistine, an uncircumcised
man; one who is an enemy to God: God therefore will not be on his side.
On that ground I have nothing to fear.

4\. He has defied the armies of the Lord; and has in effect defied
Jehovah himself: therefore the battle is the Lord's, and he will stand
by me.

5\. I have perfect confidence in his protection and defense; for they
that trust in him shall never be confounded.

6\. I conclude, therefore, that the Lord, who delivered me out of the
paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, will deliver me out of
the hand of the Philistine.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa1 17:35</span></span>

The slaying of the lion and the bear mentioned here, must have taken
place at two different times; perhaps the verse should be read thus: I
went out after him, (the lion). and smote him, etc. And when he (the
bear) rose up against me, I caught him by the beard and slew him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa1 17:37</span></span>

Go, and the Lord be with thee - Saul saw that these were reasonable
grounds of confidence, and therefore wished him success.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa1 17:38</span></span>

Saul armed David - He knew that although the battle was the Lord's, yet
prudent means should be used to secure success.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa1 17:39</span></span>

I cannot go with these - In ancient times it required considerable
exercise and training to make a man expert in the use of such heavy
armor; armor which in the present day scarcely a man is to be found who
is able to carry; and so it must have been then, until that practice
which arises from frequent use had made the proprietor perfect. I have
not proved them says David: I am wholly unaccustomed to such armor and
it would be an encumbrance to me.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">sa1 17:40</span></span>

He took his staff - What we would call his crook.

Five smooth stones -

1\. Had they been rough or angular, they would not have passed easily
through the air, and their asperities would, in the course of their
passage, have given them a false direction.

2\. Had they not been smooth, they could not have been readily
despatched from the sling.

A shepherd's bag - That in which he generally carried his provisions
while keeping the sheep in the open country.

And his sling - The sling, both among the Greeks and Hebrews, has been a
powerful offensive weapon. See what has been said on [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016) (note). It is composed of two
strings and a leathern strap; the strap is in the middle, and is the
place where the stone or bullet lies. The string on the right end of the
strap is firmly fastened to the hand; that on the left is held between
the thumb and middle joint of the fore finger. It is then whirled two or
three times round the head; and when discharged, the finger and thumb
let go their hold of the left end string. The velocity and force of the
sling are in proportion to the distance of the strap, where the bullet
lies, from the shoulder joint. Hence the ancient Baleares, or
inhabitants of Majorca and Minorca, are said to have had three slings of
different lengths, the longest they used when the enemy was at the
greatest distance; the middle one, on their nearer approach; and the
shortest, when they came into the ordinary fighting distance in the
field. The shortest is the most certain, though not the most powerful.
The Balearians are said to have had one of their slings constantly bound
about their head, to have used the second as a girdle, and to have
carried the third always in their hand. See Diod. Sic. lib. v., c. 18,
p. 286, edit. Bipont.

In the use of the sling it requires much practice to hit the mark; but
when once this dexterity is acquired, the sling is nearly as fatal as
the musket or bow; see on [Sa1 17:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#049)
(note). David was evidently an expert marksman; and his sling gave him
greatly the advantage over Goliath; an advantage of which the giant does
not seem to have been aware. He could hit him within any speaking
distance, if he missed once, he had as many chances as he had stones;
and after all, being unencumbered with armor, young, and athletic, he
could have saved his life by flight. Against him the Philistine could do
but little, except in close fight; it is true he appears to have had a
javelin or missile spear, (see on [Sa1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006) (note)), but David took care to
prevent the use of all such weapons, by giving him the first blow.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">sa1 17:41</span></span>

The man that bare the shield - See on [Sa1
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007) (note).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">sa1 17:42</span></span>

He disdained him - He held him in contempt; he saw that he was young,
and from his ruddy complexion supposed him to be effeminate.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">sa1 17:43</span></span>

Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with staves? - It is very likely that
Goliath did not perceive the sling, which David might have kept coiled
up within his hand.

Cursed David by his gods - Prayed his gods to curse him. This long
parley between David and Goliath is quite in the style of those times. A
Hindoo sometimes in a fit of anger says to his enemy, The goddess Kalee
shall devour thee! May Doorga destroy thee! Homer's heroes have
generally an altercation before they engage; and sometimes enter into
geographical and genealogical discussions, and vaunt and scold most
contemptibly.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">sa1 17:44</span></span>

Come to me, and I will give thy flesh - He intended, as soon as he could
lay hold on him, to pull him to pieces.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">sa1 17:45</span></span>

Thou comest to me with a sword - I come to thee with the name (בשם
beshem) of Jehovah of hosts; the God of the armies of Israel. What
Goliath expected from his arms, David expected from the ineffable name.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:46](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">sa1 17:46</span></span>

This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand - This was a direct
and circumstantial prophecy of what did take place.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">sa1 17:47</span></span>

For the battle is the Lord's - It is the Lord's war: you are fighting
against him and his religion, as the champion of your party; I am
fighting for God, as the champion of his cause.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">sa1 17:48</span></span>

The Philistine arose - This was an end of the parley; the Philistine
came forward to meet David, and David on his part ran forward to meet
the Philistine.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">sa1 17:49</span></span>

Smote the Philistine in his forehead - Except his face, Goliath was
everywhere covered over with strong armor. Either he had no beaver to
his helmet, or it was lifted up so as to expose his forehead; but it
does not appear that the ancient helmets had any covering for the face.
The Septuagint however supposes that the stone passed through the
helmet, and sank into his forehead: Και διεδυ ὁ λιθος δια της
περικεφαλαιας εις το μετωπον αυτου, "and the stone passed through his
helmet, and sank into his skull." To some this has appeared perfectly
improbable; but we are assured by ancient writers that scarcely any
thing could resist the force of the sling.

Diodorus Siculus, lib. v., c. 18, p. 287, edit. Bipont, says "The
Baleares, in time of war, sling greater stones than any other people,
and with such force, that they seem as if projected from a catapult. Διο
και κατα τας τειχομαχιας εν ταις προσβολαις τυπτοντες τους προ των
επαλξεων εφεστωτας κατατραυματιζουσιν· εν δε ταις παραταξεσι τους τε
θυρεους, και τα κρανη, και παν σκεπαστηριον ὁπλον συντριβουσι. Κατα δε
την ευστοχιαν οὑτως ακριβεις εισιν, ὡστε κατα το πλειστον μη ἁμαρτανειν
του προκειμενου σκοπου Therefore, in assaults made on fortified towns,
they grievously wound the besieged; and in battle they break in pieces
the shields, helmets, and every species of armor by which the body is
defended. And they are such exact marksmen that they scarcely ever miss
that at which they aim." The historian accounts for their great accuracy
and power in the use of the sling, from this circumstance: Αιτιαι δε
τουτων, κ.τ.λ. "They attain to this perfection by frequent exercise from
their childhood; for while they are young and under their mother's care,
they are obliged to learn to sling; for they fasten bread for a mark at
the top of the pole; and till the child hit the bread he must remain
fasting; and when he has hit it, the mother gives it to him to eat." -
Ibid.

I have given these passages at large, because they contain several
curious facts, and sufficiently account for the force and accuracy with
which David slung his stone at Goliath. We find also in the μη
ἁμαρτανειν, not miss the mark, of the historian, the true notion of
ἁμαρτανειν, to sin, which I have contended for elsewhere. He who sins,
though he aims thereby at his gratification and profit, misses the mark
of present and eternal felicity.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">sa1 17:51</span></span>

When the Philistines saw their champion was dead, they fled - They were
panic-struck; and not being willing to fulfill the condition which was
stipulated by Goliath, they precipitately left the field. The Israelites
took a proper advantage of these circumstances, and totally routed their
enemies.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:54](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">sa1 17:54</span></span>

David took the head of the Philistine - It has been already remarked
that this, with the following verses, and the five first verses of the
eighteenth chapter, are omitted by the Septuagint. See the observations
at the end, [Sa1 17:58](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#058) (note).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:58](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">sa1 17:58</span></span>

Whose son art thou, thou young man? - That Saul should not know David
with whom he had treated a little before, and even armed him for the
combat, and that he should not know who his father was, though he had
sent to his father for permission to David to reside constantly with
him, ([Sa1 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#022)), is exceedingly
strange! I fear all Bishop Warburton's attempts to rectify the
chronology by assumed anticipations, will not account for this. I must
honestly confess they do not satisfy me; and I must refer the reader to
what immediately follows on the authenticity of the verses which concern
this subject.

On the subject of that large omission in the Septuagint of which I have
spoken on [Sa1 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012), I here subjoin
the reasons of Mr. Pilkington and Dr. Kennicott for supposing it to be
an interpolation of some rabbinical writer, added at a very early period
to the Hebrew text.

"Had every version of the Hebrew text," says Mr. Pilkington, "agreed to
give a translation of this passage, as we now find, the attempts of
clearing it from its embarrassments would have been attended with very
great difficulties; but, as in several other cases before mentioned, so
here, the providence of God seems to have so far secured the credit of
those who were appointed to be the penmen of the oracles of truth, that
the defense of their original records may be undertaken upon good
grounds, and supported by sufficient evidence. For we are now happily in
possession of an ancient version of these two chapters, which appears to
have been made from a Hebrew copy, which had none of the thirty-nine
verses which are here supposed to have been interpolated, nor was
similar to what we have at present in those places which are here
supposed to have been altered. This version is found in the Vatican copy
of the Seventy, which whoever reads and considers, will find the
accounts there given regular, consistent, and probable. It will be
proper, therefore, to examine the several parts where such alterations
are supposed to have been made in the Hebrew text, in order to produce
such other external or internal evidence, as shall be necessary to
support the charge of interpolation, which ought not to be laid merely
upon the authority of any single version.

"The first passage, which is not translated in the Vatican copy of the
Greek version, is from the 11th to the 32d verse of the 17th chapter
wherein we have an account:

1\. Of David's being sent to the camp to visit his brethren.

2\. Of his conversation with the men of Israel, relating to Goliath's
challenge; and their informing him of the premium Saul had offered to
any one that should accept it, and come off victorious.

3\. Of Eliab's remarkable behavior to his brother David, upon his making
this inquiry. And,

4\. Of Saul's being made acquainted with what David had said upon this
occasion.

"It is obvious to remark upon this passage: -

"1. That, after David had been of so much service to the king, in
causing the evil spirit to depart from him; after its being recorded how
greatly Saul loved him, and that he had made him his armor-bearer; after
the king had sent to Jesse to signify his intention of keeping his son
with him; all of which are particularly mentioned in the latter part of
the preceding chapter; the account of his keeping his father's sheep
afterwards, and being sent to his brethren upon this occasion, must
appear to be somewhat improbable.

2\. That what is here said of the premium that Saul had offered to him
who should conquer the Philistine, is not well consistent with the
accounts afterwards given, of which we shall have occasion to take
particular notice.

3\. That Eliab's behavior, as here represented, is not only remarkable
but unaccountable and absurd. And,

4\. That the inquiries of a young man, who is not said to have declared
any intentions of accepting the challenge of the Philistine, would
scarcely have been related to the king.

But now, if this passage be supposed to have been interpolated, we must
see how the connection stands upon its being omitted."

"[Sa1 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#011). 'When Saul and all Israel
heard these words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly
afraid.'

"[Sa1 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#032). 'Then David said unto
Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and
fight with this Philistine.'

"No connection can be more proper, and in this view David is represented
as being at that time an attendant upon the king; and when we had been
told just before, ([Sa1 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#021)), that
Saul had made him his armor-bearer, we might justly expect to find him
with him when the battle was set in array; [Sa1
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#002). In this connection David is also
represented as fully answering the character before given of him: 'A
mighty valiant man, and a man of war,' [Sa1
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018), and ready to fight with the
giant upon the first proposal, (for the account of the Philistine
presenting himself forty days is in this passage here supposed to have
been interpolated, [Sa1 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#016)). I
shall leave it to the critical Hebrew reader to make what particular
remarks he may think proper in respect to the style and manner of
expression in these twenty verses, and let Jesse go for an old man
amongst men in the days of Saul, etc." - Pilkington's Remarks upon
several Passages of Scripture, p. 62.

"The authorities," says Dr. Kennicott, "here brought to prove this great
interpolation are the internal evidence arising from the context, and
the external arising from the Vatican copy of the Greek version. But how
then reads the Alexandrian MS.? The remarks acknowledge that this MS.
agrees here with the corrupted Hebrew; and therefore was probably
translated, in this part, from some late Hebrew copy which had thus been
interpolated; see pages 72, 75. Now that these two MSS. do contain
different readings in some places, I observed in pages 398-404, and 414.
And in this 17th chapter of Samuel, [Sa1
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#004), the Alexandrian MS. says,
agreeably to the present Hebrew, that the height of Goliath was six
cubits and a span, i.e., above eleven feet; but the Vatican MS.,
agreeably to Josephus, that it was four cubits and a span, i.e., near
eight feet. And in [Sa1 17:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#043), what
the Vatican renders he cursed David by his gods, the Alexandrian renders
by his idols. But though the Hebrew text might be consulted and a few
words differently rendered by the transcriber of one of these MSS., or
by the transcribers of the MSS. from which these MSS. were taken; yet,
as these MSS. do contain, in this chapter, such Greek as is almost
universally the same, (in verb, noun, and particle), I presume that they
contain here the same translation with the designed alteration of a few
words, and with the difference of the interpolated verses found in the
Alexandrian MS.

"But, after all, what if the Alexandrian MS., which now has these verses
should itself prove them interpolated? What if the very words of this
very MS. demonstrate that these verses were not in some former Greek
MS.? Certainly if the Alexandrian MS. should be thus found, at last, not
to contradict, but to confirm the Vatican in its omission of these
twenty verses, the concurrence of these authorities will render the
argument much more forcible and convincing.

"Let us then state the present question; which is, Whether the twenty
verses between [Sa1 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#011) and [Sa1
17:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#032), which are now in the Hebrew
text, are interpolated? The Vatican MS. goes on immediately from the end
of the 11th verse (και εφοβηθησαν σφοδρα) to [Sa1
17:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#032), which begins και ειπε Δαυιδ:
whereas the 12th verse in the Hebrew begins, not with a speech, but with
David's birth and parentage. If then the Alexandrian MS. begins its
present 12th verse as the 32d verse begins, and as the 12th verse could
not begin properly, I appeal to any man of judgment whether the
transcriber was not certainly copying from a ME. in which the 32d verse
succeeded the 11th verse; and if so, then from a MS. which had not these
intermediate verses? Now that this is the fact, the case will at once
appear upon examining the Alexandrian copy, where the 12th verse begins
with ΚΑΙ ΕΙΠΕ ΔΑΥΙΔ; as the 32d verse begins, and as the 12th verse
could not begin properly.

"The case seems clearly to be, that the transcriber, having wrote what
is now in the 11th verse, was beginning what is now the 32d verse; when,
after writing και ειπε Δαυιδ, he perceived that either the Hebrew, or
some other Greek copy, or the margin of his own copy, had several
intermediate verses: upon which, without blotting out the significant
word ΕΙΠΕ, he goes on to write the addition: thus fortunately leaving a
decisive proof of his own great interpolation. if this addition was in
the margin of that MS. from which the Alexandrian was transcribed, it
might be inserted by that transcriber; but if it was inserted either
from the Hebrew, or from any other Greek copy, the transcriber of this
MS. seems to have had too little learning for such a proceeding. If it
was done by the writer of that former MS., then the interpolation may be
a hundred or a hundred and fifty years older than the Alexandrian MS.
Perhaps the earliest Christian writer who enlarges upon the strong
circumstance of David's coming from the sheep to the army, is
Chrysostom, in his homily upon David and Saul; so that it had then been
long in some copies of the Greek version. The truth seems to be, that
the addition of these twenty verses took its first rise from what
Josephus had inserted in his variation and embellishment of this
history; but that many circumstances were afterwards added to his
additions.

"For (and it is extremely remarkable) though Josephus has some, he has
not half the improbabilities which are found at present in the sacred
history: as for instance: Nothing of the armies being fighting in the
valley, or fighting at all, when David was sent by his father, as in
[Sa1 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#019). Nothing of the host going
forth, and shouting for the battle, at the time of David's arrival, as
in [Sa1 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#020). Nothing of all the men
of Israel fleeing from Goliath, as in [Sa1
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#024); on the contrary, the two
armies, (it should seem), continued upon their two mountains. Nothing of
David's long conversation with the soldiers, [Sa1
17:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025), in seasons so very improper,
as, whilst they were shouting for the battle, or whilst they were
fleeing from Goliath; and fleeing from a man after they had seen him and
heard him twice in every day for forty days together, [Sa1
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#016), the two armies, all this long
while, leaning upon their arms, and looking very peaceably at one
another. Nothing of Goliath's repeating his challenge every morning and
every evening, as in [Sa1 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#016).
David, (it is said, [Sa1 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#023)),
happened to hear one of these challenges; but if he heard the evening
challenge, it would have been then too late for the several transactions
before, and the long pursuit after, Goliath's death; and David could not
well hear the morning challenge, because he could scarce have arrived so
early, after travelling from Beth-lehem to the army, (about fifteen
miles), and bringing with him an ephah of parched corn, and ten loaves,
and ten cheeses, as in [Sa1 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#017),
[Sa1 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#018). Nothing of encouraging any
man to fight Goliath, by an offer of the kinds daughter, [Sa1
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025); which, as it seems from the
subsequent history, had never been thought of; and which, had it been
offered, would probably have been accepted by some man or other out of
the whole army. Nothing of Eliab's reprimanding David for coming to see
the battle, as in [Sa1 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#028); but for
a very different reason; and, indeed, it is highly improbable that Eliab
should treat him at all with contempt and scurrility, after having seen
Samuel anoint him for the future king of Israel, see [Sa1
16:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001). Nothing of a second
conversation between David and the soldiers, as in [Sa1
17:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#030), [Sa1
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#031). Nothing of Saul and Abner's not
knowing who was David's father, at the time of his going forth against
the Philistine, as in [Sa1 17:55](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#055).
Nothing of David's being introduced to the king by Abner, in form, after
killing the Philistine, [Sa1 17:57](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#057), at
a time when the king and the captain of the host had no leisure for
complemental ceremony; but were set out, [Sa1
17:57](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#057), in immediate and full pursuit
of the Philistines. Nor, lastly, is any notice taken here by Josephus of
what now begins the 18th chapter, Jonathan's friendship for David, which
is related elsewhere, and in a different manner; on the contrary, as
soon as Josephus has mentioned Goliath's death, and told us that Saul
and all Israel shouted, and fell at once upon the Philistines, and that,
when the pursuit was ended, the head of Goliath was carried by David
into his own tent, (and he could have then no tent of his own if he had
not been then an officer in the army): I say, as soon as Josephus has
recorded these circumstances, he goes on to Saul's envy and hatred of
David, arising from the women's songs of congratulation; exactly as
these capital parts of the history are connected in the Vatican MS. And
with this circumstance I shall conclude these remarks; earnestly
recommending the whole to the learned reader's attentive examination.

"It must not however be forgot, that the learned F. Houbigant has, in
his Bible, placed these twenty verses (from the 11th to the 32d) between
hooks, as containing a passage which comes in very improperly.

"If it be inquired as to this interpolation in Samuel, when it could
possibly be introduced into the text? It may be observed that, about the
time of Josephus, the Jews seem to have been fond of enlarging and, as
they vainly thought, embellishing the sacred history, by inventing
speeches, and prayers, and hymns, and also new articles of history, and
these of considerable length; witness the several additions to the book
of Esther; witness the long story concerning wine, women, and truth,
inserted amidst parts of the genuine history of Ezra and Nehemiah, and
worked up into what is now called the First Book of Esdras; witness the
hymn of the three children in the fiery furnace, added to Daniel; and
witness also the many additions in Josephus. Certainly, then, some few
remarks might be noted by the Jews, and some few of their historical
additions might be inserted in the margin of their Hebrew copies; which
might afterwards be taken into the text itself by injudicious
transcribers.

"The history of David's conquest of the mighty and insulting Philistine
is certainly very engaging; and it gives a most amiable description of a
brave young man, relying with firm confidence upon the aid of the God of
battle against the blaspheming enemy. It is not therefore very strange
that some fanciful rabbin should be particularly struck with the strange
circumstances of the Philistines daring to challenge all Israel; and
David's cutting off the giant's head with the giant's own sword. And
then, finding that Josephus had said that David came from the sheep to
the camp, and happened to hear the challenge, the rabbin might think it
very natural that David should be indignant against the giant, and talk
valorously to the soldiers, and that the soldiers should mightily
encourage David; and then, to be sure, this was the most lucky season to
introduce the celebrated friendship of Jonathan for David; particularly
when, according to these additions, Jonathan had seen Abner leading
David in triumph to the king's presence; every one admiring the young
hero, as he proudly advanced with the grim head of the Philistine in his
hand. So that this multiform addition and fanciful embellishment of the
rabbin reminds one of the motley absurdity described by the poet in the
famous lines: -

Humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam

Jungere si velit, et varias inducere plasmas, etc.

"The passage supposed to be interpolated here, was in the Hebrew text
before the time of Aquila; because there are preserved a few of the
differences in those translations of it which were made by Aquila,
Theodotion, and Symmachus. These verses, being thus acknowledged at that
time, would doubtless be found in such copies as the Jews then declared
to be genuine, and which they delivered afterwards to Origen as such.
And that Origen did refer to the Jews for such copies as they held
genuine, he allows in his epistle to Africanus; for there he speaks of
soothing the Jews, in order to get pure copies from them." - Kennicott's
Second Dissertation on the Hebrew Text, p. 419.

In the general dissertation which Dr. Kennicott has prefixed to his
edition of the Hebrew Bible, he gives additional evidence that the
verses in question were not found originally in the Septuagint, and
consequently not in the Hebrew copy used for that version. Several MSS.
in the royal library at Paris either omit these verses or have them with
asterisks or notes of dubiousness. And the collation by Dr. Holmes and
his continuators has brought farther proof of the fact. From the whole,
there is considerable evidence that these verses were not in the
Septuagint in the time of Origen; and if they were not in the MSS. used
by Origen, it is very probable they were not in that version at first;
and if they were not in the Septuagint at first, it is very probable
that they were not in the Hebrew text one hundred and fifty years before
Christ; and if not then in the Hebrew text, it is very probable they
were not in that text originally. See Dissertation on Gen., p. 9; and
Remarks on Select Passages, p. 104.

I have only to remark here, that the historical books of the Old
Testament have suffered more by the carelessness or infidelity of
transcribers than any other parts of the sacred volume; and of this the
two books of Samuel, the two books of Kings, and the two books of
Chronicles, give the most decided and unequivocal proofs. Of this also
the reader has already had considerable evidence; and he will find this
greatly increased as he proceeds.

It seems to me that the Jewish copyists had not the same opinion of the
Divine inspiration of those books as they had of those of the law and
the prophets; and have therefore made no scruple to insert some of their
own traditions, or the glosses of their doctors, in different parts; for
as the whole must evidently appear to them as a compilation from their
public records, they thought it no harm to make different alterations
and additions from popular statements of the same facts, which they
found in general circulation. This is notoriously the case in Josephus;
this will account, and it does to me very satisfactorily, for many of
the various readings now found in the Hebrew text of the historical
books. They were held in less reverence, and they were copied with less
care, and emended with less critical skill, than the pentateuch and the
prophets; and on them the hands of careless, ignorant, and temerarious
scribes, have too frequently been laid. To deny this, only betrays a
portion of the same ignorance which was the parent of those disorders;
and attempts to blink the question, though they may with some be an
argument of zeal, yet with all the sincere and truly enlightened friends
of Divine revelation, will be considered to be as dangerous as they are
absurd.

Where the rash or ignorant hand of man has fixed a blot on the Divine
records, let them who in the providence of God are qualified for the
task wipe it off; and while they have the thanks of all honest men, God
will have the glory.

There have been many who have affected to deny the existence of giants.
There is no doubt that the accounts given of several are either fabulous
or greatly exaggerated. But men of an extraordinary size are not
uncommon even in our own day: I knew two brothers of the name of Knight,
who were born in the same township with myself, who were seven feet six
inches high; and another, in the same place, Charles Burns who was eight
feet six! These men were well and proportionately made. I have known
others of this height, whose limbs were out of all proportion; their
knees bent in, and joints rickety.

Ireland, properly speaking, is the only nation on the earth that
produces Giants; and let me tell the poor, that this is the only nation
in the world that may be said to live on potatoes; with little bread,
and less flesh-meat.

I have seen and entertained in my house the famous Polish dwarf, the
Count Boruwlaski, who was about thirty-six inches high, every part of
whose person was formed with the most perfect and delicate symmetry. The
prodigious height and bulk of Charles Burns, and the astonishing
diminutiveness of Count Boruwlaski, could not be properly estimated but
by comparing both together. Each was a perfect man; and yet, in quantum,
how disproportionate! Man is the only creature in whom the extremes of
minuteness and magnitude are so apparent, and yet the proportion of the
parts in each strictly correlative.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 18](sa1018)

</div>
