<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1023)  [Next](sa1025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 24:0</span></span>

Saul is informed that David is at En-gedi, and goes to seek him with
three thousand men, [Sa1 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001.md), [Sa1
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002.md). He goes into a cave to repose,
where David and his men lay hid; who, observing this, exhort David to
take away his life: David refuses, and contents himself with privily
cutting off Saul's skirt, [Sa1 24:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003.md).
When Saul departed, not knowing what was done, David called after him;
showed him that his life had been in his power; expostulates strongly
with him; and appeals to God, the Judge of his innocence, [Sa1
24:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#008.md). Saul confesses David's
uprightness, acknowledges his obligation to him for sparing his life;
and causes him to swear that, when he should come to the kingdom, he
would not destroy his seed, [Sa1
24:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#017.md). Saul returns home, and David
and his men stay in the hold, [Sa1
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#022.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 24:1</span></span>

Saul was returned - It is very probable that it was only a small
marauding party that had made an excursion in the Israelitish borders,
and this invasion was soon suppressed.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 24:2</span></span>

Rocks of the wild goats - The original (צורי היעלים tsurey haiyeelim) is
variously understood. The Vulgate makes a paraphrase: Super
abruptissimas petras quae solis ibicibus perviae sunt; "On the most
precipitous rocks over which the ibexes alone can travel." The Targum:
the caverns of the rocks. The Septuagint make the original a proper
name; for out of צרוי היעלים tsurey haiyeelim, they make Σαδδαιεμ
Saddaiem, and in some copies Αειαμειν Aeiamein, which are evidently
corruptions of the Hebrew.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 24:3</span></span>

The sheep-cotes - Caves in the rocks, in which it is common, even to the
present time, for shepherds and their flocks to lodge. According to
Strabo there are caverns in Syria, one of which is capable of containing
four thousand men: Ὡν ἑν και τετρακισχιλιους ανθρωπους δεξασθαι
δυναμενον; lib. xvi. p. 1096. Edit. 1707.

Saul went in to cover his feet - Perhaps this phrase signifies exactly
what the Vulgate has rendered it, ut purparet ventrem. The Septuagint,
the Targum, and the Arabic understand it in the same way. It is likely
that, when he had performed this act of necessity, he lay down to repose
himself, and it was while he was asleep that David cut off the skirt of
his robe. It is strange that Saul was not aware that there might be men
lying in wait in such a place; and the rabbins have invented a most
curious conceit to account for Saul's security: "God, foreseeing that
Saul would come to this cave, caused a spider to weave her web over the
mouth of it, which, when Saul perceived, he took for granted that no
person had lately been there, and consequently he entered it without
suspicion." This may be literally true; and we know that even a spider
in the hand of God may be the instrument of a great salvation. This is a
Jewish tradition, and one of the most elegant and instructive in their
whole collection.

David and his men remained in the sides of the cave - This is no
hyperbole; we have not only the authority of Strabo as above mentioned,
but we have the authority of the most accurate travelers, to attest the
fact of the vast capacity of caves in the East.

Dr. Pococke observes: "Beyond the valley (of Tekoa) there is a very
large grotto, which the Arabs call El Maamah, a hiding place; the high
rocks on each side of the valley are almost perpendicular, and the way
to the grotto is by a terrace formed in the rock, which is very narrow.
There are two entrances into it; we went by the farthest, which leads by
a narrow passage into a large grotto, the rock being supported by great
natural pillars; the top of it rises in several parts like domes; the
grotto is perfectly dry. There is a tradition that the people of the
country, to the number of thirty thousand, retired into this grotto to
avoid a bad air. This place is so strong that one would imagine it to be
one of the strong holds of En-gedi, to which David and his men fled from
Saul; and possibly it may be that very cave in which he cut off Saul's
skirt, for David and his men might with great ease lie hid there and not
be seen by him." - Pococke's Travels, vol. ii., part 1, p. 41.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 24:4</span></span>

And the men of David said - We know not to what promise of God the men
of David refer; they perhaps meant no more than to say,

"Behold, the Lord hath delivered thine enemy into thy land, now do to
him as he wishes to do to thee."

Then David arose - Though I have a high opinion of the character of
David, yet the circumstances of the case seem to indicate that he arose
to take away the life of Saul, and that it was in reference to this that
his heart smote him. It appears that he rose up immediately at the
desire of his men to slay his inveterate enemy, and one whom he knew the
Lord had rejected; but when about to do it he was prevented by the
remonstrance of God in his conscience, and instead of cutting off his
head, as he might have done, an act which the laws and usages of war
would have justified, he contented himself with cutting off the skirt of
his robe; and he did this only to show Saul how much he had been in his
power.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 24:6</span></span>

The Lord's anointed - However unworthily Saul was now acting, he had
been appointed to his high office by God himself, and he could only be
removed by the authority which placed him on the throne. Even David, who
knew he was appointed to reign in his stead, and whose life Saul had
often sought to destroy, did not conceive that he had any right to take
away his life; and he grounds the reasons of his forbearance on this -
He is my master, I am his subject. He is the Lord's anointed, and
therefore sacred as to his person in the Lord's sight. It is an awful
thing to kill a king, even the most untoward, when he has once been
constitutionally appointed to the throne. No experiment of this kind has
ever succeeded; the Lord abhors king killing. Had David taken away the
life of Saul at this time, he would, in the sight of God, have been a
murderer.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 24:7</span></span>

Suffered them not to rise against Saul - As he could restrain them, it
was his duty to do so; had he connived at their killing him, David would
have been the murderer. In praying for the king we call God the only
Ruler of princes, for this simple reason, that their authority is the
highest among men, and next to that of God himself; hence he alone is
above them. We find this sentiment well expressed by an elegant poet: -

Regum timendorum in proprios greges,

Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.

Horace, Odar. lib. iii., Od. i., ver. 5.

Kings are supreme over their own subjects;

Jove is supreme over kings themselves.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 24:12</span></span>

The Lord judge between me and thee - Appeals of this kind to God are the
common refuge of the poor and oppressed people. So also among the
Hindoos: God will judge between us. Mother Kalee will judge. Sometimes
this springs from a consciousness of innocence, and sometimes from a
desire of revenge.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 24:13</span></span>

Wickedness proceeded from the wicked - This proverb may be thus
understood: He that does a wicked act, gives proof thereby that he is a
wicked man. From him who is wicked, wickedness will proceed; he who is
wicked will add one iniquity to another. Had I conspired to dethrone
thee, I should have taken thy life when it was in my power, and thus
added wickedness to wickedness.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 24:14</span></span>

After a dead dog - A term used among the Hebrews to signify the most
sovereign contempt; see [Sa2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009.md). One
utterly incapable of making the least resistance against Saul, and the
troops of Israel. The same idea is expressed in the term flea. The
Targum properly expresses both thus: one who is weak, one who is
contemptible.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 24:15</span></span>

The Lord therefore be judge - Let God determine who is guilty.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 24:16</span></span>

My son David? - David had called Saul his master, lord, and king. Saul
accosts him here as his son, to show that he felt perfectly reconciled
to him, and wished to receive him as formerly into his family.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 24:19</span></span>

If a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? - Or rather, Will
he send him in a good way? But Houbigant translates the whole clause
thus: Si quis, inimicum suum reperiens, dimittit eum in viam bonam,
redditur ei adomino sua merces; "If a man, finding his enemy, send him
by a good way, the Lord will give him his reward." The words which are
here put in italic, are not in the Hebrew text, but they are found, at
least in the sense, in the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic, and seem
necessary to complete the sense; therefore, adds Saul, the Lord will
reward thee good for what thou hast done unto me.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 24:20</span></span>

I know well that thou shalt surely be king - Hebrew, Reigning, thou
shalt reign. He knew this before; and yet he continued to pursue him
with the most deadly hatred.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 24:21</span></span>

Swear now - Saul knew that an oath would bind David, though it was
insufficient to bind himself; see [Sa1
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#006.md). He had sworn to his son Jonathan
that David should not be slain; and yet sought by all means in his power
to destroy him!

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 24:22</span></span>

Saul went home - Confounded at a sense of his own baseness, and
overwhelmed with a sense of David's generosity.

David and his men gat them up unto the hold - Went up to Mizpeh,
according to the Syriac and Arabic. David could not trust Saul with his
life; the utmost he could expect from him was that he should cease from
persecuting him; but even this was too much to expect from a man of such
a character as Saul. He was no longer under the Divine guidance; an evil
spirit had full dominion over his soul. What God fills not, the devil
will occupy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](sa1025.md)

</div>
