<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](rut004)  [Next](sa1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the First Book of SamuelOtherwise Called The First Book of
the Kings

This and the three following books were formerly termed the first,
second, third, and fourth books of Kings, and the two books of Samuel
made in ancient times but one; the separation which has taken place
seems to have been done without reason or necessity. These books are,
properly speaking, a continuation of the book of Judges, as they give us
an account of the remaining judges of Israel, down to the election of
Saul; and of all the kings of Israel and Judah to the Babylonish
captivity.

Of this book, called the first book of Samuel, the following are the
contents: The birth and education of Samuel; the high priesthood of Eli;
the Philistines attack the Israelites, overthrow them with a terrible
slaughter, take the ark of the Lord, and set it up in the temple of
their god Dagon; they are visited with Divine judgments, and are obliged
to send back the ark with offerings and presents; Samuel, long
acknowledged as a prophet of the Lord, takes the government of the
people. Under his wise and pious administration, the affairs of Israel
become re-established, and the Philistines are subdued. The sons of
Samuel, who principally administered the secular concerns of the
kingdom, acting unworthily, the people desire to have a king, who should
be supreme, both in civil and military affairs. Samuel, after
expostulations, yields to their entreaties; and, under the direction of
God, Saul the son of Kish, whilst seeking the lost asses of his father,
is met by the prophet, and anointed king over Israel. This man, not
conducting himself in the government according to the direction of God,
is rejected, and David the son of Jesse anointed king in his place,
though Saul continues still in the government. This person soon becomes
advantageously known to Israel by his single combat with a gigantic
Philistine chief, called Goliath, whom he slays; on which the Israelites
attack the Philistines, and give them a total overthrow. Saul, envious
of David's popularity, seeks his destruction; he is in consequence
obliged to escape for his life, and take refuge sometimes among the
Moabites, sometimes among the Philistines, and sometimes in the caves of
the mountains of Judah, everywhere pursued by Saul, and everywhere
visibly protected by the Lord. At last Saul, being pressed by the
Philistines, and finding that the Lord had forsaken him, had recourse to
a witch that dwelt at En-dor, whom he consulted relative to the issue of
the present war with the Philistines; he loses the battle, and being
sorely wounded, and his three sons slain, he falls on his own sword, and
expires on Mount Gilboa. The Philistines find his body, and the bodies
of his three sons, among the slain; they cut off Saul's head, and affix
the bodies to the walls of Beth-shan. The men of Jabesh-gilead, hearing
this, go by night, and take the bodies from the walls of Beth-shan,
bring them to Jabesh, burn them there, bury the bones, and mourn over
their fallen king, fasting seven days. Thus concludes the first book of
Samuel.

Concerning the author of these books there have been various
conjectures. Because, in most of the Hebrew copies, they bear the name
of Samuel, as a running title, it has been generally supposed that he
was the author. But his name does not appear to have been anciently
prefixed to these books, at least in those copies used by the Greek
interpreters, commonly called the Septuagint, as they simply term each
βασιλεΐων. The History or Book of Kingdoms. The Chaldee has no
inscription. The Syriac and Arabic call each The Book of Samuel the
Prophet; and the Vulgate, The Book of Samuel, simply. The Jews, in
general, believe that Samuel is the author of the first twenty-seven
chapters of this book, which contain the history of his own life and
government, and what respects Saul and David during that time. The
remaining four chapters they suppose were added by the prophets Gad and
Nathan. This opinion is founded on what is said [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029) : Now the acts of David the
king, first and last, behold they are written in the book of Samuel the
seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the
seer. Others suppose the books to be more recent than the persons
already named, but that they were compiled out of their memoirs.

But who was the compiler? Some of the most learned among the Jews
suppose it to have been Jeremiah the prophet, and that the style bears a
near resemblance to his prophecies. That they were the work of a more
recent author than Samuel, etc., Grotius thinks evident from this
circumstance, that the names of the months are comparatively modern, and
were not known among the ancient Jews. Others have attributed them to
David; others, to Hezekiah; and others, to Ezra the scribe, on his
return from the Babylonish captivity.

Calmet's opinion is as probable as any, viz., "That these books were
written by the same hand, though composed out of the memoirs left by
persons of that time; and that the compiler has generally used the same
terms he found in those memoirs, adding here and there something of his
own by way of illustration." The equality of the style, the frequent
eulogiums on the character of Samuel, the connection of the materials,
particular quotations, and remarks on certain events, are, he thinks,
proofs sufficiently clear of what he assumes. These books contain
remarks or expressions which could only proceed from a contemporary
author, and others which are evidences of a much later age.

1\. For instance, we read, [Sa1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001),
The word of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open
vision; i.e., in the days of Eli, the high priest: hence it is evident
that the author lived in times in which prophecy was more common; which,
in fact, it was after Samuel, under David, and the succeeding kings of
Israel and Judah.

2\. Again, in the time of the author of this book, Beth-el was called
Beth-aven, [Sa1 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005), which name was
given to it in derision after Jeroboam had placed there his golden
calves.

3\. Again, it is said, [Sa1 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018), that
the ark of the Lord was set down in the field of Joshua the
Beth-shemite, where it remained to the time of this author; and yet, in
[Sa1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015), he speaks of Samuel as
being already dead: And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.

4\. It is not natural to suppose that Samuel would have spoken of
himself as is done [Sa1 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#026) : And the
child Samuel grew, and was in favor both with the Lord and with men; but
if he were dead when this book was written, any author might have added
this with the strictest propriety.

5\. In [Sa1 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#006), it is said that
Achish gave Ziklag to David, Wherefore Ziklag pertaineth to the kings of
Judah unto this day. This is a proof that when this book was written the
kingdoms of Judah and Israel were separated; and that, although the
tribe of Simeon belonged to the kings of Israel, yet Ziklag, which was
in that tribe, remained in the hands of the kings of Judah.

Here, therefore, are proofs that this book contains matters which must
have been written by a contemporary author; and others which could not
have been inserted but in times much posterior. These seeming
contradictions are reconciled by the hypothesis that the books were
compiled, by a comparatively recent author, out of materials of a much
earlier date, the author not changing many of the expressions which he
found in those ancient documents.

Several other proofs might be here adduced to support this opinion; but
as the reader will find them noticed in the places where they occur, it
is not necessary to repeat them here. Those who wish to see the subject
farther discussed, may consult Calmet. We may rest satisfied with these
three things:

1\. That the books of Samuel were constructed out of original and
authentic documents.

2\. That the compiler was not contemporary with the facts he narrates.
And,

3\. That both the author and time in which he compiled his history,
though comparatively more recent than the facts themselves, are
nevertheless both uncertain.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 1](sa1001)

</div>
