<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1015)  [Next](sa1017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 16:0</span></span>

Samuel is sent from Ramah to Bethlehem, to anoint David, [Sa1
16:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001). The Spirit of the Lord
departs from Saul, and an evil spirit comes upon him, [Sa1
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014). His servants exhort him to get
a skillful harper to play before him, [Sa1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#015), [Sa1
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016). He is pleased with the counsel,
and desires them to find such a person, [Sa1
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#017). They recommend David, [Sa1
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018). He is sent for, comes, plays
before Saul, and finds favor in his sight, [Sa1
16:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#019).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 16:1</span></span>

Fill thine horn with oil - Horns appear to have been the ancient
drinking vessels of all nations; and we may suppose that most persons
who had to travel much, always carried one with them, for the purpose of
taking up water from the fountains to quench their thirst. Such a horn
had Samuel; and on this occasion he was commanded to fill it with oil,
for the purpose of consecrating a king over Israel from among the sons
of Jesse.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 16:2</span></span>

Take a heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice - This was
strictly true; Samuel did offer a sacrifice; and it does not appear that
he could have done the work which God designed, unless he had offered
this sacrifice, and called the elders of the people together, and thus
collected Jesse's sons. But he did not tell the principal design of his
coming; had he done so, it would have produced evil and no good: and
though no man, in any circumstances, should ever tell a lie, yet in all
circumstances he is not obliged to tell the whole truth, though in every
circumstance he must tell nothing but the truth, and in every case so
tell the truth that the hearer shall not believe a lie by it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 16:3</span></span>

Call Jesse to the sacrifice - The common custom was, after the blood of
the victim had been poured out to God, and the fat burnt, to feast on
the flesh of the sacrifice. This appears to have been the case in all,
except in the whole burnt-offering; this was entirely consumed.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 16:4</span></span>

The elders of the town trembled at his coming - They knew he was a
prophet of the Lord, and they were afraid that he was now come to
denounce some judgments of the Most High against their city.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 16:5</span></span>

Sanctify yourselves - Change your clothes, and wash your bodies in pure
water, and prepare your minds by meditation, reflection, and prayer;
that, being in the spirit of sacrifice, ye may offer acceptably to the
Lord.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 16:7</span></span>

Man looketh on the outward appearance - And it is well he should, and
confine his looks to that; for when he pretends to sound the heart, he
usurps the prerogative of God.

In what way were these communications made from God to Samuel? It must
have been by direct inspirations into his heart. But what a state of
holy familiarity does this argue between God and the prophet! I believe
Moses himself was not more highly favored than Samuel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 16:10</span></span>

Seven of his sons - This certainly was not done publicly; Samuel, Jesse,
and his children, must have been in a private apartment, previously to
the public feast on the sacrifice; for Samuel says, [Sa1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011), We will not sit down till he
(David) come.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 16:12</span></span>

He was ruddy - I believe the word here means red-haired, he had golden
locks. Hair of this kind is ever associated with a delicate skin and
florid complexion.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 16:13</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord came upon David - God qualified him to be
governor of his people, by infusing such graces as wisdom, prudence,
counsel, courage, liberality, and magnanimity.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 16:14</span></span>

The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul - He was thrown into such a
state of mind by the judgments of God, as to be deprived of any regal
qualities which he before possessed. God seems to have taken what gifts
he had, and given them to David; and then the evil spirit came upon
Saul; for what God fills not, the devil will.

An evil spirit from the Lord - The evil spirit was either immediately
sent from the Lord, or permitted to come. Whether this was a diabolic
possession, or a mere mental malady, the learned are not agreed; it
seems to have partaken of both. That Saul had fallen into a deep
melancholy, there is little doubt; that the devil might work more
effectually on such a state of mind, there can be but little question.
There is an old proverb, Satan delights to fish in troubled waters; and
Saul's situation of mind gave him many advantages.

The theory of Dr. Scheuchzer, in his Physica Sacra, on the malady of
Saul, is allowed to be very ingenious. It is in substance as follows:
Health consists in a moderate tension of the fibres, which permits all
the fluids to have an entire freedom of circulation, and to the spirits,
that of diffusing themselves through all the limbs; on the contrary,
disease consists in tensions of the fibres morbidly weak or morbidly
strong. This latter seems to have been the case of Saul; and as the
undulations of the air which convey sound communicate themselves to and
through the most solid bodies, it is easy to suppose that by the
modulations of music all the fibres of his body, which were under the
influence of the morbidly increased tension, might be so relaxed as to
be brought back into their natural state, and thus permit the
re-establishment of a free and gentle circulation of the fluids, and
consequently of the animal spirits, and thus induce calmness and
tranquillity of mind. I believe this theory to be correct, and I should
find no difficulty to amplify and to illustrate the subject. Even a
skillful playing upon the harp was one means to bring a disordered state
of the nervous and fibrous system into a capacity of affording such
uninterrupted tranquillity to the mind as to render it capable of
receiving the prophetic influence; see the case of Elisha, [Kg2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#014), [Kg2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015). It has been said: -

"Music hath charms to sooth the savage breast."

This has been literally proved: a musician was brought to play on his
instrument while they were feeding a savage lion in the tower of London;
the beast immediately left his food, came towards the grating of his
den, and began to move in such a way as to show himself affected by the
music. The musician ceased, and the lion returned to his food; he
recommenced, and the lion left off his prey, and was so affected as to
seem by his motions to dance with delight. This was repeatedly tried,
and the effects were still the same.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 16:18</span></span>

I have seen a son of Jesse - Dr. Warburton supposes the story is
anticipated from [Sa1 16:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014), and
that the true chronology of this part of David's life is the following:
-

1\. David is anointed by Samuel;

2\. Carries provisions to his brethren in the army;

3\. Fights with and kills Goliath;

4\. Is received into the king's court,

5\. Contracts a friendship with Jonathan;

6\. Incurs Saul's jealousy;

7\. Retires to his father's house;

8\. Is after some time sent for by Saul to sooth his melancholy with his
harp;

9\. Again excites Saul's jealousy, who endeavors to smite him with his
javelin.

This anticipation between the 14th and 23d verse comes in, in the order
of time, between [Sa1 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#009) and [Sa1
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#010), [Sa1
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#009), [Sa1
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010), where the breach is apparent.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 16:20</span></span>

Took an ass laden with bread - He must send a present to Saul to
introduce his son, and this was probably the best he had. Dr. Warburton
pleads still farther on the propriety of his rectification of the
chronology in this place. David had at this time vanquished the
Philistine, was become a favourite with the people, had excited Saul's
jealousy, and retired to shun its effects. In the interim Saul was
seized with the disorder in question, and is recommended by his servants
to try the effects of music. They were acquainted with David's skill on
the harp, and likewise with Saul's bad disposition towards him; the
point was delicate, it required to be managed with address, and
therefore they recommend David in this artful manner: "As you must have
one constantly in attendance, both in court and on your military
expeditions; to be always at hand on occasion, the son of Jesse will
become both stations well; he will strengthen your camp and adorn your
court, for he is a tried soldier and of a graceful presence. You have
nothing to fear from his ambition, for you saw with what prudence he
went into voluntary banishment when his popularity had incurred your
displeasure." Accordingly Saul is prevailed on, David is sent for, and
succeeds with his music; this dissipates all former umbrage, and, as one
who is ever to be in attendance, he is made Saul's armor-bearer. This
sunshine still continued till his great successes awakened Saul's
jealousy afresh, and then the lifted javelin was to strike off all
obligations. Thus we see what light is thrown upon the whole history by
the supposition of an anticipation in the latter part of this chapter;
an anticipation the most natural, proper, and necessary, for the purpose
of the historian. Thus reasons Bishop Warburton, and with very
considerable plausibility, though the intelligent reader may still have
his doubts.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 16:23</span></span>

The evil spirit from God - The word evil is not in the common Hebrew
text, but it is in the Vulgate, Septuagint, Targum, Syriac, and Arabic,
and in eight of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., which present the text
thus: רוח אלהים רעה ruach Elohim raah, spiritus Domini malus, the evil
spirit of God. The Septuagint leave out Θεου, of God, and have πνευμα
πονηρον, the evil spirit. The Targum says, The evil spirit from before
the Lord; and the Arabic has it. The evil spirit by the permission of
God; this is at least the sense.

And the evil spirit departed from him - The Targum says, And the evil
spirit descended up from off him. This considers the malady of Saul to
be more than a natural disease.

There are several difficulties in this chapter; those of the chronology
are pretty well cleared, in the opinion of some, by the observations of
Bishop Warburton; but there is still something more to be done to make
this point entirely satisfactory. Saul's evil spirit, and the influence
of music upon it, are not easily accounted for. I have considered his
malady to be of a mixed kind, natural and diabolical; there is too much
of apparent nature in it to permit us to believe it was all spiritual,
and there is too much of apparent supernatural influence to suffer us to
believe that it was all natural.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa1017)

</div>
