<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1019)  [Next](sa1021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 20:0</span></span>

David complains to Jonathan of Saul's enmity against him; Jonathan
comforts him, [Sa1 20:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001.md). They walk
out into the field, and renew their covenant, [Sa1
20:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#011.md). David asks Jonathan's leave
to absent himself from Saul's court; and Jonathan informs him how he
shall ascertain the disposition of his father towards him, [Sa1
20:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#018.md). David hides himself; is
missed by Saul; Jonathan is questioned concerning his absence; makes an
excuse for David; Saul is enraged, and endeavors to kill Jonathan, [Sa1
20:24-33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#024.md). Jonathan goes out to the
field; gives David the sign which they had agreed on, and by which he
was to know that the king had determined to take away his life, [Sa1
20:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#034.md). He sends his servant back
into the city; and then he and David meet, renew their covenant, and
have a very affectionate parting, [Sa1
20:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#040.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 20:1</span></span>

David fled from Naioth - On hearing that Saul had come to that place,
knowing that he was no longer in safety, he fled for his life.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 20:2</span></span>

My father will do nothing - Jonathan thought that his father could have
no evil design against David, because of the oath which he had sworn to
himself [Sa1 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#006.md); and at any rate,
that he would do nothing against David without informing him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 20:3</span></span>

There is but a step between me and death - My life is in the most
imminent danger. Your father has, most assuredly, determined to destroy
me.

The same figure used here, there is but a step between me and death, may
be found in Juvenal, who, satirizing those who risk their lives for the
sake of gain in perilous voyages, speaks thus: -

I nune et ventis animam committe, dolato

Confisus ligno, digitis a morte remotus

Quatuor aut septem, si sit latissima teda.

Sat. xii., ver. 57.

"Go now, and commit thy life to the winds,

trusting to a hewn plank, four or seven fingers thick,

if the beam out of which it has been cut have been large enough."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 20:5</span></span>

To-morrow is the new moon - The months of the Hebrews were lunar months,
and they reckoned from new moon to new moon. And as their other feasts,
particularly the passover, were reckoned according to this, they were
very scrupulous in observing the first appearance of each new moon. On
these new moons they offered sacrifices, and had a feast; as we learn
from [Num 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010.md); [Num
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011.md). And we may suppose that the
families, on such occasions, sacrificed and feasted together. To this
David seems to refer; but the gathering together all the families of a
whole tribe seems to have taken place only once in the year. There is a
yearly sacrifice there for all the family, [Sa1
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#006.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 20:8</span></span>

If there be in me iniquity - If thou seest that I am plotting either
against the state, or the life of thy father, then slay me thyself.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 20:10</span></span>

Who shall tell me? - Who shall give me the necessary information? What
means wilt thou use to convey this intelligence to me?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 20:11</span></span>

Come, and let us go out into the field - In answer to David's question,
he now shows him how he shall convey this intelligence to him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 20:12</span></span>

Jonathan said - O Lord God of Israel - There is, most evidently,
something wanting in this verse. The Septuagint has, The Lord God of
Israel doth Know. The Syriac and Arabic, The Lord God of Israel is
Witness. Either of these makes a good sense. But two of Dr. Kennicott's
MSS. supply the word חי chai, "liveth;" and the text reads thus, As the
Lord God of Israel Liveth, when I have sounded my father - if there be
good, and I then send not unto thee, and show it thee, the Lord do so
and much more to Jonathan. This makes a still better sense.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 20:13</span></span>

The Lord be with thee, as he hath been with my father - From this, and
other passages here it is evident that Jonathan knew that the Lord had
appointed David to the kingdom.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 20:14</span></span>

Show me the kindness of the Lord - When thou comest to the kingdom, if I
am alive, thou shalt show kindness to me, and thou shalt continue that
kindness to my family after me.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 20:20</span></span>

I will shoot three arrows - Jonathan intended that David should stay at
the stone Ezel, where probably there was some kind of cave, or hiding
place; that, to prevent all suspicion, he would not go to him himself,
but take his servant into the fields, and pretend to be exercising
himself in archery; that he would shoot three arrows, the better to
cover his design; and that, if he should say to his servant, who went to
bring back the arrows, "The arrows are on this side of thee," this
should be a sign to David that he might safely return to court, no evil
being designed; but if he should say, "The arrows are beyond thee," then
David should escape for his life, Saul having determined his
destruction.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 20:25</span></span>

The king sat upon his seat - It seems that there was one table for Saul,
Jonathan, David, and Abner; Saul having the chief seat, that next to the
wall. As only four sat at this table, the absence of any one would soon
be noticed.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 20:29</span></span>

Our family hath a sacrifice - Such sacrifices were undoubtedly festal
ones; the beasts slain for the occasion were first offered to God, and
their blood poured out before him; afterwards all that were bidden to
the feast ate of the flesh. This was a family entertainment, at the
commencement of which God was peculiarly honored.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa1 20:30</span></span>

Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman - This clause is variously
translated and understood. The Hebrew might be translated, Son of an
unjust rebellion; that is, "Thou art a rebel against thy own father."
The Vulgate, Fili mulieris virum ultro rapientis; "Son of the woman who,
of her own accord, forces the man." The Septuagint is equally curious,
Υἱε κορασιων αυτομολουντων; "Son of the damsels who came of their own
accord." Were these the meaning of the Hebrew, then the bitter
reflection must refer to some secret transaction between Saul and
Jonathan's mother; which certainly reflects more dishonor on himself
than on his brave son. Most sarcasms bear as hard upon the speaker, as
they do on him against whom they are spoken. Abusive language always
argues a mean, weak, and malevolent heart.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">sa1 20:34</span></span>

Jonathan arose - in fierce anger - We should probably understand this
rather of Jonathan's grief than of his anger, the latter clause
explaining the former: for he was grieved for David. He was grieved for
his father - he was grieved for his friend.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa1 20:38</span></span>

Make speed, haste, stay not - Though these words appear to be addressed
to the lad, yet they were spoken to David, indicating that his life was
at stake, and only a prompt flight could save him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">sa1 20:40</span></span>

Jonathan gave his artillery - I believe this to be the only place in our
language where the word artillery is not applied to cannon or ordnance.
The original (כלי keley) signifies simply instruments, and here means
the bow, quiver, and arrows.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">sa1 20:41</span></span>

Until David exceeded - David's distress must, in the nature of things,
be the greatest. Besides his friend Jonathan, whom he was now about to
lose for ever, he lost his wife, relatives, country; and, what was most
afflictive, the altars of his God, and the ordinances of religion.

Saul saw David's growing popularity, and was convinced of his own
maladministration. He did not humble himself before God, and therefore
became a prey to envy, pride, jealousy, cruelty, and every other
malevolent temper. From him David had every thing to fear, and therefore
he thought it was safer to yield to the storm, than attempt to brave it;
though he could have even raised a very powerful party in Israel, had he
used the means which were so much in his power. But as he neither sought
not affected the kingdom, he left it to the providence of God to bring
him in by such means, at such a way, and in such a time, as was most
suited to his godly wisdom. He that believeth shall not make haste:
God's way and time are ever the best; and he who, even in God's way,
runs before he is sent, runs at random; runs without light, and without
Divine strength.

Feeble, therefore, must be his own might, his own counsel, and his own
wisdom: though he encompass himself with his own sparks yet this hath he
at the Lord's hand - he shalt lie down in sorrow.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 21](sa1021.md)

</div>
