<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1027)  [Next](sa1029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 28:0</span></span>

The Philistines prepare to attack the Israelites, and Achish informs
David that he shall accompany him to battle, [Sa1
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md), [Sa1
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#002.md). Saul, unable to obtain any
answer from God, applies to a witch at En-dor to bring up Samuel that he
may converse with him on the issue of the war, [Sa1
28:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003.md). Samuel appears, [Sa1
28:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#012.md). He reproaches Saul with his
misconduct, and informs him of his approaching ruin, [Sa1
28:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015.md). He is greatly distressed;
but at the solicitations of the woman and his own servants, he takes
some food, and departs the same night, [Sa1
28:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 28:1</span></span>

The Philistines gathered their armies together - Sir Isaac Newton
conjectures that the Philistines had got a great increase to their
armies by vast numbers of men which Amasis had driven out of Egypt.
This, with Samuel's death, and David's disgrace, were no inconsiderable
motives to a new war, front which the Philistines had now every thing to
hope.

Thou shalt go out with me to battle - This he said, being deceived by
what David had told him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 28:2</span></span>

Surely thou shalt know what thy servant can do - This was another
equivocal answer; and could only be understood by his succeeding
conduct. It might imply what he could do in favor of the Philistines
against Israel; or in favor of Israel against the Philistines. Achish
understood it in the former sense; and therefore he said to David, I
will make thee keeper of my head for ever; i.e., Thou shalt be captain
of my life-guards.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 28:3</span></span>

Samuel was dead - And there was no longer a public accredited prophet to
consult.

Those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards - See the note on [Lev
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031.md), and [Exo
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 28:5</span></span>

When Saul saw - He saw from the superiority of his enemies, from the
state of his army, and especially from his own state towards God, that
he had every thing to fear.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 28:6</span></span>

The Lord answered him not - He used the three methods by which
supernatural intelligence was ordinarily given: -

1\. Dreams. - The person prayed for instruction; and begged that God
would answer by a significant dream.

2\. Urim. - This was a kind of oracular answer given to the high priest
when clothed with the ephod, on which were the Urim and Thummim. How
these communicated the answer, is not well known.

3\. Prophets. - Who were requested by the party concerned to consult the
Lord on the subject in question, and to report his answer. The prophets
at that time could only be those in the schools of the prophets, which
Samuel had established at Naioth and Gibeah. These were the only
successors of Samuel that we know of.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 28:7</span></span>

Seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit - Literally, Seek me a
woman, בעלת אוב baalath ob, the mistress of the Obidiah or Pythonic
spirit - one who had a familiar spirit, whom she could invoke when she
pleased, and receive answers from him relative to futurity.

Strange that a man, who had banished all such from the land, as
dangerous to the state, as impostors and deceivers, should now have
recourse to them as the only persons in whom he could safely put his
confidence in the time in which Jehovah had refused to help him!

At En-dor - This was a city in the valley of Jezreel, at the foot of
Mount Gilboa, where the army of Saul had now encamped.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 28:8</span></span>

Saul disguised himself - That he might not be known by the woman, lest
she, being terrified, should refuse to use her art.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 28:11</span></span>

Whom shall I bring up - The woman certainly meant no more than making
her familiar personify whomsoever the querist should wish. In the
evocation of spirits this is all that, according to the professed rules
of their art, such persons pretend to; for over human souls in paradise
or in the infernal regions they have no power. If we allow that there is
such an art founded on true principles, all it can pretend to is, to
bring up the familiar; cause him when necessary to assume the form and
character of some particular person, and to give such notices relative
to futurity as he is able to collect. And this even in the cases to
which authenticity is generally allowed, is often scanty, vague, and
uncertain, for fallen spirits do not abound in knowledge: this is an
attribute of God, and rays of this perfection are imparted to pure and
holy intelligences; and even Satan himself, as may be seen from most of
his temptations, is far from excelling in knowledge. He may be cunning
and insidious, but he certainly is not wise and prudent; we in general
give this fallen spirit credit for much more wisdom than he possesses.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 28:12</span></span>

When the woman saw Samuel - That Samuel did appear on this occasion, is
most evident from the text; nor can this be denied from any legitimate
mode of interpretation: and it is as evident that he was neither raised
by the power of the devil nor the incantations of the witch, for the
appearances which took place at this time were such as she was wholly
unacquainted with. Her familiar did not appear; and from the confused
description she gives, it is fully evident that she was both surprised
and alarmed at what she saw, being so widely different from what she
expected to see.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 28:13</span></span>

I saw gods ascending out of the earth - The word אלהום elohim, which we
translate gods, is the word which is used for the Supreme Being
throughout the Bible; but all the versions, the Chaldee excepted,
translate it in the plural number, as we do. The Chaldee has, I see
מלאכא דיי malacha dayeya, an angel of the Lord, ascending from the
earth. This sight alarmed the woman; it was what she did not expect; in
this she could not recognise her familiar, and she was terrified at the
appearance.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 28:14</span></span>

An old man cometh up, and he is covered with a mantle - This seems to
have been a second apparition; she cannot mean that she had seen gods
ascending out of the earth, and these gods were like an old man with a
mantle. The angelic appearance first mentioned prepared the way for
Samuel; and the whole was done so as to show to the woman that her art
had not prevailed in the present instance, and that what was now taking
place was wholly independent of her incantations.

Saul perceived that it was Samuel - The description was suitable to his
person and clothing.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 28:15</span></span>

Why hast thou disquieted me - The complaint is not directed against the
woman but against Saul. Indeed, her incantations had no influence in the
business, and it does not appear that she had commenced her operations
before the angels had prepared the way of the prophet, and before the
prophet himself had made his appearance.

That thou mayest make known unto me what I shall do - In his former
difficulties, and when pressed by his enemies, he was in the habit of
consulting Samuel; and now he applies to him as his former preceptor.
God, he knew, might answer by such a man as Samuel, when he would answer
by no other means.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 28:16</span></span>

Wherefore then dost thou ask of me - Was ever I wont to give answers
that were not dictated by the Lord? It is his counsel alone that I
communicate.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 28:17</span></span>

The Lord hath done to him - I believe these words are spoken of Saul;
and as they are spoken to him, it seems evident that him should be thee.
The Vulgate has tibi, the Septuagint σοι, to Thee: and this is the
reading of five of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., as well as of both
the Bibles printed at Venice in 1518, where we read לך lecha, to Thee,
instead of לו lo, to Him.

As he spake by me - Here was no illusion; none but Samuel could say
this.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 28:18</span></span>

Nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek - See [Sa1
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#001) (note.md) and the notes there.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 28:19</span></span>

To-morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me - What an awful message! In
the course of the ensuing day thou shalt be slain, thy three sons shall
be slain, and the armies of Israel shall be delivered into the hands of
the Philistines! Can any person read this, properly considering the
situation of this unfortunate monarch, the triumph of the enemies of
God, and the speedy ruin in which the godlike Jonathan is about to be
involved, without feeling the keenest anguish of heart?

But Samuel says, "He and his sons should be with him." Does not this
mean that they were to go to paradise? I suppose it means no more than
that they should all die. Yet the paraphrase of the Rev. C. Wesley is
beautiful: -

"What do these solemn words portend?

A ray of hope when life shall end.

Thou and thy sons, though slain, shall be

To-morrow in repose with me.

Not in a state of hellish pain,

If Saul with Samuel do remain:

Not in a state of damn'd despair,

If loving Jonathan be there."

Saul had committed the sin unto death - the sin to be visited with a
violent death, while tile mercy of God was extended to the soul. Thus
say my faith, my hope, and my charity; and doth not the mercy of God say
the same?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 28:20</span></span>

Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth - Literally, he fell
with his own length, or with the fullness of his stature. He was so
overwhelmed with this most dreadful message, that he swooned away, and
thus fell at his own length upon the ground. The woman, being terrified,
had probably withdrawn to some distance at the first appearance of the
prophet; and Saul was left alone with Samuel. After some short time, the
woman came again unto Saul, found him sore troubled, and offered him
those succours which humanity dictated.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 28:23</span></span>

I will not eat - It is no wonder that not only his strength, but also
his appetite, had departed from him.

And sat upon the bed - Beds or couches were the common places on which
the ancients sat to take their repasts.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 28:24</span></span>

The woman had a fat calf - The ancients used great despatch in their
cookery. In hot countries they could not keep flesh meat by them any
length of time; hence they generally kept young animals, such as calves,
lambs, and kids, ready for slaughter; and when there was occasion, one
of them was killed, and dressed immediately.

Unleavened bread - There was not time to bake leavened bread; that would
have taken considerable time, in order that the leaven might leaven the
whole lump.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 28:25</span></span>

They rose up, and went away that night - The transactions of this
chapter occupy one night only.

1\. Saul came by night to En-dor, [Sa1
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008.md).

2\. He consulted the woman, and had his conference with Samuel the same
night; for no time whatever appears to have been lost after his arrival
at En-dor.

3\. He was overcome by the heavy tidings which he heard; and which for a
time appear to have deprived him of all power.

4\. The woman kills a calf; dresses a part; makes and bakes bread; and
Saul and his servants eat. And,

5\. They rose and went away that night, [Sa1
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#025.md). The next day, in all
probability, the battle happened in which Israel was defeated, and Saul
and his sons lost their lives.

There is a considerable diversity of opinion, both among learned and
pious men, relative to the subject mentioned in this chapter, that of
raising Samuel from the dead. Some deny the possibility of the thing,
and say that it was the devil that personified Samuel; and others, that
the whole was the imposition of this cunning woman, and that there was
no supernatural agency in the business. This is not a proper place to
argue the point. I have given my opinion in the notes. I may sum up in a
few particulars.

1\. I believe there is a supernatural and spiritual world, in which
Human spirits, both good and bad, live in a state of consciousness.

2\. I believe there is an invisible world, in which various orders of
spirits, not human, live and act.

3\. I believe that any of these spirits may, according to the order of
God, in the laws of their place of residence, have intercourse with this
world, and become visible to mortals.

4\. I believe there is a possibility, by arts not strictly good, to
evoke and have intercourse with spirits, not Human; and to employ, in a
certain limited way, their power and influence.

5\. I believe that the woman of En-dor had no power over Samuel; and
that no incantation can avail over any departed saint of God, nor indeed
over any human disembodied spirit.

6\. I believe Samuel did actually appear to Saul; and that he was sent
by the especial mercy of God to warn this infatuated king of his
approaching death, that he might have an opportunity to make his peace
with his Maker.

7\. I believe that the woman found, from the appearances, that her real
or pretended charms had no effect; and that what now took place came
from a totally different disposition of things from those with which she
was conversant.

8\. I believe that direct, circumstantial, and unequivocal oracles were
now delivered concerning things which neither human nor diabolical
wisdom could foresee or penetrate; that the defeat of the Israelites,
and the death of Saul and his three sons on the following day, were
matters which, from their nature, could only be known to God himself;
and that no demon or bad spirit could be employed in such a transaction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 29](sa1029.md)

</div>
