<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1030)  [Next](sa2000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 31:0</span></span>

A battle in Mount Gilboa between Israel and the Philistines; in which
the former are defeated, and Saul's three sons slain, [Sa1
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001.md), [Sa1
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#002.md). Saul, being mortally wounded,
and afraid to fall alive into the hands of the Philistines, desires his
armor-bearer to despatch him; which he refusing, Saul falls on his
sword, and his armor-bearer does the same, [Sa1
31:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#003.md). The Israelites on the other
side of the valley forsake their cities, and the Philistines come and
dwell in them, [Sa1 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007.md). The
Philistines, finding Saul and his three sons among the slain, strip them
of their armor, which they put in the house of Ashtaroth, cut of their
heads, send the news to all the houses of their idols, and fasten the
bodies of Saul and his three sons to the walls of Beth-shan, [Sa1
31:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008.md). Valiant men of Jabesh-gilead
go by night, and take away the bodies; burn them at Jabesh; bury their
bones under a tree; and fast seven days, [Sa1
31:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 31:1</span></span>

Now the Philistines fought - This is the continuation of the account
given in [Sa1 29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#001.md).

The men of Israel fled - It seems as if they were thrown into confusion
at the first onset, and turned their backs upon their enemies.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 31:2</span></span>

Followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons - They, seeing the
discomfiture of their troops, were determined to sell their lives as
dear as possible, and therefore maintained the battle till the three
brothers were slain.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 31:3</span></span>

He was sore wounded of the archers - It is likely that Saul's sons were
slain by the archers, and that Saul was now mortally wounded by the
same. Houbigant translates, The archers rushed upon him, from whom he
received a grievous wound. He farther remarks that had not Saul been
grievously wounded, and beyond hope of recovery, he would not have
wished his armor-bearer to despatch him; as he might have continued
still to fight, or have made his escape from this most disastrous
battle. Some of the versions render it, He Feared the archers greatly;
but this is by no means likely.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 31:4</span></span>

Draw thy sword, and thrust me through - Dr. Delaney has some good
observations on this part of the subject: "Saul and his armor-bearer
died by the same sword. That his armor-bearer died by his own sword is
out of all doubt; the text expressly tells us so; and that Saul perished
by the same sword is sufficiently evident. Draw Thy sword, says he to
him, and thrust me through; which, when he refused, Saul, says the text,
took The sword, (את החרב eth hachereb, the very sword), and fell upon
it. What sword? Not his own, for then the text would have said so; but,
in the plain natural grammatical construction, the sword before
mentioned must be the sword now referred to, that is, his
armor-bearer's, [Ch1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#004.md), [Ch1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#005.md). Now it is the established
tradition of all the Jewish nation that this armor-bearer was Doeg, and
I see no reason why it should be discredited; and if so, then Saul and
his executioner both fell by that weapon with which they had before
massacred the priests of God. So Brutus and Cassius killed themselves
with the same swords with which they stabbed Caesar; and Calippus was
stabbed with the same sword with which he stabbed Dio."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 31:6</span></span>

And all his men - Probably meaning those of his troops which were his
life or body guards: as to the bulk of the army, it fled at the
commencement of the battle, [Sa1 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#001.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 31:7</span></span>

The men of Israel that were on the other side of the valley - They
appear to have been panic-struck, and therefore fled as far as they
could out of the reach of the Philistines. As the Philistines possessed
Beth-shan, situated near to Jordan, the people on the other side of that
river, fearing for their safety, fled also.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 31:8</span></span>

On the morrow - It is very likely that the battle and pursuit continued
till the night, so that there was no time till the next day to strip and
plunder the slain.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 31:9</span></span>

And they cut off his head - It is possible that they cut off the heads
of his three sons likewise; for although only his head is said to be cut
off, and his body only to be fastened to the walls of Beth-shan, yet we
find that the men of Jabesh-gilead found both his body and the bodies of
his three sons, fastened to the walls, [Sa1
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012.md).

Perhaps they only took off Saul's head, which they sent about to their
temples as a trophy of their victory, when they sent the news of the
defeat of the Israelites through all their coasts, and at last placed it
in the temple of Dagon, [Ch1 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#010.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 31:10</span></span>

They put his armor in the house of Ashtaroth - As David had done in
placing the sword of Goliath in the tabernacle. We have already seen
that it was common for the conquerors to consecrate armor and spoils
taken in war, to those who were the objects of religious worship.

They fastened his body to the wall - Probably by means of iron hooks;
but it is said, [Sa2 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#012.md), that these
bodies were fastened in the Street of Beth-shan. This may mean that the
place where they were fastened to the wall was the main street or
entrance into the city.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 31:11</span></span>

When the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard - This act of the men of
Jabesh-gilead was an act of gratitude due to Saul, who, at the very
commencement of his reign, rescued them from Nahash, king of the
Ammonites, (see [Sa1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001), etc..md), and
by his timely succours saved them from the deepest degradation and the
most oppressive tyranny. This heroic act, with the seven days' fast,
showed that they retained a due sense of their obligation to this
unfortunate monarch.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 31:12</span></span>

And burnt them there - It has been denied that the Hebrews burnt the
bodies of the dead, but that they buried them in the earth, or embalmed
them, and often burnt spices around them, etc. These no doubt were the
common forms of sepulture, but neither of these could be conveniently
practiced in the present case. They could not have buried them about
Beth-shan without being discovered; and as to embalming, that was most
likely out of all question, as doubtless the bodies were now too putrid
to bear it. They therefore burnt them, because there was no other way of
disposing of them at that time so as to do them honor; and the bones and
ashes they collected, and buried under a tree or in a grove at Jabesh.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 31:13</span></span>

And fasted seven days - To testify their sincere regret for his
unfortunate death, and the public calamity that had fallen upon the
land.

Thus ends the troublesome, and I had almost said the useless, reign of
Saul. A king was chosen in opposition to the will of the Most High; and
the government of God in effect rejected, to make way for this king.

Saul was at first a very humble young man, and conducted himself with
great propriety; but his elevation made him proud, and he soon became
tyrannical in his private conduct and in his political measures. His
natural temper was not good; he was peevish, fretful, and often
outrageous; and these bad dispositions, unchecked by proper application
to the grace of God, became every day more headstrong and dangerous.
Through their violence he seems at times to have been wholly carried
away and deranged; and this derangement appears to have been
occasionally greatly exacerbated by diabolical influences. This led him
to take his friends for his foes; so that in his paroxysms he strove to
imbrue his hands in their blood, and more than once attempted to
assassinate his own son; and most causelessly and inhumanly ordered the
innocent priests of the Lord at Nob to be murdered. This was the worst
act in his whole life.

Saul was but ill qualified for a proper discharge of the regal
functions. The reader will remember that he was chosen rather as a
general of the armies than as civil governor. The administration of the
affairs of the state was left chiefly to Samuel, and Saul led forth the
armies to battle.

As a general he gave proof of considerable capacity; he was courageous,
prompt, decisive, and persevering; and, except in the last unfortunate
battle in which he lost his life, generally led his troops to victory.

Saul was a weak man, and very capricious; this is amply proved by his
unreasonable jealousy against David, and his continual suspicion that
all were leagued against him. It is also evident, in his foolish
adjuration relative to the matter of the honey (see [Sa1
14:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024.md), [Sa1
14:38-44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#038).md) in which, to save his rash
and nonsensical oath, he would have sacrificed Jonathan his son!

The question, "Was Saul a good king?" has already in effect been
answered. He was on the whole a good man, as far as we know, in private
life; but he was a bad king; for he endeavored to reign independently of
the Jewish constitution; he in effect assumed the sacerdotal office and
functions, and thus even changed what was essential to that
constitution. He not only offered sacrifices which belonged to the
priests alone; but in the most positive manner went opposite to the
orders of that God whose vicegerent he was.

Of his conduct in visiting the woman at En-dor I have already given my
opinion, and to this I must refer. His desperate circumstances imposed
on the weakness of his mind; and he did in that instance an act which,
in his jurisprudential capacity, he had disapproved by the edict which
banished all witches, etc., from Israel. Yet in this act he only wished
to avail himself of the counsel and advice of his friend Samuel.

To the question, "Was not Saul a self-murderer?" I scruple not to
answer, "No." He was to all appearance mortally wounded, when he begged
his armor-bearer to extinguish the remaining spark of life; and he was
afraid that the Philistines might abuse his body, if they found him
alive; and we can scarcely say how much of indignity is implied in this
word; and his falling on his sword was a fit of desperation, which
doubtless was the issue of a mind greatly agitated, and full of
distraction. A few minutes longer, and his life would in all probability
have ebbed out; but though this wound accelerated his death, yet it
could not be properly the cause of it, as he was mortally wounded
before, and did it on the conviction that he could not survive.

Taking Saul's state and circumstances together, I believe there is not a
coroner's inquest in this nation that would not have brought in a
verdict of derangement; while the pious and the humane would everywhere
have consoled themselves with the hope that God had extended mercy to
his soul.

Millbrook, June 11, 1818.

Ended this examination August 13, 1827. - A.C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Introduction](sa2000.md)

</div>
