<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1017)  [Next](sa1019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 18:0</span></span>

Jonathan and David commence a lasting friendship; and David acts
prudently with respect to Saul, [Sa1
18:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001.md). Saul becomes jealous of David,
on account of the esteem in which he is held in Israel; and, in his fury
endeavors to destroy him, [Sa1
18:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006.md). David is made captain over a
thousand; and the people love and respect him, [Sa1
18:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#013.md). Saul, in order to ensnare
him, offers him his daughter in marriage, [Sa1
18:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017.md); and requires a hundred
foreskins of the Philistines for dowry; hoping that, in endeavoring to
procure them, David might fall by the hands of the Philistines, [Sa1
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#025.md). David agrees to the conditions,
fulfils them, and has Michal to wife, [Sa1
18:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#026.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 18:1</span></span>

When he had made an end of speaking - These first five verses are
omitted by the Septuagint. See the notes on the preceding chapter, 1
Samuel 17 (note).

Jonathan loved him as his own soul - The most intimate friendship
subsisted between them; and they loved each other with pure hearts
fervently. No love was lost between them; each was worthy of the other.
They had a friendship which could not be affected with changes or
chances, and which exemplified all that the ancients have said on the
subject; Την φιλιαν ισοτητα ειναι, και μιαν ψυχην, τον φιλον ἑτερον
αυτον; "Friendship produces an entire sameness; it is one soul in two
bodies: a friend is another self."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 18:4</span></span>

Jonathan stripped himself - Presents of clothes or rich robes, in token
of respect and friendship, are frequent in the East. And how frequently
arms and clothing were presented by warriors to each other in token of
friendship, may be seen in Homer and other ancient writers.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 18:5</span></span>

Set him over the men of war - Made him generalissimo; or what we would
call field marshal.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 18:6</span></span>

When David was returned - This verse connects well with the 54th verse
of the preceding chapter; and carries on the narration without any break
or interruption. See the notes on [Sa1
17:54](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#054.md).

The women came out - It was the principal business of certain women to
celebrate victories, sing at funerals, etc.

With instruments of music - The original word (שלשים shalishim)
signifies instruments with three strings; and is, I think, properly
translated by the Vulgate, cum sistris, "with sistrums." This instrument
is well known as being used among the ancient Egyptians: it was made of
brass, and had three, sometimes more, brass rods across; which, being
loose in their holes, made a jingling noise when the instrument was
shaken.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 18:7</span></span>

Saul hath slain his thousands - As it cannot literally be true that Saul
had slain thousands, and David ten thousands; it would be well to
translate the passage thus: Saul hath smitten or fought against
thousands; David against tens of thousands. "Though Saul has been
victorious in all his battles; yet he has not had such great odds
against him as David has had; Saul, indeed, has been opposed by
thousands; David, by ten thousands." We may here remark that the
Philistines had drawn out their whole forces at this time: and when
Goliath was slain, they were totally discomfited by the Israelites, led
on chiefly by David.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 18:10</span></span>

The evil spirit from God - See on [Sa1
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014) (note.md), etc.

He prophesied in the midst of the house - He was beside himself; made
prayers, supplications, and incoherent imprecations: "God preserve my
life," "Destroy my enemies," or such like prayers, might frequently
escape from him in his agitated state. The Arabic intimates that he was
actually possessed by an evil spirit, and that through it he uttered a
sort of demoniacal predictions.

But let us examine the original more closely: it is said that Saul
prophesied in the midst of his house, that is, he prayed in his family,
while David was playing on the harp; and then suddenly threw his
javelin, intending to have killed David. Let it be observed that the
word ויתנבא vaiyithnabbe is the third person singular of the future
hithpael; the sign of which is not only to do an action on or for one's
self, but also to feign or pretend to do it. The meaning seems to be,
Saul pretended to be praying in his family, the better to conceal his
murderous intentions, and render David unsuspicious; who was, probably,
at this time performing the musical part of the family worship. This
view of the subject makes the whole case natural and plain.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 18:11</span></span>

Saul cast the javelin - The javelin or spear was the emblem of regal
authority; kings always had it at hand, and in ancient monuments they
are always represented with it.

In ancient times, says Justin, kings used a spear instead of a diadem:
Per ea tempora reges hastas pro diademate habebant, Hist. lib. xliii.
And as spears were the emblems of supreme power, hence they were reputed
as attributes of the Divinity, and were worshipped as representatives of
the gods. Ab origne verum, pro Diis immortalibus veteres Hastas
coluerent, ob cujus religionis memoriam, adhuc deorum simulachris Hastae
adduntur. - Ibid.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 18:13</span></span>

Made him his captain - This was under pretense of doing him honor, when
it was in effect only to rid himself of the object of his envy.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 18:15</span></span>

He was afraid of him - He saw that, by his prudent conduct, he was every
day gaining increasing influence.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 18:17</span></span>

Fight the Lord's battles - Mr. Calmet properly remarks that the wars of
the Hebrews, while conducted by the express orders of God, were truly
the wars of the Lord; but when the spirit of worldly ambition and
domination became mingled with them, they were no longer the wars of the
Lord, but wars of lust and profanity.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 18:21</span></span>

That she may be a snare to him - Saul had already determined the
condition on which he would give his daughter to David; viz., that he
should slay one hundred Philistines: this he supposed he would undertake
for the love of Michal, and that he must necessarily perish in the
attempt; and thus Michal would become a snare to him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 18:25</span></span>

But a hundred foreskins - That is, Thou shalt slay one hundred
Philistines, and thou shalt produce their foreskins, as a proof, not
only that thou hast killed one hundred men, but that these are of the
uncircumcised. A custom similar to this still prevails among the
Abyssinians, according to Bruce. See his Travels.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 18:27</span></span>

Slew - two hundred men - The Septuagint has only one hundred men. Saul
covenanted with David for a hundred; and David himself says, [Sa2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#014.md), that he espoused Michal for a
hundred: hence it is likely that one hundred is the true reading.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa1 18:30</span></span>

Then the princes of the Philistines went forth - Probably to avenge
themselves on David and the Israelites: but of this war we know no more
than that David was more skillful and successful in it than any of the
other officers of Saul. His military skill was greater, and his success
was proportionate to his skill and courage; hence it is said, he behaved
himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 19](sa1019.md)

</div>
