<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2015)  [Next](sa2017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 16:0</span></span>

Ziba, servant of Mephibosheth, meets David with provisions, and by false
insinuations obtains the grant of his masters property, [Sa2
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001). Shimei abuses and curses
David, who restrains Abishai from slaying him, [Sa2
16:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005). Hushai makes a feigned tender
of his services to Absalom, [Sa2
16:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015). Absalom calls a council and
Ahithophel advises him to go in to his father's concubines, [Sa2
16:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#020). Character of Ahithophel as a
counselor, [Sa2 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#023).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 16:1</span></span>

Two hundred loaves of bread - The word loaf gives us a false idea of the
ancient Jewish bread; it was thin cakes, not yeasted and raised like
ours.

Bunches of raisins - See on [Sa1 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018)
(note).

Summer fruits - These were probably pumpions, cucumbers, or watermelons.
The two latter are extensively used in those countries to refresh
travelers in the burning heat of the summer. Mr. Harmer supposes they
are called summer fruits on this very account.

A bottle of wine - A goat's skin full of wine; this I have already shown
was the general bottle in the Eastern countries; see on [Sa1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018) (note).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 16:2</span></span>

The asses be for the king's household - This is the Eastern method of
speaking when any thing is presented to a great man: "This and this is
for the slaves of the servants of your majesty," when at the same time
the presents are intended for the sovereign himself, and are so
understood. It is a high Eastern compliment: These presents are not
worthy of your acceptance; they are only fit for the slaves of your
slaves.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 16:3</span></span>

To-day shall the house of Israel - What a base wretch was Ziba! and how
unfounded was this accusation against the peaceable, loyal and innocent
Mephibosheth!

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 16:4</span></span>

Thine are all - This conduct of David was very rash; he spoiled an
honorable man to reward a villain, not giving himself time to look into
the circumstances of the case. But David was in heavy afflictions, and
these sometimes make even a wise man mad. Nothing should be done rashly;
he who is in the habit of obeying the first impulse of his passions or
feelings, will seldom do a right action, and never keep a clear
conscience.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 16:5</span></span>

David came to Bahurim - This place lay northward of Jerusalem, in the
tribe of Benjamin. It is called Almon, [Jos
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#018); and Alemeth, [Ch1
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#060). Bahurim signifies youths, and
Almuth youth; so the names are of the same import.

Cursed still as he came - Used imprecations and execrations.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 16:10</span></span>

Because the Lord hath said - The particle וכי vechi should be translated
for if, not because. For If the Lord hath said unto him, Curse David,
who shall then say, Wherefore hast thou done so!

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 16:11</span></span>

Let him curse; for the Lord hath bidden him - No soul of man can suppose
that ever God bade one man to curse another, much less that he commanded
such a wretch as Shimei to curse such a man as David; but this is a
peculiarity of the Hebrew language, which does not always distinguish
between permission and commandment. Often the Scripture attributes to
God what he only permits to be done; or what in the course of his
providence he does not hinder. David, however, considers all this as
being permitted of God for his chastisement and humiliation. I cannot
withhold from my readers a very elegant poetic paraphrase of this
passage, from the pen of the Rev. Charles Wesley, one of the first of
Christian poets: -

"Pure from the blood of Saul in vain,

He dares not to the charge reply:

Uriah's doth the charge maintain,

Uriah's doth against him cry!

Let Shimei curse: the rod he bears

For sins which mercy had forgiven:

And in the wrongs of man reveres

The awful righteousness of heaven.

Lord, I adore thy righteous will,

Through every instrument of ill

My Father's goodness see;

Accept the complicated wrong

Of Shimei's hand and Shimei's tongue

As kind rebukes from Thee.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 16:15</span></span>

The men of Israel - These words are wanting in the Chaldee, Septuagint,
Syriac, Vulgate, and Arabic, and in two of Kennicott's and De Rossi's
MSS.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 16:18</span></span>

Whom the Lord and this people - choose - Here is an equivocation; Hushai
meant in his heart that God and all the people of Israel had chosen
David; but he spake so as to make Absalom believe that he spoke of him:
for whatever of insincerity may appear in this, Hushai is alone
answerable. What he says afterwards may be understood in the same way.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 16:21</span></span>

Go in unto thy father's concubines - It may be remembered that David
left ten of them behind to take care of the house, see [Sa2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#016). Ahithophel advised this
infernal measure, in order to prevent the possibility of a
reconciliation between David and his son; thus was the prophecy to
Nathan fulfilled, [Sa2 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011). And this
was probably transacted in the very same place where David's eye took
the adulterous view of Bath-sheba; see [Sa2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002).

The wives of the conquered king were always the property of the
conqueror; and in possessing these, he appeared to possess the right to
the kingdom. Herodotus informs us that Smerdis, having seized on the
Persian throne after the death of Cambyses, espoused all the wives of
his predecessor, lib. iii., c. 68. But for a son to take his father's
wives was the sum of abomination, and was death by the law of God, [Lev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#011). This was a sin rarely found,
even among the Gentiles.

Every part of the conduct of Absalom shows him to have been a most
profligate young man; he was proud, vindictive, adulterous, incestuous,
a parricide, and, in fine, reprobate to every good word and work. We
still however recollect that David had grievously sinned, and we should
also recollect that he suffered grievously for it; and that his
humiliation, repentance, and amendment, were most decisive and
exemplary. Reader, God is as just as he is merciful.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa2017)

</div>
