<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2001)  [Next](sa2003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 2:0</span></span>

David, by the direction of God, goes up to Hebron, and is there anointed
king over the house of Judah, [Sa2
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#001.md). He congratulates the
inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead on their kindness in rescuing the bodies of
Saul and his sons from the Philistines, [Sa2
2:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#005.md). Abner anoints Ish-bosheth,
Saul's son, king over Gilead, the Ashurites, Jezreel, Ephraim, Benjamin,
and all Israel; over whom he reigned two years, [Sa2
2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#008.md). David reigns over Judah, in
Hebron, seven years and six months, [Sa2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#011.md). Account of a battle between
Abner, captain of the Israelites, and Joab, captain of the men of Judah;
in which the former are routed with the loss of three hundred and sixty
men: but Asahel, the brother of Joab, is killed by Abner, vv. 12-32.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 2:1</span></span>

David inquired of the Lord - By means of Abiathar the priest; for he did
not know whether the different tribes were willing to receive him,
though he was fully persuaded that God had appointed him king over
Israel.

Unto Hebron - The metropolis of the tribe of Judah, one of the richest
regions in Judea. The mountains of Hebron were famed for fruits,
herbage, and honey; and many parts were well adapted for vines, olives,
and different kinds of grain, abounding in springs of excellent water,
as the most accurate travelers have asserted.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 2:4</span></span>

Anointed David king - He was anointed before by Samuel, by which he
acquired jus ad regnum, a right To the kingdom; by the present anointing
he had jus in regno, authority Over the kingdom. The other parts of the
kingdom were, as yet, attached to the family of Saul.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 2:5</span></span>

David sent messengers unto - Jabesh-gilead - This was a generous and
noble act, highly indicative of the grandeur of David's mind. He
respected Saul as his once legitimate sovereign; he loved Jonathan as
his most intimate friend. The former had greatly injured him, and sought
his destruction; but even this did not cancel his respect for him, as
the anointed of God, and as the king of Israel. This brings to my
remembrance that fine speech of Saurin, when speaking of the banishment
of the Protestants from France by the revocation of the edict of Nantes.
He thus at the Hague apostrophizes Louis XIV., their persecutor: Et toi,
prince redoubtable, que j'honorai jadis comme mon roi, et que je
respecte encore comme le fleau do Seigneur. "And thou, O formidable
prince, whom I once honored as my king, and whom I still reverence as
the scourge of the Lord!"

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 2:7</span></span>

Now let your hands be strengthened - David certainly wished to attach
the men of Jabesh to his interest; he saw that they were generous and
valiant, and must be of great service to him whose part they espoused;
and he was no doubt afraid that they would attach themselves to the
house of Saul, in consideration of the eminent services Saul had
rendered them in rescuing them from Nahash, king of the Ammonites.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 2:8</span></span>

Abner the son of Ner - This man had long been one of the chief captains
of Saul's army, and commander-in-chief on several occasions; he was
probably envious of David's power, by whom he had often been
out-generalled in the field.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 2:9</span></span>

Made him king over Gilead - These were places beyond Jordan; for as the
Philistines had lately routed the Israelites, they were no doubt in
possession of some of the principal towns, and were now enjoying the
fruits of their victory. Abner was therefore afraid to bring the new
king to any place where he was likely to meet with much resistance, till
he had got his army well recruited.

Who the Ashurites were is not generally agreed; probably men of the
tribe of Ashur.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 2:10</span></span>

Ish-bosheth - reigned two years - It is well observed that Ish-bosheth
reigned all the time that David reigned in Hebron, which was seven years
and six months. Perhaps the meaning of the writer is this: Ish-bosheth
reigned two years before any but the tribe of Judah had attached
themselves to the interest of David. Some think that Abner in effect
reigned the last five years of Ish-bosheth, who had only the name of
king after the first two years. Or the text may be understood thus: When
Ish-bosheth had reigned two years over Israel, he was forty years of
age. Houbigant, dissatisfied with all the common modes of solution,
proposes to read ששית שנה shishshith shanah, six years, for the שתים
שנים shetayim shanim, two years, of the text, which he contends is a
solecism; for in pure Hebrew the words would be שתים שנה as they are
everywhere read in the first book; and שנה is the reading of eleven of
Kennicott's MSS., and nine of De Rossi's; but the number two is
acknowledged by all the ancient versions, and by all the MSS. yet
collated. The critical reader may examine Houbigant on the place. After
all, probably the expedition mentioned in the succeeding verses is that
to which the writer refers, and from which he dates. Ish-bosheth had
reigned two years without any rupture with David or his men, till under
the direction of Abner, captain of his host, the Israelites passed over
Jordan, from Mahanaim to Gibeon, and being opposed by Joab, captain of
David's host, that battle took place which is described in the following
verses.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 2:14</span></span>

Let the young men - play before us - This was diabolical play, where
each man thrust his sword into the body of the other, so that the
twenty-four (twelve on each side) fell down dead together! But this was
the signal for that sanguinary skirmish which immediately took place.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 2:16</span></span>

Caught every one his fellow by the head - Probably by the beard, if
these persons were not too young to have one, or by the hair of the
head. Alexander ordered all the Macedonians to shave their beards; and
being asked by Parmenio why they should do so, answered, "Dost thou not
know that in battle there is no better hold than the beard?"

Helkath-hazzurim - "The portion of the mighty;" or, "The inheritance of
those who were slain," according to the Targum.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 2:18</span></span>

Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe - To be swift of foot was
deemed a great accomplishment in the heroes of antiquity; ποδας ωκυς
Αχιλλευς, the swift-footed Achilles, is an epithet which Homer gives to
that hero no less than thirty times in the course of the Ilias. It has a
qualification also among the Roman soldiers; they were taught both to
run swiftly, and to swim well.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 2:21</span></span>

Take thee his armor - It seems Asahel wished to get the armor of Abner
as a trophy; this also was greatly coveted by ancient heroes. Abner
wished to spare him, for fear of exciting Joab's enmity; but as Asahel
was obstinate in the pursuit, and was swifter of foot than Abner, the
latter saw that he must either kill or be killed, and therefore he
turned his spear and ran it through the body of Asahel. This turning
about that he might pierce him is what we translate "the hinder end of
his spear." This slaying of Asahel cost Abner his life, as we shall find
in the next chapter.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 2:27</span></span>

And Joab said - The meaning of this verse appears to be this: If Abner
had not provoked the battle, (see [Sa2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#014).md), Joab would not have attacked
the Israelites that day; as his orders were probably to act on the
defensive. Therefore the blame fell upon Israel.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 2:29</span></span>

They came to Mahanaim - So they returned to the place whence they set
out. See [Sa2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#012.md). This was the
commencement of the civil wars between Israel and Judah, and properly
the commencement of the division of the two kingdoms, through which both
nations were deluged with blood.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 3](sa2003.md)

</div>
