<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2000)  [Next](sa2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

An Amalekite comes to David, and informs him that the Philistines had
routed the Israelites; and that Saul and his sons were slain, [Sa2
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md). And pretends that he himself
had despatched Saul, finding him ready to fall alive into the hands of
the Philistines, and had brought his crown and bracelets to David, [Sa2
1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#005.md). David and his men mourn for
Saul and his sons, [Sa2 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#011.md), [Sa2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#012.md). He orders the Amalekite, who
professed that he had killed Saul, to be slain, [Sa2
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#013.md). David's funeral song for Saul
and Jonathan, [Sa2 1:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#017.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 1:2</span></span>

A man came out of the camp - The whole account which this young man
gives is a fabrication: in many of the particulars it is grossly
self-contradictory. There is no fact in the case but the bringing of the
crown, or diadem, and bracelets of Saul; which, as he appears to have
been a plunderer of the slain, he found on the field of battle; and he
brought them to David, and told the lie of having despatched Saul,
merely to ingratiate himself with David.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 1:8</span></span>

I am an Amalekite - Dr. Delaney remarks that an Amalekite took that
crown from off the head of Saul, which he had forfeited by his
disobedience in the case of Amalek.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 1:10</span></span>

The crown - and the bracelet - The crown was probably no more than a
royal fillet or diadem, both being the ensigns of royalty. It is
sometimes customary in the East for a sovereign prince to give a crown
and bracelets, when investing others with dominion or authority over
certain provinces. Had Saul these in token of his being God's
vicegerent, and that he held the kingdom from him alone?

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 1:16</span></span>

Thy blood be upon thy head - If he killed Saul, as he said he did, then
he deserved death; at that time it was not known to the contrary, and
this man was executed on his own confession.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 1:17</span></span>

David lamented - See this lamentation, and the notes on it at the end of
this chapter, [Sa2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021) (note.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 1:18</span></span>

The use of the bow - The use of is not in the Hebrew; it is simply the
bow, that is, a song thus entitled. See the observations at the end,
[Sa2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021) (note.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 1:21</span></span>

As though he had not been - In stead of בלי beli, Not, I read כלי keley,
Instruments.

Anointed with oil - See the observations at the end.

[Sa2 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#018.md), etc.: He bade them teach
the children of Judah the use of the bow, קשת kasheth.

The word kasheth is to be understood of the title of the song which
immediately follows, and not of the use of the bow, as our translation
intimates.

Many of David's Psalms have titles prefixed to them; some are termed
Shosannim, some Maschil, Nehiloth, Neginoth, etc., and this one here,
Kadesh or The Bow, because it was occasioned by the Philistine archers.
[Sa1 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#003.md) : "And the archers hit him."

But especially respecting the bow of Jonathan, "which returned not back
from the blood of the slain," as the song itself expresses. And David
could not but remember the bow of Jonathan, out of which "the arrow was
shot beyond the lad," [Sa1 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#036.md). It
was the time when that covenant was made, and that affection expressed
between them "which was greater than the love of women."

On these accounts the song was entitled Kasheth, or The song of the Bow,
and David commanded the chief musicians, Ethan, Heman, and Jeduthun, to
teach the children of Judah to sing it.

"It is written in the book of Jasher." Sept., επι βιβλιου του ευθους,
"in the book of the upright."

ספרא דאוריתא siphra deoraitha, "The book of the Law." - Jonathan.

The Arabic says, "Behold it is written in the book of Ashee; this is the
book of Samuel;" the interpretation of which is, "book of songs or
canticles."

This lamentation is justly admired as a picture of distress the most
tender and the most striking; unequally divided by grief into longer and
shorter breaks, as nature could pour them forth from a mind interrupted
by the alternate recurrence of the most lively images of love and
greatness.

His reverence for Saul and his love for Jonathan have their strongest
colourings; but their greatness and bravery come full upon him, and are
expressed with peculiar energy.

Being himself a warrior, it is in that character he sees their greatest
excellence; and though his imagination hurries from one point of
recollection to another, yet we hear him - at first, at last, everywhere
- lamenting, How are the mighty fallen!

It is almost impossible to read the noble original without finding every
word swollen with a sigh or broken with a sob. A heart pregnant with
distress, and striving to utter expressions descriptive of its feelings,
which are repeatedly interrupted by an excess of grief, is most sensibly
painted throughout the whole. Even an English reader may be convinced of
this, from the following specimen in European characters: -

19\. Hatstsebi Yishrael al bamotheycha chalal; Eych naphelu gibborim;

20\. Al taggidu begath, Al tebasseru bechutsoth Ashkelon; Pen tismachnah
benoth Pelishtim, Pen taalozenah benoth haarelim.

21\. Harey baggilboa al tal, Veal matar aleychem usedey terumoth; Ki
sham nigal magen Gibborim. Magen Shaul keley Mashiach bashshamen!

22\. Middam chalalim, mecheleb gibborim, Kesheth Yehonathan lo nashog
achor; Vechereb Shaul lo thashub reykam.

23\. Shaul Vihonathan, Hannee habim vehanneimim bechaiyeyhem, Ubemotham
lo niphradu. Minnesharim kallu, mearayoth gaberu!

24\. Benoth Yishrael el Shaul becheynah; Hammalbishchem shani im adanim,
Hammaaleh adi zahab al lebushechen.

25\. Eych naphelu gibborim bethoch hammilchamah! Yehonathan al
bamotheycha chalal!

26\. Tsar li aleycha achi Yehonathan, naamta li meod Niphleathah
ahabathecha li meahabath nashim!

27\. Eych naphelu gibborim, Vaiyobedu keley milchamah!

The three last verses in this sublime lamentation have sense and sound
so connected as to strike every reader.

Dr. Kennicott, from whom I have taken several of the preceding remarks,
gives a fine Latin version of this song, which I here subjoin: -

O decus Israelis, super excelsa tua Miles!

Quomodo ceciderunt Fortes!

Nolite indicare in Gatho,

Nolite indicare in plateis Ascalonis:

Ne laetentur filiae Philistaeorum,

Ne exultent filiae incircumcisorum.

Montes Gilboani super vos

Nec ros, nec pluvia, neque agri primitiarum;

Ibi enim abjectus fuit clypeus fortium.

Clypeus Saulis, arma inuncti olec!

Sine sanguine Militum,

Sine adipe Fortium.

Arcus Jonathanis non retrocesserat;

Gladiusque Saulis non redierat incassum.

Saul et Jonathan

Amabiles erant et jucundi in vitis suis,

Et in morte sua non separati.

Prae aquilis veloces!

Prae leonibus fortes!

Filiae Israelis deflete Saulem;

Qui coccino cum deliciis vos vestivit,

Qui vestibus vestris ornamenta imposuit aurea!

Quomodo ceciderunt Fortes, in medio belli!

O Jonathan, super excelsa tua Miles!

Versor in angustiis, tui causa, Frater mi, Jonathan!

Mihi fuisti admodum jucundus!

Mihi tuus amor admodum mirabilis,

Mulierum exuperans amorem!

Quomodo ceciderunt fortes,

Et perierunt arma belli!

Dissertation I., p. 122.

In [Sa2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021.md) I have inserted כלי keley
for בלי beli. Dr. Delaney rightly observes that the particle בלי beli is
not used in any part of the Bible in the sense of quasi non, as though
not, in which sense it must be used here if it be retained as a genuine
reading: The shield of Saul as though it had not been anointed with oil.

In a MS. written about the year 1200, numbered 30 in Kennicott's Bible,
כלי keley is found; and also in the first edition of the whole Hebrew
Bible, printed Soncini 1488. Neither the Syriac nor Arabic versions, nor
the Chaldee paraphrase, acknowledge the negative particle בלי beli,
which they would have done had it been in the copies from which they
translated. It was easy to make the mistake, as there is such a
similarity between ב beth and כ caph; the line therefore should be read
thus: The shield of Saul, weapons anointed with oil.

In [Sa2 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#022.md) נשוג nashog, to obtain,
attain, seems to have been written for נסוג nasog, to recede, return.
The former destroys the sense, the latter, which our translation has
followed, and which is supported by the authority of 30 MSS., makes it
not only intelligible but beautiful.

In [Sa2 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#019.md), [Sa2
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#022.md), and [Sa2
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#025.md), חלל and חללים chalal and
chalalim occur, which we translate the Slain, but which Dr. Kennicott, I
think from good authority, renders soldier and soldiers; and thus the
version is made more consistent and beautiful.

חלל chalal signifies to bore or pierce through; and this epithet might
be well given to a soldier, q.d., the Piercer, because his business is
to transfix or pierce his enemies with sword, spear, and arrows.

If it be translated soldiers in the several places of the Old Testament,
where we translate it Slain or Wounded, the sense will be much mended;
see [Jdg 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#031.md), [Jdg
20:39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#039.md); [Psa
89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011.md); [Pro
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#026.md); [Jer
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#004.md), [Jer
51:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#047.md), [Jer
51:49](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#049.md); [Eze
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#006.md), [Eze
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007.md); [Eze
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#014.md). In several others it retains
its radical signification of piercing, wounding, etc.

After these general observations I leave the particular beauties of this
inimitable song to be sought out by the intelligent reader. Much has
been written upon this, which cannot, consistently with the plan of
these notes, be admitted here. See Delaney, Kennicott, Lowth, etc.; and,
above all, let the reader examine the Hebrew text.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 2](sa2002.md)

</div>
