<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2023)  [Next](kg1000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 24:0</span></span>

David is tempted by Satan to number Israel and Judah, [Sa2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001.md). Joab remonstrates against it,
but the king determines that it shall be done; and Joab and the captains
accomplish the work, and bring the sum total to the king: viz.: eight
hundred thousand warriors in Israel, and five hundred thousand in Judah,
[Sa2 24:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#002.md). David is convinced that
he has done wrong; and the prophet Gad is sent to him, to give him his
choice of three judgments, one of which God is determined to inflict
upon the nation, [Sa2 24:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010.md). David
humbles himself before God; and a pestilence is sent, which destroys
seventy thousand men, [Sa2 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014.md), [Sa2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015.md). The angel of the Lord being
about to destroy Jerusalem, David makes intercession, and the plague is
stayed, [Sa2 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016.md), [Sa2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017.md). Gad directs him to build an
altar to the Lord on the threshing-floor of Araunah, where the plague
was stayed, [Sa2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018.md). He purchases
this place for the purpose, and offers burnt-offerings and
peace-offerings, [Sa2 24:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#019.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 24:1</span></span>

He moved David against them - God could not be angry with David for
numbering the people if he moved him to do it; but in the parallel place
([Ch1 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001).md) it is expressly said,
Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel.
David, in all probability, slackening in his piety and confidence toward
God, and meditating some extension of his dominions without the Divine
counsel or command, was naturally curious to know whether the number of
fighting men in his empire was sufficient for the work which he had
projected. See more on [Sa2 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010.md)
(note). He therefore orders Joab and the captains to take an exact
account of all the effective men in Israel and Judah. God is justly
displeased with this conduct, and determines that the props of his vain
ambition shall be taken away, either by famine, war, or pestilence.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 24:3</span></span>

Joab said unto the king - This very bad man saw that the measure now
recommended by the king was a wrong one, and might be ruinous to the
people, and therefore he remonstrates against it in a very sensible
speech; but the king was infatuated, and would hear no reason.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 24:5</span></span>

And pitched in Aroer - This was beyond Jordan, on the river Arnon, in
the tribe of Gad: hence it appears, says Calmet, that they began their
census with the most eastern parts of the country beyond Jordan.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 24:6</span></span>

Tahtim-hodshi - Where this place was is not exactly known: some think
that the words refer to a newly conquered country, as our margin, the
nether land newly inhabited; and if so, this was probably the country
eastward of Gilead, which the Israelites, in the time of Saul, had
conquered from the Hagarites, and dwelt in themselves. See [Ch1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#010.md), where this transaction is
recorded.

To Dan-jaan - Or, to Dan of the woods. This is the place so frequently
mentioned, situated at the foot of Mount Libanus, near to the source of
the Jordan, the most northern city of all the possessions of the
Israelites in what was called the promised land, as Beer-sheba was the
most southern: hence the common form of speech, From Dan to Beer-sheba,
i.e., from north to south.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 24:7</span></span>

The strong hold of Tyre - This must have been the old city of Tyre,
which was built on the main land: the new city was built on a rock in
the sea.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 24:8</span></span>

Nine months and twenty days - This was a considerable time; but they had
much work to do, nor did they complete the work, as appears from [Ch1
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#006.md); [Ch1
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#024.md). William the Conqueror made a
survey of all England, particularizing "how many hides or carucates the
land is taxed at; whose it was in the time of his predecessor Edward;
who the present owners and sub-tenants; what and how much arable land,
meadow, pasture, and wood there is, how much in demesne, i.e., held and
cultivated by the landowners; how much in tenantcy, and what number of
ploughs it will keep; what mills and fisheries; how many sockmen,
freemen, co-liberti, cotarii, bordarii, radmanni, radchenisters,
villains, maid-servants, and bondmen, there are; how many hogs the woods
would support; how many churches, priests, or parsons; what customary
rents, prestations, and services, are to be paid and rendered out of the
lands; what has been added to the manor; what has been withheld from it,
and by whom; what land is waste, and what the whole was let for in the
time of King Edward; and what the nett rent, and whether it was too dear
rented, and whether it might be improved." This survey was begun in the
year 1080, and was finished in the year 1086, six years having been
employed in the work. This most important document is still preserved;
it is in the Chapter House, Westminster, in two volumes, one in folio,
on three hundred and eighty-two leaves of vellum. the other in quarto,
on four hundred and fifty leaves; and is in as good preservation as it
was seven hundred years ago. This work was much more difficult than that
which was performed by Joab and his fellows. The work itself is known by
the name Domesday Book.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 24:9</span></span>

In Israel eight hundred thousand - the men of Judah were five hundred
thousand - In the parallel place, [Ch1
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#005.md), the sums are widely different:
in Israel one million one hundred thousand, in Judah four hundred and
seventy thousand. Neither of these sums is too great, but they cannot be
both correct; and which is the true number is difficult to say. The
former seems the most likely; but more corruptions have taken place in
the numbers of the historical books of the Old Testament, than in any
other part of the sacred records. To attempt to reconcile them in every
part is lost labor; better at once acknowledge what cannot be
successfully denied, that although the original writers of the Old
Testament wrote under the influence of the Divine Spirit, yet we are not
told that the same influence descended on all copiers of their words, so
as absolutely to prevent them from making mistakes. They might mistake,
and they did mistake; but a careful collation of the different
historical books serves to correct all essential errors of the scribes.
See the Dissertations of Dr. Kennicott mentioned at the conclusion of
the preceding chapter.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 24:10</span></span>

David said - I have sinned greatly - We know not exactly in what this
sin consisted. I have already hinted, [Sa2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001.md), that probably David now began to
covet an extension of empire, and purposed to unite some of the
neighboring states with his own; and having, through the suggestions of
Satan or some other adversary, (for so the word implies), given way to
this covetous disposition, he could not well look to God for help, and
therefore wished to know whether the thousands of Israel and Judah might
be deemed equal to the conquests which he meditated. When God is
offended and refuses assistance, vain is the help of man.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 24:11</span></span>

For when David was up - It is supposed that David's contrition arose
from the reproof given by Gad, and that in the order of time the reproof
came before the confession stated in the 10th verse.

David's seer - A holy man of God, under the Divine influence, whom David
had as a domestic chaplain.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 24:13</span></span>

Shall seven years of famine - In [Ch1
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#012.md), the number is three, not seven;
and here the Septuagint has three, the same as in Chronicles: this is no
doubt the true reading, the letter ז zain, Seven, being mistaken for ג
gimel, Three. A mistake of this kind might be easily made from the
similarity of the letters.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 24:14</span></span>

I am in a great strait: let us fall now into the hand of the Lord -
David acted nobly in this business. Had he chosen war, his own personal
safety was in no danger, because there was already an ordinance
preventing him from going to battle. Had he chosen famine, his own
wealth would have secured his and his own family's support. But he
showed the greatness of his mind in choosing the pestilence, to the
ravages of which himself and household were exposed equally with the
meanest of his subjects.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 24:15</span></span>

From the morning - to the time appointed - That is, from the morning of
the day after David had made his election till the third day, according
to the condition which God had proposed, and he had accepted: but it
seems that the plague was terminated before the conclusion of the third
day, for Jerusalem might have been destroyed, but it was not. Throughout
the land, independently of the city, seventy thousand persons were
slain! This was a terrible mortality in the space of less than three
days.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 24:16</span></span>

The angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem - By what means this
destruction took place, we know not: it appears that an angel was
employed in it, and that this minister of Divine justice actually
appeared as an object. of sight; for it is said, [Sa2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017.md), When David saw the angel that
smote the people, he said, etc.; and both Ornan and his four sons saw
him and were affrighted, [Ch1 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#020.md).

The threshing-place of Araunah - These threshing-places, we have already
seen, were made in the open air. In the parallel place, [Ch1
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#015.md), [Ch1
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#020.md), etc., this person is called
Ornan. The word that we render Araunah is written in this very chapter
אורנה Auarnah, [Sa2 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#016.md), ארניה
Araniah, [Sa2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018.md), ארונה Araunah or
Araunah, [Sa2 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#020.md), and the
following: but in every place in 1 Chronicles 21:1-30 where it occurs it
is written ארנן Ornan. It is likely he had both names, Araunah and
Ornan: but the varieties of spelling in 2 Samuel must arise from the
blunders of transcribers.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 24:17</span></span>

But these sheep, what have they done? - It seems that in the order of
Providence there is no way of punishing kings in their regal capacity,
but by afflictions on their land, in which the people must necessarily
suffer. If the king, therefore, by his own personal offenses, in which
the people can have no part, bring down God's judgments upon his people,
(though they suffer innocently), grievous will be the account that he
must give to God. The people generally suffer for the miscarriages of
their governors: this has been observed in every age.

Quicquid delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi.

\- "When doting monarchs urge

Unsound resolves, their subjects feel the scourge."

Hor. Ep. lib. i., ep. 2, ver. 14.

Against my father's house - That is, against his own family; even to cut
it off from the face of the earth.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 24:18</span></span>

Go up, rear an altar unto the Lord - This place is supposed to be Mount
Moriah: on which, according to the rabbins, Cain and Abel offered their
sacrifices; where Abraham attempted to sacrifice Isaac, and where the
temple of Solomon was afterwards built.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 24:22</span></span>

Here be oxen for burnt-sacrifice - He felt for the king; and showed his
loyalty to him by this offer. He felt for the people; and was willing to
make any sacrifice to get the plague stayed. He felt for his own
personal safety; and therefore was willing to give up all to save his
life. He felt for the honor of God; and therefore was glad that he had a
sacrifice to offer, so that God might magnify both his justice and
mercy.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 24:23</span></span>

As a king, give unto the king - Literally, All these did King Araunah
give unto the king. That there could not be a king of the Jebusites on
Mount Moriah, is sufficiently evident; and that there was no other king
than David in the land, is equally so: the word המלך hammelech, "the
king," given here to Araunah, is wanting in the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Arabic; in three of Kennicott's and De Rossi's MSS., and in the parallel
place in Chronicles: and, it is very probable, never made a part of the
text. Perhaps it should be read, All these did Arnunah give unto the
king.

There is, however, a difficulty here. David had taken the fortress of
the Jebusites many years before; yet it is evident that Araunah was
proprietor of the soil at this time. It is not clear that he was a
subject of David; but he paid him respect as a neighbor and a king. This
is merely possible.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 24:24</span></span>

Neither will I offer burnt-offerings - It is a maxim from heaven,
"Honour the Lord with thy substance." He who has a religion that costs
him nothing, has a religion that is worth nothing: nor will any man
esteem the ordinances of God, if those ordinances cost him nothing. Had
Araunah's noble offer been accepted, it would have been Araunah's
sacrifice, not David's; nor would it have answered the end of turning
away the displeasure of the Most High. It was David that sinned, not
Araunah: therefore David must offer sacrifice, and at his own expense
too.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 24:25</span></span>

David - offered burnt-offerings - And that these sacrifices were
pleasing to the Lord, is evident from a circumstance marked in the
parallel place, [Ch1 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026.md) : David
called upon the Lord, and he answered him from heaven by fire upon the
altar of burnt-offering.

The plague was stalled - Jerusalem did not share in the common calamity,
seventy thousand being the whole that were slain throughout the land.

This book is unfinished, and requires 1 Chronicles 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28, and 29, to complete it. A few things relative to this history
may be found in the beginning of the following book; but the information
in 1 Chronicles is much more extensive and satisfactory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Introduction](kg1000.md)

</div>
