<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2021)  [Next](sa2023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 22:0</span></span>

David's psalm of thanksgiving for God's powerful deliverance and
manifold blessings, including prophetic declarations relative to the
humiliation and exaltation of the Messiah, vv. 1-51.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 22:1</span></span>

David spake unto the Lord the words of this song - This is the same in
substance, and almost in words, with Psalm 18:1-50, and therefore the
exposition of it must be reserved till it occurs in its course in that
book, with the exception of a very few observations, and Dr. Kennicott's
general view of the subject.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 22:5</span></span>

When the waves of death compassed me - Though in a primary sense many of
these things belong to David, yet generally and fully they belong to the
Messiah alone.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 22:11</span></span>

He rode upon a cherub, and did fly - he was seen upon the things of the
wind - In the original of this sublime passage, sense and sound are
astonishingly well connected. I shall insert the Hebrew, represent it in
English letters for the sake of the unlearned reader, and have only to
observe, he must read from the right to the left.

רוח כנפי על וירא ויעף כרוב על וירכב ruach canphey al vaiyera vaiyaoph
kerub al vayirkab wind the of wings the upon seen was he and; fly did
and cherub upon rode he

The clap of the wing, the agitation and rush through the air are
expressed here in a very extraordinary manner.

Other beauties of this kind will be noted in the exposition of the Psalm
alluded to above.

I now subjoin Dr. Kennicott's remarks on this chapter: -

"The very sublime poetry contained in this chapter is universally
admired, and yet it cannot be perfectly understood, till it is known Who
is the speaker, who the person thus triumphant over mighty enemies,
whose Sufferings occasioned such a dreadful convulsion of nature, and,
who, upon his deliverance, inflicted such vengeance on his own people,
and also became thus a king over the heathen. Should we be told that
this person was David, it will be very difficult to show how this
description can possibly agree with that character: but if it did in
fact agree, yet would it contradict St. Paul, who quotes part of it as
predicting the conversion of the Gentiles under Christ the Messiah. [Rom
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009); [Heb
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#013); and see Peirce's Commentary, p.
50. Now if the person represented as speaking through this Divine ode be
David only, the Messiah is excluded. In consequence of the difficulties
resulting from each of these suppositions, the general idea has been
that it relates both to David and to the Messiah as a prophecy of a
double sense; first, as spoken by David of himself, and yet to be
understood in a secondary sense, of the Messiah. But it must be remarked
here, that if spoken only of David, it is not a prediction of any thing
future, but a thanksgiving for favors past, and therefore is no prophecy
at all. And farther, it could not be a prophecy descriptive of David
unless the particulars agreed to David, which they evidently do not. If
then David be here necessarily excluded from the single sense, he must
be excluded also from the double sense, because nothing can be intended
by any sacred writer, to relate to two persons, unless it be True of
both; but it not being the case here as to David, we must conclude that
this song relates only to the Messiah; and on this subject an excellent
Dissertation, by the late Mr. Peirce, is subjoined to his comment on the
Epistle to the Hebrews. It may be necessary to add here two remarks: the
twenty-fourth verse now ends with, I have kept myself from mine
iniquity, which words, it is objected, are not proper, if applied to the
Messiah. But this difficulty is removed, in part, by the context, which
represents the speaker as perfectly innocent and righteous; and this
exactly agrees with the proof arising from the Syriac and Arabic
versions, and also the Chaldee paraphrase, that this word was anciently
מעונים ab iniquitatibus; consequently, this is one of the many instances
where the ם final mem is improperly omitted by the Jewish transcribers.
See my General Dissertation. Lastly, the difficulty arising from the
title, which ascribes the Psalm to David, and which seems to make him
the speaker in it, may be removed, either by supposing that the title
here, like those now prefixed to several Psalms, is of no sufficient
authority; or rather, by considering this title as only meant to
describe the time when David composed this prophetic hymn, that when
delivered from all his other enemies as well as from the hand of Saul,
he then consecrated his leisure by composing this sublime prophecy
concerning Messiah, his son, whom he represents here as speaking, (just
as in Psalm 22, 40, and other places), and as describing,

1\. His triumph over death and hell;

2\. The manifestations of Omnipotence in his favor, earth and heaven,
trembling at God's awful presence;

3\. The speaker's innocence thus divinely attested;

4\. The vengeance he was to take on his own people the Jews, in the
destruction of Jerusalem; and,

5\. The adoption of the heathen, over whom he was to be the head and
ruler.

"Another instance of a title denoting only the time of a prophecy,
occurs in the very next chapter; where a prophecy concerning the Messiah
is entitled, The Last words of David; i.e., a hymn which he composed a
little before his death, after all his other prophecies. And perhaps
this ode in 2 Samuel 22, which immediately precedes that in 2 Samuel 23,
was composed but a little while before; namely, when all his wars were
over. Let it be added, that Josephus, immediately before he speaks of
David's mighty men, which follow in this same chapter of Samuel,
considers the two hymns in 2 Samuel 22 and 23, as both written after his
wars were over - Jam Davides, bellis et periculis perfunctus, pacemque
deinceps profundam agitans, odas in Deum hymnosque composuit. Tom. i.,
page 401."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](sa2023)

</div>
