<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2013)  [Next](sa2015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 14:0</span></span>

A woman of Tekoah, by the advice of Joab, comes to the king; and by a
fictitious story persuades him to recall Absalom, vv. 1-20. Joab is
permitted to go to Geshur, and bring Absalom from thence, [Sa2
14:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#021.md). Absalom comes to Jerusalem
to his own house, but is forbidden to see the king's face, [Sa2
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#024.md). An account of Absalom's beauty,
and the extraordinary weight of his hair, [Sa2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#025.md), [Sa2
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#026.md). His children, [Sa2
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#027.md). He strives to regain the king's
favor, and employs Joab as an intercessor, [Sa2
14:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#028.md). David is reconciled to him,
[Sa2 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#033.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 14:2</span></span>

Joab sent to Tekoah - Tekoah, according to St. Jerome, was a little city
in the tribe of Judah, about twelve miles from Jerusalem.

There are several circumstances relative to this woman and her case
which deserve to be noticed: -

1\. She was a widow, and therefore her condition of life was the better
calculated to excite compassion.

2\. She lived at some distance from Jerusalem, which rendered the case
difficult to be readily inquired into; and consequently there was the
less danger of detection.

3\. She was advanced in years, as Josephus says, that her application
might have the more weight.

4\. She put on mourning, to heighten the idea of distress.

5\. She framed a case similar to that in which David stood, in order to
convince him of the reasonableness of sparing Absalom.

6\. She did not make the similitude too plain and visible, lest the king
should see her intention before she had obtained a grant of pardon. Thus
her circumstances, her mournful tale, her widow's needs, her aged
person, and her impressive manner, all combined to make one united
impression on the king's heart. We need not wonder at her success. See
Bishop Patrick.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 14:5</span></span>

I am indeed a widow woman - It is very possible that the principal facts
mentioned here were real, and that Joab found out a person whose
circumstances bore a near resemblance to that which he wished to
represent.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 14:7</span></span>

The whole family is risen - They took on them the part of the avenger of
blood; the nearest akin to the murdered person having a right to slay
the murderer.

They shall quench my coal which is left - A man and his descendants or
successors are often termed in Scripture a lamp or light. So, [Sa2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017.md), the men of David said, when
they sware that he should no more go out with them to battle, That thou
Quench not the Light of Israel. See also [Psa
132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017.md). And to raise up a lamp to a
person signifies his having a posterity to continue his name and family
upon the earth: thus, quench my coal that is left means destroying all
hope of posterity, and extinguishing the family from among the people.
The heathens made use of the same similitude. The few persons who
survived the deluge of Deucalion are termed ζωπυρα living coals, because
by them the vital flame of the human race was to be rekindled on the
earth.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 14:8</span></span>

I will give charge concerning thee - This would not do, it was too
distant; and she could not by it bring her business to a conclusion: so
she proceeds: -

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 14:9</span></span>

The iniquity be on me - She intimates that, if the king should suppose
that the not bringing the offender to the assigned punishment might
reflect on the administration of justice in the land, she was willing
that all blame should attach to her and her family, and the king and his
throne be guiltless.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 14:10</span></span>

Whosoever saith aught unto thee - Neither did this bring the matter to
such a bearing that she could come to her conclusion, which was, to get
the king pledged by a solemn promise that all proceedings relative to
the case should be stopped.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 14:11</span></span>

Let the king remember the Lord thy God - Consider that when God is
earnestly requested to show mercy, he does it in the promptest manner;
he does not wait till the case is hopeless: the danger to which my son
is exposed is imminent; if the king do not decide the business
instantly, it may be too late.

And he said, As the Lord liveth - Thus he binds himself by a most solemn
promise and oath; and this is what the woman wanted to extort.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 14:13</span></span>

Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing - The woman, having now
got the king's promise confirmed by all oath, that her son should not
suffer for the murder of his brother, comes immediately to her
conclusion: Is not the king to blame? Does he now act a consistent part?
He is willing to pardon the meanest of his subjects the murder of a
brother at the instance of a poor widow, and he is not willing to pardon
his son Absalom, whose restoration to favor is the desire of the whole
nation. Is that clemency to be refused to the king's son, the hope of
the nation and heir to the throne, which is shown to a private
individual, whose death or life can only be of consequence to one
family? Why, therefore, dost thou not bring back thy banished child?

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 14:14</span></span>

For we must needs die - Whatever is done must be done quickly; all must
die; God has not exempted any person from this common lot. Though Amnon
be dead, yet the death of Absalom cannot bring him to life, nor repair
this loss. Besides, for his crime, he justly deserved to die; and thou,
in this case didst not administer justice. Horrible as this fratricide
is, it is a pardonable case: the crime of Amnon was the most flagitious;
and the offense to Absalom, the ruin of his beloved sister,
indescribably great. Seeing, then, that the thing is so, and that Amnon
can be no more recalled to life than water spilt upon the ground can be
gathered up again; and that God, whose vicegerent thou art, and whose
example of clemency as well as justice thou art called to imitate,
devises means that those who were banished from him by sin and
transgression, may not be finally expelled from his mercy and his
kingdom; restore thy son to favor, and pardon his crime, as thou hast
promised to restore my son, and the Lord thy God will be with thee. This
is the sum and sense of the woman's argument.

The argument contained in this 14th verse is very elegant, and
powerfully persuasive; but one clause of it has been variously
understood, Neither doth God respect any person; the Hebrew is, ולא ישא
אלהים נפש velo yissa Elohim nephesh, "And God doth not take away the
soul." The Septuagint has it, Και ληψεται ὁ Θεος την ψυχην; And God will
receive the soul. This intimates that, after human life is ended, the
soul has a state of separate existence with God. This was certainly the
opinion of these translators, and was the opinion of the ancient Jews,
at least three hundred years before the incarnation; about which time
this translation was made. The Vulgate has, Nec volt Deus perire animam,
"Nor does God will the destruction of the soul." God is not the author
of death; neither hath he pleasure in the destruction of the living;
imitate him; pardon and recall thy son.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 14:20</span></span>

According to the wisdom of an angel of God - This is quite in the style
of Asiatic flattery. A European is often addressed, "Saheb can do every
thing; we can do nothing; none can prevent the execution of Saheb's
commands; Saheb is God." See Ward.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 14:21</span></span>

And the king said unto Joab - It appears that Joab was present at the
time when the woman was in conference with the king, and no doubt others
of David's courtiers or officers were there also.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 14:24</span></span>

Let him not see my face - He would not at once restore him to favor,
though he had now remitted his crime; so that he should not die for it.
It was highly proper to show this detestation of the crime, and respect
for justice.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 14:25</span></span>

None to be so much praised as Absalom - It was probably his personal
beauty that caused the people to interest themselves so much in his
behalf; for the great mass of the public is ever caught and led by
outward appearances.

There was no blemish in him - He was perfect and regular in all his
features, and in all his proportions.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 14:26</span></span>

When he polled his head - Not at any particular period, but when the
hair became too heavy for him. On this account of the extraordinary
weight of Absalom's hair, see the observations at the end of this
chapter, [Sa2 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#030) (note.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 14:27</span></span>

Unto Absalom there were born - These children did not survive him; see
[Sa2 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018.md).

Tamar - The Septuagint adds, And she became the wife of Roboam, the son
of Solomon, and bare to him Abia; see [Mat
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#007.md). Josephus says the same. This
addition is not found in the other versions.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 14:30</span></span>

Go and set it on fire - This was strange conduct, but it had the desired
effect. He had not used his influence to get Absalom to court; now he
uses it, and succeeds.

Additional observations on [Sa2 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#026.md)
: -

"And at every year's end, he (Absalom) polled his head; and he weighed
the hair at two hundred shekels."

The very learned Bochart has written a dissertation on this subject
(vide Bocharti Opera, vol. iii., col. 883, edit. Lugd. 1692) in a letter
to his friend M. Faukell. I shall give the substance in what follows.

There is nothing more likely than that corruptions in the Scripture
numerals have taken place. Budaeus de Asse (lib. ii., p. 49 and 51, also
lib. iii., p. 67 etc). complains loudly of this.

This might easily have happened, as in former times the numbers in the
sacred writings appear to have been expressed by single letters. The
letter ר resh stands for two hundred, and might in this place be easily
mistaken for ד daleth which signifies four; but this may be thought to
be too little, as it would not amount to more than a quarter of a pound;
yet, if the two hundred shekels be taken in the amount will be utterly
incredible; for Josephus says, (Antiq. lib. vii., cap. 8), Σικλους
διακοσιους, οὑτοι δε εισι πεντε μναι, i.e., "Two hundred shekels make
five minae," and in lib. xiv., cap. 12. he says, Ἡ δε μνα παρ' ἡμιν
ισχει λιτρας β' και ημισυ; "And a mina with us (i.e., the Jews) weighs
two pounds and a half." This calculation makes Absalom's hair weigh
twelve pounds and a half! Credat Judaeus Apella!

Indeed, the same person tells us that the hair of Absalom was so thick,
etc., ὡς μολις αυτην ἡμεραις αποκειρειν οκτω, "that eight days were
scarcely sufficient to cut it off in!" This is rabbinism, with a
witness.

Epiphanius, in his treatise De Ponderibus et Mensuris, casts much more
light on this place, where he says, Σικλος ὁ λεγεται και κοδραντης
τεταρτον μεν εστι της ουγκιας, ἡμισυ δε του στατηρος, δυο δραχμας εχων;
"A shekel, (i.e., a common or king's shekel, equal to half a shekel of
the sanctuary), which is called also a quarter, is the fourth part of an
ounce, or half a stater; which is about two drachms." This computation
seems very just, as the half-shekel, (i.e., of the sanctuary), [Exo
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013.md), which the Lord commanded the
children of Israel to give as an offering for their souls, is expressly
called in [Mat 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024.md), το διδραχμον,
"two drachms:" and our Lord wrought a miracle to pay this, which the
Romans then exacted by way of tribute: and Peter took out of the fish's
mouth a stater, which contained exactly four drachms or one shekel, (of
the sanctuary), the tribute money for our Lord and himself.

The king's shekel was about the fourth part of an ounce, according to
what Epiphanius says above; and Hesychius says the same: Δυναται δε ὁ
σικλος δυο δραχμας Αττικας; "A shekel is equal to, or worth, two Attic
drachms." The whole amount, therefore, of the two hundred shekels is
about fifty ounces, which make four pounds two ounces, Troy weight, or
three pounds two ounces, Avoirdupois. This need not, says my learned
author, be accounted incredible, especially as abundance of oil and
ointments were used by the ancients in dressing their heads; as is
evident, not only from many places in the Greek and Roman writers, but
also from several places in the sacred writings. See [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005.md); [Ecc
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008.md); [Mat
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#017.md).

Josephus also informs us that the Jews not only used ointments, but that
they put gold dust in their hair, that it might flame in the sun; and
this they might do in considerable quantities, as gold was so plentiful
among them. I must own I have known an instance that makes much for
Bochart's argument: an officer, who had upwards of two pounds of powder
and ointments put on his head daily, whose hair did not weigh a fourth
part of that weight. And Absalom, being exceedingly vain, might be
supposed to make a very extensive use of these things. There are some,
however, who endeavor to solve the difficulty by understanding שקל
shakal to mean rather the value than the weight.

Bochart concludes this elaborate dissertation, in which he appears to
have ransacked all the Hebrew, Greek, and Roman authors for proofs of
his opinion, by exhorting his friend in these words of Horace: -

\- Si quid novisti rectius istis,

Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.

To me the above is quite unsatisfactory; and, with due deference to so
great a character, I think I have found out something better.

I believe the text is not here in its original form; and that a mistake
has crept into the numeral letters. I imagine that ל lamed, Thirty, was
first written; which, in process of time, became changed for ר resh, Two
Hundred, which might easily have happened from the similarity of the
letters. But if this be supposed to be too little, (which I think it is
not), being only seven ounces and a half in the course of a year; let it
be observed that the sacred text does not limit it to that quantity of
time, for מקץ ימים לימים mikkets yamim laiyamim signifies literally,
"From the end of days to days;" which Jonathan properly renders, מזמן
עדן לעדן mizzeman iddan leiddan, "at proper or convenient times," viz.,
when it grew too long or weighty, which it might be several times in the
year. Besides, this was not all his hair; for his head was not shaved
but polled, i.e., the redundancy cut off.

But how was it probable that these two numerals should be interchanged?
Thus; if the upper stroke of the ל lamed were but a little impaired, as
it frequently is both in MSS. and printed books, it might be very easily
taken for ר resh, and the remains of the upper part of the lamed might
be mistaken for the stroke over the ר, which makes it the character of
two hundred.

But how could מאתים mathayim, two hundred, in the text, be put in the
place of שלשים sheloshim, thirty? Very easily, when the numbers became
expressed by words at length instead of numeral letters.

The common reading of the text appears to me irreconcilable with truth;
and I humbly hope that what I have offered above solves every
difficulty, and fully accounts for all that the sacred historian speaks
of this vain-comely lad.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 14:27</span></span>

"Absalom had a daughter, whose name was Tamar."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 15](sa2015.md)

</div>
