<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol002)  [Next](sol004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 3:0</span></span>

The bride mentions the absence of her spouse, her search after him, and
her ultimate success, [Sol 3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001.md). A
description of the bridegroom, his bed, chariot, etc., [Sol
3:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006.md).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 3:1</span></span>

By night on my bed I sought him - It appears that the bridegroom only
saw the bride by night: that on the night referred to here he did not
come as usual. The bride troubled on the account, rose and sought him,
inquired of the city guards, and continued to seek till at last she
found him, and brought him to her apartment, [Sol
3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002.md).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 3:4</span></span>

Into my mother's house - The women in the East have all separate
apartments, into which no person ever attempts to enter except the
husband. We find Isaac bringing Rebecca into his mother's tent, when he
made her his wife, [Gen 24:67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#067.md). What is
here related appears to refer to the third night of the nuptials.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 3:5</span></span>

I charge you - The same adjuration as before, [Sol
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007.md).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 3:6</span></span>

Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness - Going to Egypt was
called descending or going down, coming from it was termed coming up.
The bride, having risen, goes after her spouse to the country, and the
clouds of incense arising from her palanquin seemed like pillars of
smoke; and the appearance was altogether so splendid as to attract the
admiration of her own women, who converse about her splendor,
excellence, etc., and then take occasion to describe Solomon's nuptial
bed and chariot. Some think that it is the bridegroom who is spoken of
here. With this verse the third night is supposed to end.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 3:7</span></span>

Threescore valiant men - These were the guards about the pavilion of the
bridegroom, who were placed there because of fear in the night. The
security and state of the prince required such a guard as this, and the
passage is to be literally understood.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 3:8</span></span>

They all hold swords - They are swordsmen. Every man has a sword, and is
well instructed how to use it.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 3:9</span></span>

Of the wood of Lebanon - Of the cedar that grew on that mount. It is
very likely that a nuptial bed, not a chariot, is intended by the
original word אפיון appiryon. Montanus properly translates it sponsarum
thalamum, a nuptial bed. It may, however, mean a palanquin.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 3:10</span></span>

The pillars - of silver - The bedposts were made of silver, or cased
with wrought silver plates, like the king's chairs brought from Hanover,
now, in one of the staterooms in Windsor Castle.

The bottom thereof of gold - This may refer to cords made of gold
thread, or to the mattress, which was made of cloth ornamented with
gold.

The covering - of purple - Most probably the canopy.

The midst - paved with love - The counterpane, a superb piece of
embroidery, wrought by some of the noble maids of Jerusalem, and, as a
proof of their affection, respect, and love, presented to the bride and
bridegroom, on their nuptial day. This is most likely to be the sense of
the passage, though some suppose it to refer to the whole court.

A Turkish couch is made of wooden lattices painted and gilded; the
inside is painted with baskets of flowers and nosegays, intermixed with
little mottoes according to the fancy of the artist. Solomon's couch may
have been of the same kind, and decorated in the same way; and the
paving with love may refer to the amatory verses worked either on the
counterpane, hangings, or embroidered carpet. And as this was done by
the daughters of Jerusalem, they might have expressed the most striking
parts of such a chaste history of love as Halaly's Leely and Mejnoon on
the different parts. I see that Dr. Good is of this opinion. It is
sufficiently probable.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 3:11</span></span>

Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion - This is the exhortation of the
companions of the bride to the females of the city to examine the superb
appearance of the bridegroom, and especially the nuptial crown, which
appears to have been made by Bathsheba, who it is supposed might have
lived till the time of Solomon's marriage with the daughter of Pharaoh.
It is conjectured that the prophet refers to a nuptial crown, [Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010.md). But a crown, both on the bride
and bridegroom, was common among most people on such occasions. The
nuptial crown among the Greeks and Romans was only a chaplet or wreath
of flowers.

In the day of the gladness of his heart - The day in which all his
wishes were crowned, by being united to that female whom beyond all
others he loved.

Here the third day is supposed to end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](sol004.md)

</div>
