<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol005)  [Next](sol007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 6:0</span></span>

The companions of the bride inquire after the bridegroom, [Sol
6:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001). A description of the bride,
[Sol 6:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 6:1</span></span>

Whither is thy beloved gone - These words are supposed to be addressed
to the bride by her own companions, and are joined to the preceding
chapter by the Hebrew and all the versions.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 6:2</span></span>

My beloved is gone down into his garden - The answer of the bride to her
companions.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 6:4</span></span>

Beautiful - as Tirzah - This is supposed to be the address of Solomon to
the bride. Tirzah was a city in the tribe of Ephraim, ([Jos
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#024)), and the capital of that
district. It appears to have been beautiful in itself, and beautifully
situated, for Jeroboam made it his residence before Samaria was built;
and it seems to have been the ordinary residence of the kings of Israel,
[Kg1 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#017); [Kg1
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#021). Its same signifies beautiful or
delightful.

Comely as Jerusalem - This was called the perfection of beauty, [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002), [Psa
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003); [Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002). And thus the poet compares the
bride's beauty to the two finest places in the land of Palestine, and
the capitals of the two kingdoms of Israel and Judah.

Terrible as an army with banners - This has been supposed to carry an
allusion to the caravans in the East, and the manner in which they are
conducted in their travels by night. The caravans are divided into
companies, called cottors, according to Thevenet; and each company is
distinguished by the form of the brazier in which they carry their
lights. After night, these braziers are placed on the ends of long
poles, and carried by a person who walks at the head of the company.
Some have ten or twelve lights, and are of different forms; some
triangular, or like an N; some like an M, by which each pilgrim readily
knows his own company, both by night and day. A whole caravan, composed
of many thousands of hadgees or pilgrims, divided into various cottors
or companies, each having its own distinguishing brazier or light, must
necessarily produce a very splendid, if not a terrible, appearance.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 6:5</span></span>

Turn away thine eyes - As the sight of so many fires after night was
extremely dazzling, and the eye could not bear the sight, so the look of
the bride was such as pierced the heart, and quite overwhelmed the
person who met it. Hence the bridegroom naturally cries out, "Turn away
thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me."

Thy hair is as a flock of goats - See on [Sol
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001) (note).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 6:6</span></span>

Thy teeth - See on [Sol 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002) (note).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 6:7</span></span>

As a piece of a pomegranate - See on [Sol
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003) (note).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 6:8</span></span>

There are threescore queens - Though there be sixty queens, and eighty
concubines, or secondary wives, and virgins innumerable, in my harem,
yet thou, my dove, my undefiled, art אצת achath, One, the Only One, she
in whom I delight beyond all.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 6:9</span></span>

The daughters saw her, and blessed her - Not only the Jewish women in
general spoke well of her on her arrival, but the queens and concubines
praised her as the most accomplished of her sex.

With this verse the fourth night of the marriage week is supposed to
end.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 6:10</span></span>

Looketh forth as the morning - The bride is as lovely as the dawn of
day, the Aurora, or perhaps the morning star, Venus. She is even more
resplendent, she is as beautiful as the Moon. She even surpasses her,
for she is as clear and bright as the Sun; and dangerous withal to look
on, for she is as formidable as the vast collection of lights that burn
by night at the head of every company in a numerous caravan. See the
note on [Sol 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004) (note). The
comparison of a fine woman to the splendor of an unclouded full moon is
continually recurring in the writings of the Asiatic poets.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 6:11</span></span>

I went down into the garden of nuts - I believe this and the following
verse refer at least to the preparations for a farther consummation of
the marriage, or examination of the advancement of the bride's
pregnancy. But many circumstances of this kind are so interwoven, and
often anticipated and also postponed, that it is exceedingly difficult
to arrange the whole so as to ascertain the several parts, and who are
the actors and speakers. But other writers find no difficulty here,
because they have their system; and that explains all things.

It is probably not the hazel but the almond nut, that is referred to
here.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 6:12</span></span>

The chariots of Amminadib - Probably for their great speed these
chariots became proverbial. The passage marks a strong agitation of
mind, and something like what we term palpitation of the heart. As I am
not aware of any spiritual meaning here, I must be excused from
commenting on that which is literal. Amminadib signifies my noble or
princely people; but it may here be a proper name, and Amminadib might
be celebrated for his skill and rapidity in driving, as Jehu was.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 6:13</span></span>

Return, O Shulamite - This appears to be addressed to the bride, as now
the confirmed, acknowledged wife of Solomon; for שולמית shulammith,
appears to be a feminine formed from שלמה shelomoh, or Nwmlv shelomon,
as we form Charlotte from Charles; Henrietta, from Henry; Janette, from
John, etc.

The company of two armies - Or the musicians of the camps. She is as
terrible as hosts of armed men, on the ground of what is said on [Sol
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004), [Sol
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#005). The two armies may refer to the
choirs of the bride's virgins, and the bridegroom's companions; but the
similitude is not very perceptible. The Targum explains it of "the camps
of Israel and Judah:" as if the bridegroom should say, "My beloved
possesses all the perfections both of the Israelitish and Jewish women."
But how little satisfaction do the best conjectures afford!

With this chapter the fifth night is supposed to end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](sol007)

</div>
