<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol004)  [Next](sol006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 5:0</span></span>

The bridegroom calls on his spouse to admit him, [Sol
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md). She hesitates; but arising
finds him gone, seeks him, and is treated unworthily by the city watch,
[Sol 5:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004.md). Inquires of the daughters
of Jerusalem, who question her concerning her beloved, [Sol
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008.md), [Sol
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009.md). This gives her occasion to enter
into a fine description of his person and accomplishments, [Sol
5:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010.md).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 5:1</span></span>

I am come into my garden - באתי bathi, I came, or have come; this should
be translated in the past tense, as the other preterite verbs in this
clause. I think the latter clause of the preceding verse should come in
here: "Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.
I have come into my garden, my sister, callah, or spouse; I have
gathered my myrrh," etc. I have taken thee for my spouse, and am
perfectly satisfied that thou art pure and immaculate.

Eat, O friends - drink abundantly - These are generally supposed to be
the words of the bridegroom, after he returned from the nuptial chamber,
and exhibited those signs of his wife's purity which the customs of
those times required. This being a cause of universal joy, the
entertainment is served up; and he invites his companions, and the
friends of both parties, to eat and drink abundantly, as there was such
a universal cause of rejoicing. Others think that these are the words of
the bride to her spouse: but the original will not bear this meaning;
the verbs are all plural.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 5:2</span></span>

I sleep, but my heart waketh - This is a new part; and some suppose that
the fifth day's solemnity begins here. Though I sleep, yet so impressed
is may heart with the excellences of my beloved, that my imagination
presents him to me in the most pleasing dreams throughout the night. I
doubt whether the whole, from this verse to the end of the seventh, be
not a dream: several parts of it bear this resemblance; and I confess
there are some parts of it, such as her hesitating to rise, his sudden
disappearance, etc., which would be of easier solution on this
supposition. Or part of the transactions mentioned might be the effects
of the dream she had, as rising up suddenly, and going out into the
street, meeting with the watchmen, etc., before she was well awake. And
her being in so much disorder and dishabille might have induced them to
treat her as a suspiciovs person, or one of questionable character. But
it is most likely the whole was a dream.

For my head is filled with dew - She supposed he had come in the night,
and was standing without, wet, and exposed to the inclemency of the
weather.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 5:3</span></span>

I have put off my coat - The bride must have been in a dream or in much
disorder of mind to have made the frivolous excuses here mentioned. The
words relate to the case of a person who had gone to take rest on his
bed. As they wore nothing but sandals, they were obliged to wash their
feet previously to their lying down. I have washed my feet, taken off my
clothes, and am gone to bed: I cannot therefore be disturbed. A Hindoo
always washes his feet before he goes to bed. If called from his bed, he
often makes this excuse, I shall daub my feet; and the excuse is
reasonable, as the floors are of earth; and they do not wear shoes in
the house - Ward.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 5:4</span></span>

My beloved put in his hand - If it were a real scene, which is mentioned
in this and the two following verses, it must refer, from the well-known
use of the metaphors, to matrimonial endearments. Or, it may refer to
his attempts to open the door, when she hesitated to arise, on the
grounds mentioned [Sol 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#003.md). But this
also bears every evidence of a dream.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 5:5</span></span>

My hands dropped with myrrh - It was a custom among the Romans, as
Brissonius, Isidore, and others relate, to conduct the bride to the
house of the bridegroom with lighted torches; and those who brought her
anointed the door-posts with fragant oils, whence the name uxor, or as
it was formerly written unxor, for a wife or married woman, because of
the anointing which took place on the occasion; for sometimes the bride
herself anointed the door-posts, and sometimes those who brought her;
probably both at the same time. The same custom might have existed among
the Jews. See Vossius' Etymologicon.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 5:7</span></span>

Took away my veil - They tore it off rudely, to discover who she was.
See on [Sol 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002) (note.md). To tear the
veil signifies, in Eastern phrase, to deflower or dishonor a woman.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 5:8</span></span>

I am sick of love - "I am exceedingly concerned for his absence; and am
distressed on account of my thoughtless carriage towards him." The
latter clause may be well translated, "What should ye tell him?" Why,
"that I am sick of love." This ends the transactions of the third day
and night.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 5:9</span></span>

What is thy beloved more than another beloved - This question gives the
bride an opportunity to break out into a highly wrought description of
the beauty and perfections of her spouse.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 5:10</span></span>

My beloved is white and ruddy - Red and white, properly mixed, are
essential to a fine complexion; and this is what is intimated: he has
the finest complexion among ten thousand persons; not one in that number
is equal to him. Literally, "He bears the standard among ten thousand
men;" or "He is one before whom a standard is borne," i.e., he is
captain or chief of the whole.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 5:11</span></span>

His head is as the most fine gold - He has the most beautiful head, fine
and majestic. Gold is here used to express excellence.

His locks are bushy - Crisped or curled. This may refer to his
mustachios.

Black as a raven - His hair is black and glossy.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 5:12</span></span>

His eyes are as the eyes of doves - See on [Sol
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001) (note.md).

Washed with milk - The white of the eye, exceedingly white. By the use
of stibium, in the East, the eye is rendered very beautiful; and
receives such a lustre from the use of this article, that, to borrow the
expression of a late traveler, "their eyes appear to be swimming in
bliss." I believe this expression to be the meaning of the text.

Fitly set - Or, as the margin, very properly, sitting in fullness; not
sunk, not contracted.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 5:13</span></span>

His cheeks are as a bed of spices - Possibly meaning a bed in the
garden, where odoriferous herbs grew. But it has been supposed to refer
to his beard, which in a young well-made man is exceedingly beautiful. I
have seen young Turks, who had taken much care of their beards,
mustachios, etc., look majestic. Scarcely any thing serves to set off
the human face to greater advantage than the beard, when kept in proper
order. Females admire it in their suitors and husbands. I have known
cases, where they not only despised but execrated Europeans, whose faces
were close shaved. The men perfume their beards often; and this may be
what is intended by spices and sweet-smelling myrrh.

His lips like lilies - The שושנם shoshannim may mean any flower of the
lily kind, such as the rubens lilium, mentioned by Pliny, or something
of the tulip kind. There are tints in such flowers that bear a very near
resemblance to a fine ruby lip.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 5:14</span></span>

His hands - gold rings set with the beryl - This really seems to refer
to gold rings set with precious stones on the fingers, and perhaps to
circlets or bracelets about the wrists. Some suppose it to refer to the
roundness and exquisite symmetry of the hand and fingers. תרשיש
tarshish, which we translate beryl, a gem of a sea-green tint, had
better be translated chrysolite, which is of a gold color.

His belly - bright ivory overlaid with sapphires - This must refer to
some garment set with precious stones which went round his waist, and
was peculiarly remarkable. If we take it literally, the sense is plain
enough. His belly was beautifully white, and the blue veins appearing
under the skin resembled the sapphire stone. But one can hardly think
that this was intended.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sol 5:15</span></span>

His legs are as pillars of marble - Exquisitely turned and well-shaped;
the sockets of gold may refer to his slippers. On these a profusion of
gold and ornaments are still lavished in Asiatic countries.

His countenance is as Lebanon - As Lebanon exalts its head beyond all
the other mountains near Jerusalem, so my beloved is tall and majestic,
and surpasses in stature and majesty all other men. He is also as
straight and as firm as the cedars.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 5:16</span></span>

His mouth is most sweet - His eloquence is great, and his voice is
charming. Every word he speaks is sweetness, mildness, and benevolence
itself. Then, her powers of description failing, and metaphor exhausted
she cries out, "The whole of him is loveliness. This is my beloved, and
this is my companion, O ye daughters of Jerusalem."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](sol006.md)

</div>
