<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](col004)  [Next](th1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 0:0</span></span>

Preface to the First Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonians

Thessalonica, now called by the Turks Salonichi, a mere corruption of
its ancient name, is a seaport town of Turkey in Europe, situated on
what was called the Thermaic Gulf, and was anciently the capital of
Macedonia. According to Stephanus Byzantinus, it was embellished and
enlarged by Philip, king of Macedon, father of Alexander the Great, who
called it Thessalonica, or the Victory of Thessalia, on account of the
victory he obtained there over the Thessalians; prior to which it was
called Thermae. Strabo, Tzetzes, and Zonaras say that it obtained the
name of Thessalonica from Thessalonica, wife of Cassander, and daughter
of Philip.

In 1431, it was taken from the Venetians by the Turks, in whose
possession it still continues. It is still a large, rich, and populous
city, being ten miles in circumference, and carrying on an extensive
trade in silk, the principal merchants being Greek Christians and Jews.

Christianity has never been extinct in Thessalonica since the year 51 or
52, in which it was planted there by the Apostle Paul; see Acts 17, etc.
It contains at present thirty churches belonging to the Greek
Christians, and as many Jewish synagogues, besides some Mohammedan
mosques. Thessalonica is the see of an archbishop; and is well
fortified, being surrounded with walls flanked with towers, and defended
on the land side by a citadel; and near the harbor, with three forts.

St. Paul, in company with Silas, first preached the Gospel in this city
and the adjacent country, about a.d. 52 or 53. Though the Jews, who were
sojourners in this city, rejected the Gospel in general, yet a great
multitude of the devout Greeks, i.e., such as were proselytes to
Judaism, or the descendants of Jewish parents, born and naturalized in
Greece, believed and associated with Paul and Silas, and not a few of
the chief women of the city embraced the Christian faith. [Act
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004).

As the Jews found that, according to the doctrine of the Gospel, the
Gentiles were called to enjoy the same privileges with themselves,
without being obliged to submit to circumcision and other ordinances of
the law, they persecuted that Gospel, and those who proclaimed it; for,
moved with indignation, they employed certain lewd fellows of the baser
sort - the beasts of the people, set the city on an uproar, assaulted
the house of Jason, where the apostles lodged, dragged him and certain
brethren before the rulers, and charged them with seditious designs and
treason against the Roman emperor! The apostles escaped, and got to
Berea, where they began anew their important evangelical labors: thither
the Jews of Thessalonica, pursuing them, raised a fresh tumult; so that
the apostle, being counselled by the brethren, made his escape to
Athens; [Act 17:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005). Thus he followed
the command of his Master: Being persecuted in one city, he fled to
another; not to hide himself, but to proclaim, in every place, the
saving truths of the Gospel of Christ.

It does not appear that St. Paul stayed long at Athens; he soon went
thence to Corinth, where Timothy and Silas were, but probably not before
Timothy met him, for whom he had sent, [Act
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#015), to come to him speedily; and
whom, it appears, he sent immediately back to Thessalonica, to establish
the believers there, and comfort them concerning the faith; [Th1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002). While Paul abode at Corinth,
Timothy and Silas came to him from Thessalonica, and hearing by them of
the steadfastness of the Thessalonian converts in the faith of Christ,
he wrote this epistle, and shortly after the second, to comfort and
encourage them; to give them farther instructions in the doctrines of
Christianity, and to rectify some mistaken views, relative to the day of
judgment, which had been propagated amongst them. See the preface to the
second epistle.

Who the persons were who formed the apostolic Church at Thessalonica is
not easy to determine. They were not Jews, for these in general
persecuted the apostle and the Gospel in this place. We are therefore
left to infer that the Church was formed, 1st, of Jewish proselytes,
called, [Act 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004), devout Greeks. And
2dly, of converts from heathenism; for, on the preaching of the Gospel
to them, it is said; [Th1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009), that
they turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true God. Though
some of the Jews believed on the preaching of Paul and Silas, [Act
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#003), [Act
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004), yet it is evident that the great
bulk of the Church was composed of Grecian proselytes and converts from
heathenism. Hence we find in this epistle but few allusions to the Jews,
and but few references to the peculiarities of their religious or civil
institutions.

There is a remarkable reading in the text of [Act
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004), which I neglected to quote in
the note on that place: instead of των σεβομενων, Ελληνων πολυ πληθος,
of devout Greeks a great multitude; the Codex Alexandrinus, Codex Bezae,
both in the Greek and Latin, two others, with the Vulgate, read των
σεβομενων και Ἑλληνων, of the devout, i.e., those who worshipped the
true God; And of the Greeks, i.e., those who were previously heathens, a
great multitude; so that,

1\. Some few Jews;

2\. A great number of those who acknowledged the true God; and

3\. A great multitude of heathens, besides many of the chief women,
received the doctrine preached by the apostle, and became members of the
Church at Thessalonica. See Dr. Paley's remarks on this various reading.

The First Epistle to the Thessalonians is allowed on all hands to be the
first epistle that St. Paul wrote to any of the Churches of God; and
from it two things may be particularly noted:

1\. That the apostle was full of the Spirit of love;

2\. That the Church at Thessalonica was pure, upright, and faithful, as
we scarcely find any reprehension in the whole epistle: the Thessalonian
converts had Faith that worked, a Love that labored, and a Hope which
induced them to bear afflictions patiently and wait for the coming of
the Lord Jesus Christ.

This epistle has been divided into different parts by commentators; but
these are arbitrary, the apostle having made no division of this kind;
for, although he treats of several subjects, yet he has not so
distinguished them from each other as to show that he had any formal
division in his mind. In the divisions imposed on this epistle by
commentators we do not find two of them alike; a full proof that the
apostle has made no divisions, else some of these learned men would have
certainly found them out. Technical distinctions of this nature are of
little use to a proper understanding of the contents of this epistle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 1](th1001)

</div>
