<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1.md)  
  [Previous](th1001)  [Next](th1003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001.md)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 2:0</span></span>

The apostle sets forth how the Gospel was brought and preached to the
Thessalonians, in consequence of his being persecuted at Philippi, [Th1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001.md), [Th1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002.md). The manner in which the apostles
preached, the matter of their doctrine, and the tenor of their lives,
[Th1 2:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#003.md). He exhorts them to walk
worthy of God, [Th1 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#012.md). And commends
them for the manner in which they received the Gospel, [Th1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013.md). How they suffered from their own
countrymen, as the first believers did from the Jews, who endeavored to
prevent the apostles from preaching the Gospel to the Gentiles, [Th1
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014.md). St. Paul's apology for his
absence from them; and his earnest desire to see them, founded on his
great affection for them, [Th1
2:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017.md).

[1 Thessalonians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 2:1</span></span>

Our entrance in unto you - His first coming to preach the Gospel was
particularly owned of the Lord, many of them having been converted under
his ministry. This consideration gave him a right to deliver all the
following exhortations.

[1 Thessalonians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th1 2:2</span></span>

Shamefully entreated - at Philippi - There Paul and Silas had been
beaten with many stripes, shut up in the inner prison, and their feet
made fast in the stocks. See [Act
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023.md), etc.; and the notes there.

With much contention - The words εν πολλῳ αγωνι not only signify, with
intense labor and earnestness, but may here mean, exposed to the
greatest danger; at the peril of our lives. The Greek phrase quoted by
Rosenmuller is to the point, αγων προφασιν ουκ αναμενει, in danger we
must not delay - activity and despatch are then indispensably necessary.

[1 Thessalonians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th1 2:3</span></span>

Our exhortation - The word παρακλησιςhas a very extensive meaning; it
signifies not only exhortation and teaching in general, but also
encouragement, consolation, and the like. When the apostles exhorted or
admonished men, it was that they should turn from evil to good, from
misery to happiness, from Satan to God, and from hell to heaven. Their
exhortations having this object, every word was consolatory; and as the
truth which they delivered was unquestionable, therefore their ministry
was a subject of the highest encouragement and joy.

Not of deceit - We did not endeavor to allure you with false pretences;
we did not deceive you, nor were we deceived ourselves.

Nor of uncleanness - Such as the teachings of the Gentile philosophers
were; their supreme gods were celebrated for their adulteries,
fornications, uncleannesses, thefts, barbarities, and profligacies of
the most odious kind. Our Gospel was pure; came from the pure and holy
God; was accompanied with the influences of the Holy Spirit, and
produced purity both in the hearts and lives of all that received it.

Nor in guile - We had no false pretences, and were influenced by no
sinister motives.

[1 Thessalonians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th1 2:4</span></span>

But as we were allowed of God - Καθως δεδοκιμασμεθα· As we were
accounted worthy to be put in trust - as God put confidence in us, and
sent us on his most especial message to mankind, even so we speak,
keeping the dignity of our high calling continually in view; and, acting
as in the sight of God, we speak not to please or flatter men, though
our doctrine is the most consolatory that can be conceived, but to
please that God who searcheth the heart, and before whom all our motives
are constantly without a veil.

[1 Thessalonians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 2:5</span></span>

Flattering words - Though we proclaimed the Gospel or glad tidings, yet
we showed that without holiness none should see the Lord.

Ye know - That while we preached the whole Gospel we never gave any
countenance to sin.

For a cloak of covetousness - We did not seek temporal emolument; nor
did we preach the Gospel for a cloak to our covetousness: God is witness
that we did not; we sought you, not yours. Hear this, ye that preach the
Gospel! Can ye call God to witness that in preaching it ye have no end
in view by your ministry but his glory in the salvation of souls? Or do
ye enter into the priesthood for a morsel of bread, or for what is
ominously and impiously called a living, a benefice? In better days your
place and office were called a cure of souls; what care have you for the
souls of them by whose labors you are in general more than sufficiently
supported? Is it your study, your earnest labor, to bring sinners to
God; to preach among your heathen parishioners the unsearchable riches
of Christ?

But I should speak to the thousands who have no parishes, but who have
their chapels, their congregations, pew and seat rents, etc., etc. Is it
for the sake of these that ye have entered or continue in the Gospel
ministry? Is God witness that, in all these things, ye have no cloak of
covetousness? Happy is the man who can say so, whether he has the
provision which the law of the land allows him, or whether he lives on
the free-will offerings of the people.

The faithful laborer is worthy of his hire; for the ox that treads out
the corn should not be muzzled; and they that preach the Gospel should
live, not riot, by the Gospel. But wo to that man who enters into the
labor for the sake of the hire! he knows not Christ; and how can he
preach him?

[1 Thessalonians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 2:6</span></span>

Nor of men sought we glory - As we preached not for worldly gain, so we
preached not for popular applause; we had what we sought for-the
approbation of God, and the testimony of a good conscience.

When we might have been burdensome - They had a right to their
maintenance while they devoted themselves wholly to the work of the
Gospel for the sake of the people's souls. Others understand the words
εν βαρει ειναι, to be honorable; we sought no glory of you nor of
others, though we were honorable as the apostles of Christ. כבוד cabod,
in Hebrew, to which the Greek βαρος answers, signifies not only weight
but glory; and in both these senses the apostle uses it, [Co2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017.md).

[1 Thessalonians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 2:7</span></span>

But we were gentle among you - Far from assuming the authority which we
had, we acted towards you as a tender nurse or parent does to a delicate
child. We fed, counselled, cherished, and bore with you; we taught you
to walk, preserved you from stumbling, and led you in a right path.

Instead of ηπιοι, gentle, many MSS., and several versions and fathers,
have νηπιοι, young children. But this never can be considered the
original reading, the scope of the place being totally opposed to it. It
is the Thessalonians whom the apostle considers as young children, and
himself and fellow laborers as the nurse; he could with no propriety say
that he was among them as a little child, while himself professed to be
their nurse.

[1 Thessalonians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 2:8</span></span>

Being affectionately desirous of you - We had such intense love for you
that we were not only willing and forward to preach the unsearchable
riches of Christ to you, but also to give our own lives for your sake,
because ye were dear, διοτι αγαπητοι ἡμιν, because ye were beloved by
us. The words used here by the apostle are expressive of the strongest
affection and attachment.

[1 Thessalonians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 2:9</span></span>

Ye remember - our labor and travail - From this it appears that St. Paul
spent much more time at Thessalonica than is generally supposed; for the
expressions in this verse denote a long continuance of a constantly
exercised ministry, interrupted only by manual labor for their own
support; labouring night and day, because we would not be chargeable to
you. Probably Paul and his companions worked with their hands by day,
and spent a considerable part of the night, or evenings, in preaching
Christ to the people.

[1 Thessalonians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th1 2:10</span></span>

Ye are witnesses, and God also, how holily - i.e., in reference to God;
how justly in reference to men; and unblamably in reference to our
spirit and conduct, as ministers of Christ, we behaved ourselves among
you. What a consciousness of his own integrity must St. Paul have had to
use the expressions that are here! No hypocrite, and none who did the
work of the Lord carelessly, could make such an appeal both to God and
man.

[1 Thessalonians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th1 2:11</span></span>

How we exhorted - What pastoral care is marked here! They exhorted -
were continually teaching and instructing, the objects of their charge;
this was their general work.

And comforted - They found many under trials and temptations, and those
they encouraged.

And charged - Μαρτυρουμενοι· Continued witness to the people that all
the threatenings and promises of God were true; that he required faith,
love, and obedience; that he could not behold sin with allowance; that
Jesus died to save them from their sins; and that, without holiness,
none should see God. And all these things they did, not in a general way
only, but they spoke to every man; none was left unnoticed,
unadmonished, uncomforted. The spirit in which they performed all these
branches of the pastoral care was that which was most likely to insure
success; as a father treats his children, so they treated every member
of the Church.

[1 Thessalonians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th1 2:12</span></span>

That ye would walk worthy of God - That they should, in every respect,
act up to their high calling, that it would not be a reproach to the God
of holiness to acknowledge them as his sons and daughters. See the notes
on [Eph 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#001.md); [Phi
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#027) (note.md); and [Col
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#010) (note.md).

His Kingdom and glory - His Church here, for that is the kingdom of God
among men; and his glory hereafter, for that is the state to which the
dispensations of grace in his Church lead. The words, how ever, may be a
hendiadys, and signify his glorious kingdom.

[1 Thessalonians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th1 2:13</span></span>

Ye received the word of God - Ye received the doctrine of God, not as
any thing fabricated by man, but as coming immediately from God himself,
we being only his messengers to declare what he had previously revealed
to us. And ye have had the fullest proof that ye have not believed in
vain; for that doctrine, under the power and influence of the Holy
Ghost, has worked most powerfully in you, filling you with light, life,
and holiness.

[1 Thessalonians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">th1 2:14</span></span>

Ye - became followers of the Churches of God - There is not a word here
of the Church of Rome being the model after which the other Churches
were to be formed; it had no such pre-eminence: this honor belonged to
the Churches of Judea; it was according to them, not the Church at Rome,
that the Asiatic Churches were modelled. The purest of all the apostolic
Churches was that of the Thessalonians, and this was formed after the
Christian Churches in Judea.

Had any pre-eminence or authority belonged to the Church of Rome, the
apostle would have proposed this as a model to all those which he formed
either in Judea, Asia Minor, Greece, or Italy.

Ye also have suffered - of your own countrymen - It is worthy of remark
that, in almost every case, the Jews were the leaders of all
persecutions against the apostles and the infant Church. And what they
could not do themselves, they instigated others to do; and, by gathering
together lewd fellows of the baser sort from among the Gentiles, they
made frequent uproars, and especially at Thessalonica, where the
opposition to the Gospel was very high, and the persecution of the
Christians very hot.

[1 Thessalonians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">th1 2:15</span></span>

Who hath killed the Lord Jesus, etc. - What a finished but just
character is this of the Jews!

1\. They slew the Lord Jesus, through the most unprincipled and fell
malice.

2\. They killed their own prophets; there was no time in which the seed
of the serpent did not hate and oppose spiritual things, they slew even
their own prophets who declared to them the will of God.

3\. They persecuted the apostles; showing the same spirit of enmity to
the Gospel which they had shown to the law.

4\. They did not please God, nor seek to please him; though they
pretended that their opposition to the Gospel was through their zeal for
God's glory, they were hypocrites of the worst kind.

5\. They were contrary to all men; they hated the whole human race, and
judged and wished them to perdition.

6\. They forbade the apostles to preach to the Gentiles, lest they
should be saved; this was an inveteracy of malice completely superhuman;
they persecuted the body to death, and the soul to damnation! They were
afraid that the Gentiles should get their souls saved if the Gospel was
preached to them!

7\. They filled up their sins always; they had no mere purposes or
outlines of iniquity, all were filled up; every evil purpose was
followed, as far as possible, with a wicked act! Is it any wonder,
therefore, that wrath should come upon them to the uttermost? It is to
be reckoned among the highest mercies of God that the whole nation was
not pursued by the Divine justice to utter and final extinction.

[1 Thessalonians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th1 2:17</span></span>

Being taken from you for a short time - Through the persecution raised
by the Jews, see Acts 17, he was obliged to leave Thessalonica, and
yield to a storm that it would have been useless for him to have
withstood.

Being taken from you - in presence, not in heart - The apostle had
compared himself to a parent or nurse, [Th1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007.md), [Th1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#011.md); and the people he considered as
his most beloved children; here he represents himself as feeling what an
affectionate father must feel when torn from his children; for this is
the import of the word απορφανισθεντες, bereft of children, which we
tamely translate being taken from you.

Endeavoured the more abundantly - His separation from them did not
destroy his parental feelings, and the manner in which he was obliged to
leave them increased his desire to visit them as soon as possible.

[1 Thessalonians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">th1 2:18</span></span>

Even I Paul - He had already sent Timothy and Silas to them; but he
himself was anxious to see them, and had purposed this once and again,
but Satan hindered; i.e., some adversary, as the word means, whether the
devil himself, or some of his children. There was, however, such a storm
of persecution raised up against him, that his friends did not think it
prudent to permit him to go till the storm had been somewhat allayed.

[1 Thessalonians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">th1 2:19</span></span>

For what is our hope - I can have no prospects from earth; I have
forsaken all for the Gospel; and esteem every thing it can afford as
dross and dung, that I may gain Christ. Why then should I continually
labor at the risk of my life, preaching the Gospel? Is it not to get
your souls saved, that ye may be my crown of rejoicing in the day of
Christ? For this I labor; and, having planted the Gospel among you, I
wish to take every opportunity of watering it, that it may grow up unto
eternal life.

[1 Thessalonians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">th1 2:20</span></span>

For ye are our glory and joy - Ye are the seal of our apostleship; your
conversion and steadiness are a full proof that God hath sent us.
Converts to Christ are our ornaments; persevering believers, our joy in
the day of judgment.

1\. In the preceding chapter we have the character and marks of a
genuine pastor laid down in such a manner as not to be misunderstood.
Every man who preaches the Gospel should carefully read this chapter and
examine himself by it. Most preachers, on reading it conscientiously,
will either give up their place to others, or purpose to do the work of
the Lord more fervently for the future. He who expects nothing but the
approbation of Christ, will labor for Christ; and he, who has the glory
of his Master only in view, will ever have his Master's presence and
blessing. Those who enter into this work for human applause or secular
emolument, may have their reward; but in that, one smile of approbation
from Christ is not included.

2\. God, for reasons best known to himself, often permits the most pious
and benevolent purposes of his servants to be frustrated for a time. It
is well that the good purpose was in the heart; but God knows the
fittest time and place to bring it to effect. Satan is ever opposing all
that is pure, good, and benevolent and he appears frequently to succeed;
but this is not really the case: if at any time he prevents the
followers of God from bringing a pious purpose into effect, that was the
time in which it could not have been done to secure its full effect. Let
the purpose be retained, and the best time and place will be duly
provided. As Satan constantly endeavors to oppose every good work, no
wonder he is found opposing a good purpose, even at the very time that
God sees it improper to bring it to the intended effect. Man proposes,
but God disposes.

3\. The apostle speaks of the wrath coming upon the Jews: it was about
twenty years after this that their city was destroyed, their temple
burnt, more than a million of them destroyed, their civil polity utterly
subverted, and what remained of this wretched nation scattered to all
the winds of heaven; and in this state, without a nation, without a
temple, without worship, and apparently without any religion, they
continue, to this day, a monument of God's displeasure, and a proof of
the Divine inspiration both of the prophets and apostles, who, in the
most explicit manner, had predicted all the evils which have since
befallen them. Their crimes were great; to these their punishment is
proportioned. For what end God has preserved them distinct from all the
people of the earth among whom they sojourn, we cannot pretend to say;
but it must unquestionably be for an object of the very highest
importance. In the meantime, let the Christian world treat them with
humanity and mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 3](th1003.md)

</div>
