<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1.md)  
  [Previous](th1002)  [Next](th1004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001.md)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 3:0</span></span>

St Paul informs them how, being hindered himself from visiting them, he
had sent Timothy to comfort them, of whom he gives a high character,
[Th1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001.md), [Th1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002.md). Shows that trials and
difficulties are unavoidable in the present state, [Th1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003.md), [Th1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#004.md). Mentions the joy he had on
hearing by Timothy of their steadiness in the faith, for which he
returns thanks to God; and prays earnestly for their increase, [Th1
3:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005.md). Prays also that God may afford
him an opportunity of seeing them, [Th1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011.md). And that they may abound in love
to God and one another, and be unblamable in holiness at the coming of
Christ, [Th1 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#012.md), [Th1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013.md).

[1 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 3:1</span></span>

Wherefore, when we could no longer, etc. - The apostle was anxious to
hear of their state, and as he could obtain no information without
sending a messenger express, he therefore sent Timothy from Athens;
choosing rather to be left alone, than to continue any longer in
uncertainty relative to their state.

[1 Thessalonians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th1 3:2</span></span>

Timotheus, our brother - It appears that Timothy was but a youth when
converted to God; he had now however been some years in the work of God;
Paul therefore calls him his brother, being one of the same Christian
family, a son of God by adoption: elsewhere he calls him his own son,
[Ti1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002.md); and his dearly beloved son,
[Ti2 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#002.md); because he was brought to
the knowledge of the true God, and to salvation by Christ, through the
apostle's instrumentality. See the preface to the First Epistle to
Timothy.

Minister of God - Employed by God to preach the Gospel; this was God's
work, and he had appointed Timothy to do it, and to do it at this time
in conjunction with St. Paul; and therefore he calls him his fellow
laborer. There were no sinecures then; preaching the Gospel was God's
work; the primitive preachers were his workmen, and labored in this
calling. It is the same still, but who works?

[1 Thessalonians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th1 3:3</span></span>

That no man should be moved - That is, caused to apostatize from
Christianity.

We are appointed thereunto - Εις τουτο κειμεθα· We are exposed to this,
we lie open to such, they are unavoidable in the present state of
things; as the Latins say, sic est sors nostra, "this is our lot." God
appoints nothing of this kind, but he permits it: for he has made man a
free agent.

[1 Thessalonians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th1 3:4</span></span>

That we should suffer tribulation - I prepared you for it, because I
knew that it was according to their nature for wicked men to persecute
the followers of God.

[1 Thessalonians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 3:5</span></span>

For this cause - Knowing that you would be persecuted, and knowing that
your apostasy was possible, I sent to know your faith - whether you
continued steadfast in the truth, lest you might have been tempted by
Satan to consult your present ease, and abandon the Gospel, for which
you suffered persecution.

[1 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 3:6</span></span>

When Timotheus came - We have already seen that he and Silas stayed
behind at Thessalonica, when Paul was obliged to leave it; for the
persecution seems to have been principally directed against him. When
Paul came to Athens, he sent pressingly to him and Silas to come to him
with all speed to that city. We are not informed that they did come, but
it is most likely that they did, and that Paul sent Timothy back to
Thessalonica to comfort and build up these new converts. After Paul had
sent away Timothy, it is likely he went himself straight to Corinth, and
there Timothy soon after met him, with the good news of the steadiness
of the Thessalonian Church.

Your faith and charity - The good tidings which Timothy brought from
Thessalonica consisted of three particulars:

1\. Their faith; they continued steadfast in their belief of the Gospel.

2\. Their charity; they loved one another, and lived in unity and
harmony.

3\. They were affectionately attached to the apostle; they had good
remembrance of him, and desired earnestly to see him.

[1 Thessalonians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 3:7</span></span>

Therefore - we were comforted - My afflictions and persecutions seemed
trifles when I heard of your perseverance in the faith.

[1 Thessalonians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 3:8</span></span>

For now we live - Your steadfastness in the faith gives me new life and
comfort; I now feel that I live to some purpose, as my labor in the Lord
is not in vain.

[1 Thessalonians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 3:9</span></span>

What thanks can we render to God - The high satisfaction and uncommon
joy which the apostle felt are strongly depicted in the language he
uses. How near his heart did the success of his ministry lie! It was not
enough for him that he preached so often, labored so hard, suffered so
much; what were all these if souls were not converted? And what were all
conversions, if those who embraced the Gospel did not walk steadily in
the way to heaven, and persevere?

[1 Thessalonians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th1 3:10</span></span>

Night and day praying exceedingly - Supplicating God at all times;
mingling this with all my prayers; ὑπερεκπερισσου δεομενοι, abounding
and superabounding in my entreaties to God to permit me to revisit you.
How strong was his affection for this Church!

Might perfect that which is lacking - That I might have the opportunity
of giving you the fullest instructions in the doctrine of Christ, that
ye might have every thing in the most ample detail; so that the great
outlines of truth which you already know may be filled up, that ye may
be perfectly fitted to every good word and work.

[1 Thessalonians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th1 3:11</span></span>

Now God himself and our Father - That is: God who is our Father, who has
adopted us into the heavenly family, and called us his sons and
daughters.

Direct our way - As he was employed in God's work he dared not consult
his own inclinations, he looked for continual directions from God,
where, when, and how to do his Master's work.

[1 Thessalonians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th1 3:12</span></span>

Make you to increase and abound in love - They had already love to each
other, so as to unite them in one Christian body; and he prays that they
may have an increase and an abundance of it; that they might feel the
same love to each other which he felt for them all.

[1 Thessalonians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th1 3:13</span></span>

To the end he may establish your hearts - Without love to God and man,
there can be no establishment in the religion of Christ. It is love that
produces both solidity and continuance. And, as love is the fulfilling
of the law, he who is filled with love is unblamable in holiness: for he
who has the love of God in him is a partaker of the Divine nature, for
God is love.

At the coming of our Lord - God is coming to judge the world; every hour
that passes on in the general lapse of time is advancing his approach;
whatsoever he does is in reference to this great event: and whatsoever
we do should be in reference to the same. But who in that great day
shall give up his accounts with joy? That person only whose heart is
established in holiness before God; i.e., so as to bear the eye and
strict scrutiny of his Judge. Reader, lay this to heart, for thou
knowest not what a moment may bring forth. When thy soul departs from
thy body it will be the coming of the Lord to thee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 4](th1004.md)

</div>
