<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2001)  [Next](th2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 2:0</span></span>

He exhorts the Thessalonians to stand fast in the faith, and not to be
alarmed at the rumors they heard concerning the sudden coming of Christ,
[Th2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001), [Th2
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002). Because, previously to this
coming, there would be a great apostasy from the true faith, and a
manifestation of a son of perdition, of whose unparalleled presumption
he gives an awful description; as well as of his pernicious success
among men, and the means which he would use to deceive and pervert the
world; and particularly those who do not receive the love of the truth,
but have pleasure in unrighteousness, [Th2
2:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003). He thanks God for their
steadfastness; shows the great privileges to which they were called; and
prays that they may be comforted and established in every good word and
work, [Th2 2:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013).

[2 Thessalonians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 2:1</span></span>

We beseech you - by the coming of our Lord - It is evident that the
Thessalonians, incited by deceived or false teachers, had taken a wrong
meaning out of the words of the first epistle, [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015), etc., concerning the day of
judgment; and were led then to conclude that that day was at hand; and
this had produced great confusion in the Church: to correct this
mistake, the apostle sent them this second letter, in which he shows
that this day must be necessarily distant, because a great work is to be
done previously to its appearing.

Of the day of general judgment he had spoken before, and said that it
should come as a thief in the night, i.e. when not expected; but he did
not attempt to fix the time, nor did he insinuate that it was either
near at hand, or far off. Now, however, he shows that it must
necessarily be far off, because of the great transactions which must
take place before it can come.

[2 Thessalonians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th2 2:2</span></span>

Be not soon shaken in mind - Απο του νοος· From the mind; i.e. that they
should retain the persuasion they had of the truths which he had before
delivered to them; that they should still hold the same opinions, and
hold fast the doctrines which they had been taught.

Neither by spirit - Any pretended revelation.

Nor by word - Any thing which any person may profess to have heard the
apostle speak.

Nor by letter - Either the former one which he had sent, some passages
of which have been misconceived and misconstrued; or by any other
letter, as from us - pretending to have been written by us, the
apostles, containing predictions of this kind. There is a diversity of
opinion among critics concerning this last clause, some supposing that
it refers simply to the first epistle; others supposing that a forged
epistle is intended. I have joined the two senses. The word σαλευθηναι,
to be shaken, signifies to be agitated as a ship at sea in a storm, and
strongly marks the confusion and distress which the Thessalonians had
felt in their false apprehension of this coming of Christ.

As that the day of Christ is at hand - In the preface to this epistle I
have given a general view of the meaning of the phrase the coming of
Christ. Now the question is: Whether does the apostle mean, the coming
of Christ to execute judgment upon the Jews, and destroy their polity,
or his coming at the end of time, to judge the world? There are
certainly many expressions in the following verses that may be applied
indifferently to either, and some seem to apply to the one, and not to
the other; and yet the whole can scarcely be so interpreted as to suit
any one of these comings exclusively. This is precisely the case with
the predictions of our Lord relative to these great events; one is used
to point out and illustrate the other. On this ground I am led to think
that the apostle, in the following confessedly obscure words, has both
these in view, speaking of none of them exclusively; for it is the
custom of the inspired penmen, or rather of that Spirit by which they
spoke, to point out as many certain events by one prediction as it was
possible to do, and to choose the figures, metaphors, and similes
accordingly; and thus, from the beginning, God has pointed out the
things that were not by the things that then existed, making the one the
types or significations of the other. As the apostle spoke by the same
Spirit, he most probably followed the same plan; and thus the following
prophecy is to be interpreted and understood.

[2 Thessalonians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th2 2:3</span></span>

Except there come a falling away first - We have the original word
αποστασια in our word apostasy; and by this term we understand a
dereliction of the essential principles of religious truth - either a
total abandonment of Christianity itself, or such a corruption of its
doctrines as renders the whole system completely inefficient to
salvation. But what this apostasy means is a question which has not yet,
and perhaps never will be, answered to general satisfaction. At present
I shall content myself with making a few literal remarks on this obscure
prophecy, and afterwards give the opinions of learned men on its
principal parts.

That man of sin - Ὁ ανθρωπος της ἁμαρτιας· The same as the Hebrew
expresses by איש און ish aven, and איש בליעל ish beliyaal; the perverse,
obstinate, and iniquitous man. It is worthy of remark that, among the
rabbins, Samael, or the devil, is called איש בליעל ואיש און ish beliyaal
veish aven, the man of Belial, and the man of iniquity; and that these
titles are given to Adam after his fall.

The son of perdition - Ὁ υἱος της απωλειας· The son of destruction; the
same epithet that is given to Judas Iscariot, [Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012) (note). The son of perdition,
and the man of sin, or, as some excellent MSS. and versions, with
several of the fathers, read, ανθρωπος της ανομιας, the lawless man, see
[Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008), must mean the same person or
thing. It is also remarkable that the wicked Jews are styled by Isaiah,
[Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004), בנים משחיתים benim
mashchithim, "children of perdition;" persons who destroy themselves and
destroy others.

[2 Thessalonians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th2 2:4</span></span>

Who opposeth and exalteth - He stands against and exalts himself above
all Divine authority, and above every object of adoration, and every
institution relative to Divine worship, σεβασμα, himself being the
source, whence must originate all the doctrines of religion, and all its
rites and ceremonies; so that sitting in the temple of God - having the
highest place and authority in the Christian Church, he acts as God -
taking upon himself God's titles and attributes, and arrogating to
himself the authority that belongs to the Most High.

The words ως Θεον, as God, are wanting in ABD, many others, Erpen's
Arabic, the Coptic, Sahidic, Ethiopic, Armenian, the Vulgate, some
copies of the Itala, and the chief of the Greek fathers. Griesbach has
left them out of the text, and Professor White says, Certissime delenda;
"They should most certainly be erased." There is indeed no evidence of
their being authentic, and the text reads much better with out them: So
that he sitteth in the temple of God, etc.

[2 Thessalonians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 2:5</span></span>

I told you these things - In several parts of this description of the
man of sin, the apostle alludes to a conversation which had taken place
between him and the members of this Church when he was at Thessalonica;
and this one circumstance will account for much of the obscurity that is
in these verses. Besides, the apostle appears to speak with great
caution, and does not at all wish to publish what he had communicated to
them; the hints which he drops were sufficient to call the whole to
their remembrance.

[2 Thessalonians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 2:6</span></span>

And now ye know what withholdeth - I told you this among other things; I
informed you what it was that prevented this man of sin, this son of
perdition, from revealing himself fully.

[2 Thessalonians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th2 2:7</span></span>

For the mystery of iniquity doth already work - There is a system of
corrupt doctrine, which will lead to the general apostasy, already in
existence, but it is a mystery; it is as yet hidden; it dare not show
itself, because of that which hindereth or withholdeth. But when that
which now restraineth shall be taken out of the way, then shall that
wicked one be revealed-it will then be manifest who he is, and what he
is. See the observations at the end of this chapter (note).

[2 Thessalonians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th2 2:8</span></span>

Whom the Lord shall consume - He shall blast him so, that he shall
wither and die away; and this shall be done by the spirit of his mouth -
the words of eternal life, the true doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus;
this shall be the instrument used to destroy this man of sin: therefore
it is evident his death will not be a sudden but a gradual one; because
it is by the preaching of the truth that he is to be exposed,
overthrown, and finally destroyed.

The brightness of his coming - This may refer to that full manifestation
of the truth which had been obscured and kept under by the exaltation of
this man of sin.

[2 Thessalonians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th2 2:9</span></span>

Whose coming is after the working of Satan - The operation of God's
Spirit sends his messengers; the operation of Satan's spirit sends his
emissaries. The one comes κατ' ενεργειαν του Θεου, after or according to
the energy or inward powerful working of God; the other comes κατ'
ενεργειαν του Σατανα, according to the energy or inward working of
Satan.

With all power - Πασῃ δυναμει· All kinds of miracles, like the Egyptian
magicians; and signs and lying wonders: the word lying may be applied to
the whole of these; they were lying miracles, lying signs, and lying
wonders; only appearances of what was real, and done to give credit to
his presumption and imposture. Whereas God sent his messengers with real
miracles, real signs, and real wonders; such Satan cannot produce.

[2 Thessalonians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th2 2:10</span></span>

And with all deceivableness of unrighteousness - With every art that
cunning can invent and unrighteousness suggest, in order to delude and
deceive.

In them that perish - Εν τοις απολλυμενοις· Among them that are
destroyed; and they are destroyed and perish because they would not
receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved. So they perish
because they obstinately refuse to be saved, and receive a lie in
preference to the truth. This has been true of all the Jews from the
days of the apostle until now.

[2 Thessalonians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 2:11</span></span>

God shall send them strong delusion - For this very cause, that they
would not receive the love of the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, therefore God permits strong delusion to occupy their
minds; so that they believe a lie rather than the truth, prefer false
apostles and their erroneous doctrines to the pure truths of the Gospel,
brought to them by the well-accredited messengers of God; being ever
ready to receive any false Messiah, while they systematically and
virulently reject the true one.

[2 Thessalonians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th2 2:12</span></span>

That they all might be damned - Ἱνα κριθωσι· So that they may all be
condemned who believed not the truth when it was proclaimed to them; but
took pleasure in unrighteousness, preferring that to the way of
holiness. Their condemnation was the effect of their refusal to believe
the truth; and they refused to believe it because they loved their sins.
For a farther and more pointed illustration of the preceding verses, see
the conclusion of this chapter (note).

[2 Thessalonians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th2 2:13</span></span>

God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation, etc. - In your
calling, God has shown the purpose that he had formed from the
beginning, to call the Gentiles to the same privileges with the Jews,
not through circumcision, and the observance of the Mosaic law, but by
faith in Christ Jesus; but this simple way of salvation referred to the
same end - holiness, without which no man, whether Jew or Gentile, can
see the Lord.

Let us observe the order of Divine grace in this business:

1\. They were to hear the truth - the doctrines of the Gospel.

2\. They were to believe this truth when they heard it preached.

3\. They were to receive the Spirit of God in believing the truth.

4\. That Spirit was to sanctify their souls-produce an inward holiness,
which was to lead to all outward conformity to God.

5\. All this constituted their salvation - their being fitted for the
inheritance among the saints in light.

6\. They were to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ - that state
of felicity for which they were fitted, by being saved here from their
sins, and by being sanctified by the Spirit of God.

[2 Thessalonians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">th2 2:15</span></span>

Therefore, brethren, stand fast - Their obtaining eternal glory depended
on their faithfulness to the grace of God; for this calling did not
necessarily and irresistibly lead to faith; nor their faith to the
sanctification of the spirit; nor their sanctification of the spirit to
the glory of our Lord Jesus. Had they not attended to the calling, they
could not have believed; had they not believed, they could not have been
sanctified; had they not been sanctified they could not have been
glorified. All these things depended on each other; they were stages of
the great journey; and at any of these stages they might have halted,
and never finished their Christian race.

Hold the traditions which ye have been taught - The word παραδοσις,
which we render tradition, signifies any thing delivered in the way of
teaching; and here most obviously means the doctrines delivered by the
apostle to the Thessalonians; whether in his preaching, private
conversation, or by these epistles; and particularly the first epistle,
as the apostle here states. Whatever these traditions were, as to their
matter, they were a revelation from God; for they came by men who spake
and acted under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit; and on this ground
the passage here can never with any propriety be brought to support the
unapostolical and anti-apostolical traditions of the Romish Church;
those being matters which are, confessedly, not taken from either
Testament, nor were spoken either by a prophet or an apostle.

[2 Thessalonians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th2 2:16</span></span>

Now our Lord Jesus - As all your grace came from God through Christ, so
the power that is necessary to strengthen and confirm you unto the end
must come in the same way.

Everlasting consolation - Παρακλησιν αιωνιαν· The glad tidings of the
Gospel, and the comfort which ye have received through believing; a gift
which God had in his original purpose, in reference to the Gentiles; a
purpose which has respected all times and places, and which shall
continue to the conclusion of time; for the Gospel is everlasting, and
shall not be superseded by any other dispensation. It is the last and
best which God has provided for man; and it is good tidings, everlasting
consolation - a complete system of complete peace and happiness. The
words may also refer to the happiness which the believing Thessalonians
then possessed.

And good hope through grace - The hope of the Gospel was the
resurrection of the body, and the final glorification of it and the soul
throughout eternity. This was the good hope which the Thessalonians had;
not a hope that they should be pardoned or sanctified, etc. Pardon and
holiness they enjoyed, therefore they were no objects of hope; but the
resurrection of the body and eternal glory were necessarily future;
these they had in expectation; these they hoped for; and, through the
grace which they had already received they had a good hope - a
well-grounded expectation, of this glorious state.

[2 Thessalonians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th2 2:17</span></span>

Comfort your hearts - Keep your souls ever under the influence of his
Holy Spirit: and stablish you - confirm and strengthen you in your
belief of every good word or doctrine, which we have delivered unto you;
and in the practice of every good work, recommended and enjoined by the
doctrines of the Gospel. It is not enough that we believe the truth; we
must love the truth.

Antinomianism says: "Believe the doctrines, and ye are safe." The
testimony borne by the Gospel is: Believe, love, obey: none of these can
subsist without the other. The faith of a devil may exist without loving
obedience; but the faith of a true believer worketh by love; and this
faith and love have not respect to some one commandment, but to all; for
God writes his whole law on the heart of every genuine Christian, and
gives him that love which is the fulfilling of the law.

The reader will have observed that, in going through this chapter, while
examining the import of every leading word, I have avoided fixing any
specific meaning to terms: the apostasy or falling away; the man of sin;
son of perdition; him who letteth or withholdeth, etc. The reason is, I
have found it extremely difficult to fix any sense to my own
satisfaction; and it was natural for me to think that, if I could not
satisfy myself, it was not likely I could satisfy my readers. But, as
something should be said relative to the persons and things intended by
the apostle, I choose to give rather what others have said, than attempt
any new mode of interpretation. The great variety of explanations given
by wise and learned men only prove the difficulty of the place.

1\. The general run of Protestant writers understand the whole as
referring to the popes and Church of Rome, or the whole system of the
papacy.

2\. Others think that the defection of the Jewish nation, from their
allegiance to the Roman emperor, is what is to be understood by the
apostasy or falling off; and that all the other terms refer to the
destruction of Jerusalem.

3\. The fathers understood the Antichrist to be intended, but of this
person they seem to have formed no specific idea.

4\. Dr. Hammond refers the apostasy to the defection of the primitive
Christians to the Gnostic heresy; and supposes that, by the man of sin
and son of perdition, Simon Magus is meant.

5\. Grotius applies the whole to Caius Caesar.

6\. Wetstein applies the apostasy to the rebellion and slaughter of the
three princes that were proclaimed by the Roman armies, previously to
the reign of Vespasian; and supposes Titus and the Flavian family to be
intended by the man of sin and son of perdition.

7\. Schoettgen contends strongly that the whole refers to the case of
the Jews, incited to rebellion by the scribes and Pharisees, and to the
utter and final destruction of the rabbinic and Pharisaic system; and
thinks he finds something in their spirit and conduct, and in what has
happened to them, to illustrate every word in this prophecy. Dr. Whitby
is nearly of the same sentiments.

8\. Calmet follows, in the main, the interpretation given by the ancient
fathers; and wonders at the want of candour in the Protestant writers,
who have gleaned up every abusive tale against the bishops and Church of
Rome; and asks them, would they be willing that the Catholics should
credit all the aspersions cast on Protestantism by its enemies?

9\. Bishop Newton has examined the whole prophecy with his usual skill
and judgment. The sum of what he says, as abridged by Dr. Dodd, I think
it right to subjoin. The principal part of modern commentators follow
his steps. He applies the whole to the Romish Church: the apostasy, its
defection from the pure doctrines of Christianity; and the man of sin,
etc. the general succession of the popes of Rome. But we must hear him
for himself, as he takes up the subject in the order of the verses.

[Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003), [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004). For that day shall not come,
except, etc. - "The day of Christ shall not come except there come the
apostasy first." The apostasy here described is plainly not of a civil
but of a religious nature; not a revolt from the government, but a
defection from the true religion and worship. In the original, it is the
apostasy, with an article to give it an emphasis; the article being
added signifies, "that famous and before-mentioned prophecy." So
likewise is the man of sin with the like article, and the like emphasis.
If, then, the notion of the man of sin be derived from any ancient
prophet, it must be derived from [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025); [Dan
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036). Any man may be satisfied that
St. Paul alluded to Daniel's description, because he has not only
borrowed the same ideas, but has even adopted some of the phrases and
expressions. The man of sin may signify either a single man, or a
succession of men; a succession of men being meant in Daniel, it is
probable that the same was intended here also. It is the more probable,
because a single man appears hardly sufficient for the work here
assigned; and it is agreeable to the phraseology of Scripture, and
especially to that of the prophets, to speak of a body or number of men,
under the character of one: thus, a king, [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008); Revelation 17:1-18, is used for a
succession of kings. The man of sin being to be expressed from [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024), according to the Greek
translation, He shall exceed in evil all that went before him; and he
may fulfill the character either by promoting wickedness in general, or
by advancing idolatry in particular, as the word sin signifies
frequently in Scripture. The son of perdition is also the denomination
of the traitor Judas, [Joh 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012),
which implies that the man of sin should be, like Judas, a false
apostle; like him, betray Christ; and, like him, be devoted to
destruction. Who opposeth, etc., is manifestly copied from Daniel, He
shall exalt himself, etc. The features exactly resemble each other: He
opposeth and exalteth himself above all; or, according to the Greek,
above every one that is called God, or that is worshipped. The Greek
word for worshipped is σεβασμα, alluding to the Greek title of the Roman
emperors, σεβαστος, which signifies august or venerable. He shall
oppose; for the prophets speak of things future as present; he shall
oppose and exalt himself, not only above inferior magistrates, (who are
sometimes called gods in holy writ), but even above the greatest
emperors; and shall arrogate to himself Divine honors. So that he, as
God, sitteth in the temple, etc. By the temple of God the apostle could
not well mean the temple of Jerusalem; because that, he knew, would be
destroyed within a few years. After the death of Christ the temple of
Jerusalem is never called by the apostles the temple of God; and if at
any time they make mention of the house or temple of God, they mean the
Church in general, or every particular believer. Who ever will consult
[Co1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016), [Co1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017); [Co2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016); [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015); [Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012); will want no examples to prove
that, under the Gospel dispensation, the temple of God is the Church of
Christ; and the man of sin sitting implies this ruling and presiding
there; and sitting there as God implies his claiming Divine authority in
things spiritual as well as temporal; and showing himself that he is
God, implies his doing it with ostentation.

[Th2 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#005), [Th2
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#006), [Th2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007). Remember ye not, etc. - The
apostle thought it part of his duty, as he made it a part of his
preaching and doctrine, to forewarn his new converts of the grand
apostasy that would infect the Church, even while he was at
Thessalonica. From these verses it appears that the man of sin was not
then revealed; his time was not yet come, or the season of his
manifestation. The mystery of iniquity was indeed already working; the
seeds of corruption were sown, but they were not grown up to maturity;
the man of sin was yet hardly conceived in the womb; it must be some
time before he could be brought forth; there was some obstacle that
hindered his appearing. What this was we cannot determine with absolute
certainty at so great a distance of time; but if we may rely upon the
concurrent testimony of the fathers, it was the Roman empire. Most
probably it was somewhat relating to the higher powers, because the
apostle observes such caution; he mentioned it in discourse, but would
not commit it to writing.

[Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). Then shall that Wicked be
revealed - When the obstacle, mentioned in the preceding verse, should
be removed, then shall that wicked, etc. Nothing can be plainer than
that the lawless, (ὁ ανομος), as the Greek signifies, the wicked one,
here mentioned, and the man of sin, must be one and the same person. The
apostle was speaking before of what hindered that he should be revealed,
and would continue to hinder it till it was taken away; and then the
wicked one, etc. Not that he should be consumed immediately after he was
revealed. But the apostle, to comfort the Thessalonians, no sooner
mentions his revelation than he foretells also his destruction, even
before he describes his other qualifications. His other qualifications
should have been described first, in order of time; but the apostle
hastens to what was first and warmest in his thoughts and wishes: Whom
the Lord shall consume, etc. If these two clauses refer to two distinct
and different events, the meaning manifestly is, that the Lord Jesus
shall gradually consume him with the free preaching and publication of
his word; and shall utterly destroy him at his second coming, in the
glory of his Father, with all the holy angels. If these two clauses
relate to one and the same event, it is a pleonasm very usual in the
sacred, as well as other oriental writings; and the purport plainly is,
that the Lord Jesus shall destroy him with the greatest facility, when
he shall be revealed from heaven, as the apostle has expressed it in the
preceding chapter.

[Th2 2:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009). Whose coming is after,
etc. - The apostle was eager to foretell the destruction of the man of
sin; and for this purpose having broken in upon his subject, he now
returns to it again, and describes the other qualifications by which
this wicked one should advance and establish himself in the world. He
should rise to credit and authority by the most diabolical methods;
should pretend to supernatural powers; and boast of revelations,
visions, and miracles, false in themselves, and applied to promote false
doctrines.

[Th2 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009). He should likewise practice
all other wicked acts of deceit; should be guilty of the most impious
frauds and impositions upon mankind; but should prevail only among those
who are destitute of a sincere affection for the truth; whereby they
might attain eternal salvation.

[Th2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010). And indeed it is a just and
righteous judgment of God, to give them over to vanities and lies in
this world, and to condemnation in the next, who have no regard to truth
and virtue, but delight in falsehood and wickedness; [Th2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011), [Th2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012).

Upon this survey there appears little room to doubt of the genuine sense
and meaning of the passage. The Thessalonians, as we have seen from some
expressions in the former epistle, were alarmed as if the end of the
world was at hand. The apostle, to correct their mistake and dissipate
their fears, assures them that a great apostasy, or defection of the
Christians from the true faith and worship, must happen before the
coming of Christ. This apostasy all the concurrent marks and characters
will justify us in charging upon the Church of Rome. The true Christian
worship is the worship of the one only God, through the one only
Mediator, the man Christ Jesus; and from this worship the Church of Rome
has most notoriously departed, by substituting other mediators, and
invocating and adoring saints and angels, nothing is apostasy, if
idolatry be not. And are not the members of the Church of Rome guilty of
idolatry in the worship of images, in the adoration of the host, in the
invocation of angels and saints, and in the oblation of prayers and
praises to the Virgin Mary, as much or more than to God blessed for
ever? This is the grand corruption of the Christian Church: this is the
apostasy as it is emphatically called, and deserves to be called; which
was not only predicted by St. Paul, but by the Prophet Daniel likewise.
If the apostasy be rightly charged upon the Church of Rome, it follows
of consequence that the man of sin is the pope; not meaning any pope in
particular, but the pope in general, as the chief head and supporter of
this apostasy. He is properly the man of sin, not only on account of the
scandalous lives of many popes, but by reason of their most scandalous
doctrines and principles; dispensing with the most necessary duties; and
granting, or rather selling, pardons and indulgences to the most
abominable crimes. Or, if by sin be meant idolatry in particular, as in
the Old Testament, it is evident how he has perverted the worship of God
to superstition and idolatry of the grossest kind. He also, like the
false apostle, Judas, is the son of perdition; whether actively, as
being the cause of destruction to others; or passively, as being devoted
to destruction himself. He opposeth - he is the great adversary of God
and man; persecuting and destroying, by croisades, inquisitions, and
massacres, those Christians who prefer the word of God to the authority
of men. The heathen emperor of Rome may have slain his thousands of
innocent Christians; but the Christian bishop of Rome has slain his ten
thousands. He exalteth himself above all that is called God, or is
worshipped - not only above inferior magistrates, but likewise above
bishops and primates; not only above bishops and primates, but likewise
above kings and emperors; deposing some, obliging them to kiss his toe,
to hold his stirrup, treading even upon the neck of a king, and kicking
off the imperial crown with his foot; nay, not only kings and emperors,
but likewise above Christ and God himself; making even the word of God
of none effect by his traditions - forbidding what God has commanded; as
marriage, the use of the Scriptures, etc.; and also commanding or
allowing what God has forbidden, as idolatry, persecution, etc. So that
he, as God, sitteth in the temple of God, etc.; he is therefore in
profession a Christian, and a Christian bishop. His sitting in the
temple of God implies plainly his having a seat or cathedra in the
Christian Church; and he sitteth there as God, especially at his
inauguration, when he sits upon the high altar in St. Peter's church,
and makes the table of the Lord his footstool, and in that position
receives adoration. At all times he exercises Divine authority in the
Church, showing himself that he is God - affecting Divine titles, and
asserting that his decrees are of the same or greater authority than the
word of God. So that the pope is evidently, according to the titles
given him in the public decretals, The God upon earth; at least there is
no one, like him, who exalteth himself above every god; no one, like
him, who sitteth as God in the temple of God, showing himself that he is
God. The foundations of popery were laid in the apostle's days, but of
which the superstructure was raised by degrees; and several ages passed
before the building was completed, and the man of sin revealed in full
perfection. The tradition that generally prevailed was that that which
hindered was the Roman empire: this tradition might have been derived
even from the apostle himself; and therefore the primitive Christians,
in the public offices of the Church, prayed for its peace and welfare,
as knowing that, when the Roman empire should be dissolved and broken in
pieces, the empire of the man of sin would be raised upon its ruins. In
the same proportion as the power of the empire decreased, the authority
of the Church increased, and the latter at the expense and ruin of the
former; till at length the pope grew up above all, and the wicked, or
lawless one, was fully manifested and revealed. His coming is after the
energy of Satan, etc; and does it require any particular proof that the
pretensions of the pope, and the corruption of the Church of Rome, are
all supported and authorized by feigned visions and miracles, by pious
frauds and impositions of every kind? But how much soever the man of sin
may be exalted, and how long soever he may reign, yet at last the Lord
shall consume him, etc. This is partly taken from [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004), And with the breath of his lips
shall he slay the wicked one; where the Jews put an emphasis upon the
words the wicked one; as appears from the Chaldee, which renders it, "He
shall destroy the wicked Roman." If the two clauses, as said in the note
on [Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008) (note), relate to two
different events, the meaning is, "that the Lord Jesus shall gradually
consume him with the free preaching of the Gospel; and shall utterly
destroy him at his second coming in the glory of the Father." The former
began to take effect at the Reformation; and the latter will be
accomplished in God's appointed time. The man of sin is now upon the
decline, and he will be totally abolished when Christ shall come in
judgment. Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Origen, Lactantius, Cyril of
Jerusalem, Ambrose, Hilary, Jerome, Augustine, and Chrysostom, give much
the same interpretation that has here been given of the whole passage.
And it must be owned that this is the genuine meaning of the apostle;
that this only is consistent with the context; that every other
interpretation is forced and unnatural; that this is liable to no
material objection; that it coincides perfectly with Daniel; that it is
agreeable to the tradition of the primitive Church; and that it has been
exactly fulfilled in all its particulars; which cannot be said of any
other interpretation whatever. Such a prophecy as this is an illustrious
proof of Divine revelation, and an excellent antidote to the poison of
popery.

See the Dissertations on the Prophecies; and Dodd, as above.

10\. Dr. Macknight proceeds, in general, on the plan of Bishop Newton;
but, as he thinks that the apostle had the prophecy of Daniel, in Dan.
7, and 8, particularly in view, he collates his words with those of the
prophet in the following way: -

[Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003). That man of sin be revealed,
the son of perdition - Ὁ ανθρωπος της ἁμαρτιας, ὁ υἱος της απωλειας·
"The article," says he, "joined to these appellations, is emphatical, as
in the former clause, importing that the ancient prophets had spoken of
these persons, though under different names; particularly the Prophet
Daniel, whose description of the little horn and blasphemous king agrees
so exactly in meaning with Paul's descriptions of the man of sin, and
son of perdition, and lawless one, that there can be little doubt of
their being the same persons; but this will best appear by a comparison
of the passages: -

[Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003). And that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition. [Dan
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021). And the same horn made war with
the saints, and prevailed against them.

[Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). And he shall speak great
words against the Most High; and shall wear out the saints of the Most
High. [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004). Who opposeth and
exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped so
that he, as God, sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he
is God. [Dan 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036). And the king shall
do according to his will; and he; shall exalt himself above every god,
and shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods.

[Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025). He shall also stand up
against the Prince of princes. [Th2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007). Only he who now letteth will let,
until he be taken out of the way. [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008). I considered the horns, and,
behold, there came up among them another little horn, before whom there
were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots. [Th2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). And there shall that wicked one
be revealed. [Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). And he shall
think to change times and laws, and they shall be given into his hand.
See [Dan 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024). [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001). Giving heed to seducing spirits,
and doctrines of devils. [Dan 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038).
In his estate he shall honor the god of forces (Mahuzzim, gods who are
protectors, that is, tutelary angels and saints.) [Ti1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003). Forbidding to marry. [Dan
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#037). Neither shall he regard the God
of his fathers, nor the desire of women. [Th2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008). Whom the Lord shall consume with
the Spirit mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.
[Dan 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011). I beheld then, because of
his of the voice of the great words which the horn spake; I beheld, even
till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the
burning flame.

[Dan 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026). And they shall take away
his dominion, to consume and destroy it unto the end.

[Dan 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025). He shall be broken without
hand.

After entering into great detail in his notes, he sums up in the
following manner: - "Now as, in the prophecies of Daniel, empires
governed by a succession of kings are denoted by a single emblem; such
as, by a part of an image, a single beast, a horn, etc., of a beast; so
in Paul's prophecy, the man of sin, and son of perdition, and the
lawless one, may denote an impious tyranny, exercised by a succession of
men who cause great misery and ruin to others; and who, at length, shall
be destroyed themselves. It is true, the papists contend that one person
only is meant by these appellations, because they are in the singular
number, and have the Greek article prefixed to them. But in Scripture we
find other words in the singular number, with the article, used to
denote a multitude of persons; for example, [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); ὁ δικαιος, the just one, by
faith, shall live; that is, all just persons whatever: [Tit
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007); ὁ επισκοπος, the bishop must be
blameless; that is, all bishops must be so: [Jo2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007); ὁ πλανος, the deceiver, signifies
many deceivers, as is plain from the preceding clause, where many
deceivers are said to have gone out. In like manner the false teachers,
who deceived Christ's servants to commit fornication and idolatry, are
called that woman Jezebel, [Rev 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020),
and the whore of Babylon, [Rev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005);
and in this prophecy, [Rev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#007), the
Roman emperors, and magistrates under them, are called ὁ κατεχων, he who
restraineth. Farther, a succession of persons, arising one after
another, is denoted by appellations in the singular number with the
article; for example: the succession of the Jewish high priests is thus
denoted in the laws concerning them, [Lev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010), [Lev
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#015); [Num
35:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025). As also the succession of
the Jewish kings, [Deu 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014); [Sa1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011). From these examples, therefore,
it is plain that the names, man of sin, son of perdition, lawless one,
although in the singular number, and with the article prefixed, may,
according to the Scripture idiom, denote a multitude, and even a
succession of persons arising one after another.

"The facts and circumstances mentioned in these prophecies are, for the
most part, so peculiarly marked, that they will not easily apply, except
to the persons and events intended by the Spirit of God. And therefore,
in every case where different interpretations have been given of any
prophecy, the proper method of ascertaining its meaning is to compare
the various events to which it is thought to relate with the words of
the prophecy, and to adopt that as the event intended which most exactly
agrees in all its parts to the prophetic description.

"According to this rule, though many different interpretations have been
given of the prophecy under consideration, that, in my opinion, will
appear the best founded which makes it a prediction of the corruptions
of Christianity, which began to be introduced into the Church in the
apostle's days, and wrought secretly all the time the heathen
magistrates persecuted the Christians, but which showed themselves more
openly after the empire received the faith of Christ, a.d. 312, and, by
a gradual progress, ended in the monstrous errors and usurpations of the
bishops of Rome, when the restraining power of the emperors was taken
out of the way by the incursions of the barbarous nations, and the
breaking of the empire into the ten kingdoms prefigured by the ten horns
of Daniel's fourth beast. Now, to be convinced of this, we need only
compare the rise and progress of the papal tyranny with the descriptions
of the man of sin, and of the mystery of iniquity, given in the writings
of Daniel and Paul.

"And first, we have shown in note 1, on [Th2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007), that the mystery of iniquity, or
the corrupt doctrines which ended in the errors and usurpations of the
see of Rome, was working secretly in the apostle's days, as he affirms,
[Th2 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007); and that the power of the
Roman emperors, and of the magistrates under them, was that which then,
and during the succeeding ages, restrained the mystery of iniquity in
its working, and the man of sin from revealing himself. For, while the
power of the state continued in the hands of the heathen rulers, and
while they employed that power in persecuting the Christians, the
corrupt doctrines and practices introduced by the false teachers did not
spread so fast as otherwise they would have done. At least they were not
produced to public view as the decisions of Heaven, to which all men
were bound to pay implicit obedience. But, after the heathen magistrates
were taken out of the way by the conversion of Constantine, and after he
and his successors called the Christian bishops to meet in general
councils, and enforced their assumption of Divine authority by the civil
power; then did they in these councils arrogate to themselves the right
of establishing what articles of faith and discipline they thought
proper, and of anathematizing all who rejected their decrees; a claim
which, in after times, the bishops of Rome transferred from general
councils to themselves. It was in this period that the worship of saints
and angels was introduced; celibacy was praised as the highest piety;
meats of certain kinds were prohibited; and a variety of superstitious
mortifications of the body were enjoined by the decrees of councils, in
opposition to the express laws of God. In this period, likewise,
idolatry and superstition were recommended to the people by false
miracles, and every deceit which wickedness could suggest; such as the
miraculous cures pretended to be performed by the bones and other relics
of the martyrs, in order to induce the ignorant vulgar to worship them
as mediators; the feigned visions of angels, who they said had appeared
to this or that hermit, to recommend celibacy, fastings, mortifications
of the body, and living in solitude; the apparitions of souls from
purgatory, who begged that certain superstitions might be practised, for
delivering them from that confinement: by all which, those assemblies of
ecclesiastics, who by their decrees enjoined these practices, showed
themselves to be the man of sin, and lawless one, in his first form,
whose coming was to be with all power, and signs, and miracles of
falsehood; and who opposed every one that is called god, or that is
worshipped. For these general councils, by introducing the worship of
saints and angels, robbed God of the worship due to him; and, by
substituting saints and angels as mediators, in the place of Christ,
they degraded him from his office as mediator, or rendered it altogether
useless. However, though they thus opposed God and Christ by their
unrighteous decrees, they did not yet exalt themselves above every one
who is called God, or an object of worship; neither did they sit yet in
the temple of God, as God, and openly show themselves to be God. These
blasphemous extravagances were to be acted in after times by a number of
particular persons in succession, I mean by the bishops of Rome, after
the power of the Christian Roman emperors and of the magistrates under
them, was taken out of the way. For the bishops of that see, having very
early obtained from the Christian emperors decrees in their own favor,
soon raised themselves above all other bishops; and, by a variety of
artifices, made the authority and influence of the whole body of the
clergy center in themselves; and claimed that infallible authority which
was formerly exercised by general councils, of making articles of faith;
and of establishing rules of discipline for the whole Christian
community; and of determining, in the last resort, all differences among
the clergy; and of anathematizing every one who did not submit to their
unrighteous decisions. In this manner did the bishops of Rome establish
in their own persons a spiritual dominion over the whole Christian
world. But not content with this height of power, by dexterously
employing the credit and influence which the ecclesiastics, now devoted
to their will, had over the laity in all the countries where they lived,
they interfered in many civil matters also; till at length they reared
that intolerable fabric of spiritual and civil tyranny conjoined,
whereby the understandings, the persons, and the properties, not of the
laity only, but also of the clergy themselves, have for along time been
most grievously enthralled, in all the countries where Christianity was
professed.

"This height, however, of spiritual and civil tyranny united, the
bishops of Rome did not attain till, as the apostle foretold, that which
restrained was taken out of the way; or, till an end was put to the
authority of the Roman emperors in the west, by the inroads of the
barbarous nations; and, more especially, till the western empire was
broken into the ten kingdoms, prefigured in Daniel's vision by the ten
horns of the fourth beast; for then it was that the bishops of Rome made
themselves the sovereigns of Rome and of its territory, and so became
the little horn which Daniel beheld coming up among the ten horns, and
which had the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things; to show
that its dominion was founded on the deepest policy, and that its
strength consisted in the bulls, excommunications, and anathemas, which,
with intolerable audacity, it uttered against all who opposed its
usurpations. And in process of time, the bishops of Rome having got
possession of three of the kingdoms into which the western empire was
broken, signified by three of the horns of Daniel's fourth beast being
plucked up by the roots before the little horn, they call themselves the
vicars of Christ, on pretense that Christ had transferred his whole
authority to them. They also thought to change times and laws, as Daniel
foretold; for, as the vicars of Christ, they assumed the power of saving
and damning men at their own pleasure; and altered the terms of
salvation, making it depend, not on faith and holiness, but on the
superstitious practices which they had established; and sold the pardon
of sins past, and even the liberty of sinning for the future, for money.
Moreover, they openly made war with the saints who resisted their
corrupt doctrines and practices, and prevailed against them, and wore
out the saints of the Most High; for, by the cruel and bloody
persecutions which they obliged the princes who acknowledged their
authority to carry on against those who adhered to the pure doctrines
and worship of Christ, they destroyed incredible numbers of them. Nay,
by the terror of their excommunications and interdicts, they forced even
the most powerful sovereigns to bend to their yoke: thus with their
mouth did they speak very great things. At length they assumed the right
of conferring kingdoms and of deposing princes, and actually deposed
some, with the help of the potentates of their communion, who put their
mandates in execution. Lastly, to render this exercise of their tyranny
the more effectual, they arrogated the power of loosing subjects from
their oaths of allegiance; whereby they made void the most sacred of all
moral obligations, the obligation of allegiance. But this impious scheme
of false doctrine, and the spiritual tyranny built upon it, agreeably to
the predictions of the Prophet Daniel and of the Apostle Paul, began at
the Reformation to be consumed by the breath of the Lord's mouth; that
is, by the Scriptures put into the hands of the laity, and by the
preaching of true doctrine out of the Scriptures.

"Upon the whole, I think every impartial person who attentively
considers the foregoing sketch must be sensible that, in the bishops of
Rome, all the characters and actions ascribed by Daniel to the little
horn, and by Paul to the man of sin and the lawless one, are clearly
united. For, according to the strong workings of Satan, with all power,
and signs, and miracles of falsehood, they have opposed Christ, and
exalted themselves above all that is called god, or an object of
worship; and have long sat in the temple of God, as God, showing
themselves that they are God: that is, they exercise the power and
prerogatives of God. And seeing, in the acquisition and exercise of
their spiritual tyranny, they have trampled upon all laws, human and
Divine; and have encouraged their votaries in the most enormous acts of
wickedness; the Spirit of God has, with the greatest propriety, given
them the appellations of the man of sin, the son of perdition, and the
lawless one. Farther, as it is said the man of sin was to be revealed in
his season, there can be little doubt that the dark ages, in which all
learning was overturned by the irruption of the northern barbarians,
were the season allotted to the man of sin for revealing himself.
Accordingly, we know that in these ages the corruptions of Christianity
and the usurpations of the clergy were carried to the greatest height.
In short, the annals of the world cannot produce persons and events to
which the things written in this passage can be applied with so much
fitness as to the bishops of Rome. Why then should we be in any doubt
concerning the interpretation and application of this famous prophecy?

"At the conclusion of our explication of the prophecy concerning the man
of sin, it may be proper to observe, that the events foretold in it
being such as never took place in the world before, and, in all
probability, never will take place in it again; the foreknowledge of
them was certainly a matter out of the reach of human conjecture or
foresight. It is evident, therefore, that this prophecy, which from the
beginning has stood on record, taken in conjunction with the
accomplishment of it verified by the concurrent testimony of history,
affords an illustrious proof of the Divine original of that revelation
of which it makes a part, and of the inspiration of the person from
whose mouth it proceeded." See Dr. Macknight's Commentary and Notes,
vol. iii., p. 100, etc.

With all this evidence before him, the intelligent reader will now be
enabled to judge for himself, and to adopt for his own that opinion
which appears to be the best supported by circumstances and facts. The
labors of the above learned men have certainly narrowed the principal
subjects of inquiry; and we may now safely state that, in this very
obscure prophecy, the Spirit of God had in view either the Jewish or an
apostate Christian Church, possessing great spiritual and secular
influence and jurisdiction. That the words appear to apply best to the
conduct of many of the popes, and the corruptions of the Romish Church,
needs no proof; but to which of these Churches, or to what other Church
or system, we should apply them, some men, as eminent for their piety as
for their learning, hesitate to declare: yet I must acknowledge, that
the most pointed part of the evidence here adduced tends to fix the
whole on the Romish Church, and on none other.

Whatever may be intended here by the words mystery of iniquity, we may
safely assert that it is a mystery of iniquity to deny the use of the
sacred Scriptures to the common people; and that the Church that does so
is afraid to come to the light. Nothing can be more preposterous and
monstrous than to call people to embrace the doctrines of Christianity,
and refuse them the opportunity of consulting the book in which they are
contained. Persons who are denied the use of the sacred writings may be
manufactured into different forms and modes; and be mechanically led to
believe certain dogmas, and perform certain religious acts; but without
the use of the Scriptures, they never can be intelligent Christians;
they do not search the Scriptures, and therefore they cannot know Him of
whom these Scriptures testify. The mystery of iniquity contained in this
prohibition works now, and has worked long; but did it work in the
apostles' times? Did it work in the Church at Thessalonica? Is it
possible that the present crop should have been produced from so remote
a seed? What does that most solemn adjuration of the apostle, [Th1
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027), mean? I charge you by the Lord,
that this epistle be Read unto All the holy brethren. Why was such a
charge necessary? Why should it be given in so awful a manner? Does it
not absolutely imply that there would be attempts made to keep all the
holy brethren from seeing this epistle? And can we conceive that less
was referred to in the delivery of this very awful adjuration? This
mystery of iniquity did work then in the Christian Church; even then
attempts were made to hide the Scriptures from the common people. And
does not this one consideration serve more to identify the prophecy than
any thing else? Let him that readeth understand. See the notes on [Th1
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027), and at the end of that chapter
(note).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](th2003)

</div>
