<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2000)  [Next](th2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

The salutation of St. Paul and his companions, [Th2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001), [Th2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#002). The apostle gives thanks to God
for their faith, love, and union; and for their patience under
persecutions, [Th2 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003), [Th2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#004). Speaks of the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the punishment of the ungodly, and the glorification of
the righteous, [Th2 1:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005). Prays that
God may count them worthy of their calling, that the name of Jesus may
be glorified in them, [Th2 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011), [Th2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#012).

[2 Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 1:1</span></span>

Paul, and Silvanus, etc. - See the notes on [Th1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001). This epistle was written a short
time after the former: and as Silas and Timothy were still at Corinth,
the apostle joins their names with his own, as in the former case.

[2 Thessalonians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th2 1:3</span></span>

Your faith groweth exceedingly - The word ὑπεραυξανει signifies to grow
luxuriantly, as a good and healthy tree planted in a good soil; and if a
fruit tree, bearing an abundance of fruit to compensate the labor of the
husbandman. Faith is one of the seeds of the kingdom; this the apostle
had sowed and watered, and God gave an abundant increase. Their faith
was multiplied, and their love abounded; and this was not the case with
some distinguished characters only, it was the case with every one of
them.

[2 Thessalonians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th2 1:4</span></span>

We ourselves glory in you in the Churches of God - We hold you up as an
example of what the grace of God, can produce when communicated to
honest and faithful hearts.

For your patience and faith - From [Act
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005), [Act
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#013), and from [Th1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014), we learn, that the people of
Thessalonica had suffered much persecution, both from the Jews and their
own countrymen; but being thoroughly convinced of the truth of the
Gospel, and feeling it to be the power of God unto salvation, no
persecution could turn them aside from it. And having suffered for the
truth, it was precious to them. Persecution never essentially injured
the genuine Church of God.

[2 Thessalonians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th2 1:5</span></span>

A manifest token of the righteousness judgement of God - The
persecutions and tribulations which you endure, are a manifest proof
that God has judged righteously in calling you Gentiles into his Church;
and these sufferings are also a proof that ye are called in; for they
who enter into the kingdom of God go through great tribulation; your
going through that tribulation is a proof that ye are entering in, and
God sees it right and just that ye should be permitted to suffer before
ye enjoy that endless felicity.

The words, however, may be understood in another sense, and will form
this maxim: "The sufferings of the just, and the triumphs of the wicked,
in this life, are a sure proof that there will be a future judgment, in
which the wicked shall be punished and the righteous rewarded. "This
maxim is not only true in itself, but it is most likely that this is the
apostle's meaning.

That ye may be counted worthy - Your patient endurance of these
sufferings is a proof that ye are rendered meet for that glory on
account of which ye suffer and, in a true Gospel sense of the word,
worthy of that glory; for he who is a child of God, and a partaker of
the Divine nature, is worthy of God's kingdom, not because he has done
any thing to merit it, but because he bears the image of God; and the
image is that which gives the title.

[2 Thessalonians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 1:6</span></span>

Seeing it is a righteous thing - Though God neither rewards nor punishes
in this life in a general way, yet he often gives proofs of his
displeasure, especially against those who persecute his followers. They,
therefore, who have given you tribulation, shall have tribulation in
recompense.

[2 Thessalonians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th2 1:7</span></span>

And to you who are troubled, rest with us - And while they have
tribulation, you shall have that eternal rest which remains for the
people of God.

When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed - But this fullness of tribulation
to them, and rest to you, shall not take place till the Lord Jesus come
to judge the world.

With his mighty angels - The coming of God to judge the world is
scarcely ever spoken of in the sacred writings without mentioning the
holy angels, who are to accompany him, and to form his court or retinue.
See [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002); [Mat
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031); [Mat
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027); [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064); [Mar
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038).

[2 Thessalonians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th2 1:8</span></span>

In flaming fire - Εν φλογι πυρος· In thunder and lightning, taking
vengeance - inflicting just punishment on them that know not God - the
heathen who do not worship the true God, and will not acknowledge him,
but worship idols; and on them that obey not the Gospel - the Jews,
particularly who have rejected the Gospel, and persecuted Christ and his
messengers; and all nominal Christians who, though they believe the
Gospel as a revelation from God, yet do not obey it as a rule of life.

[2 Thessalonians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th2 1:9</span></span>

Who shall be punished - What this everlasting destruction consists in we
cannot tell. It is not annihilation, for their being continues; and as
the destruction is everlasting, it is an eternal continuance and
presence of substantial evil, and absence of all good; for a part of
this punishment consists in being banished from the presence of the Lord
- excluded from his approbation, for ever; so that the light of his
countenance can be no more enjoyed, as there will be an eternal
impossibility of ever being reconciled to him.

The glory of his power - Never to see the face of God throughout
eternity is a heart-rending, soul-appalling thought; and to be banished
from the glory of his power, that power the glory of which is peculiarly
manifested in saving the lost and glorifying the faithful, is what
cannot be reflected on without confusion and dismay. But this must be
the lot of all who acknowledge not God, and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

[2 Thessalonians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th2 1:10</span></span>

When he shall come to be glorified in his saints - As the grace of God
is peculiarly glorified in saving sinners and making them into saints,
this gracious power will be particularly manifested in the great day,
when countless millions will appear before that throne who have come out
of great tribulation, and have washed their robes and made them white in
the blood of the Lamb.

And to be admired - Οαυμασθηναι· To be wondered at among and on the
account of all them that believe. Much as true believers admire the
perfections of the Redeemer of mankind, and much as they wonder at his
amazing condescension in becoming man, and dying for the sins of the
world; all their present amazement and wonder will be as nothing when
compared with what they shall feel when they come to see him in all his
glory, the glory that he had with the father before the world was. In
reference to this we may apply those words of St. John: "Beloved, now
are we the sons of God; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but
we know that when he shall appear we shall be like him; for we shall see
him as he is." [Jo1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002).

Instead of τοις πιστευουσιν, them that believe, τοις πιστευσασιν, them
that have believed, is the reading of ABCDEF, many others, the later
Syriac, Slavonic, Vulgate, and Itala, with most of the Greek fathers.
This reading is undoubtedly genuine.

Because our testimony - was believed in that day - The members of this
sentence seem to have been strangely transposed. I believe it should be
read thus: "In that day, when he shall come to be glorified in his
saints, and admired among all them that have believed; for our testimony
was believed among you." The Thessalonians had credited what the
apostles had said and written, not only concerning Jesus Christ in
general, but concerning the day of judgment in particular.

[2 Thessalonians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 1:11</span></span>

We pray - that our God would count you worthy - It is our earnest prayer
that God would make you worthy, αξιωσῃ, afford those continual supplies
of grace by his Holy Spirit, without which you cannot adorn your holy
vocation; you are called into the Christian Church, and, to be proper
members of this Church, you must be members of the mystical body of
Christ; and this implies that you should be holy, as he who has called
you is holy.

Fulfil all the good pleasure of his goodness -

1\. The goodness of God - his own innate eternal kindness, has led him
to call you into this state of salvation.

2\. It is the pleasure of that goodness to save you unto eternal life.

3\. It is the good pleasure; nothing can please God more than your
receiving and retaining his utmost salvation.

4\. It is all the good pleasure of his goodness thus to save you; this
he has amply proved by sending his Son to die for you, beyond which gift
he has none greater. In this, all the good pleasure of his goodness is
astonishingly manifested.

5\. And if you be faithful to his grace, he will fulfill - completely
accomplish, all the good pleasure of his goodness in you; which goodness
is to be apprehended and is to work by faith, the power of which must
come from him, though the act or exercise of that power must be of
yourselves; but the very power to believe affords excitement to the
exercise of faith.

[2 Thessalonians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th2 1:12</span></span>

That the name of our Lord - This is the great end of your Christian
calling, that Jesus who hath died for you may have his passion and death
magnified in your life and happiness; that ye may show forth the virtues
of him who called you from darkness into his marvellous light.

And ye in him - That his glorious excellence may be seen upon you; that
ye may be adorned with the graces of his Spirit, as he is glorified by
your salvation from all sin.

According to the grace - That your salvation may be such as God
requires, and such as is worthy of his grace to communicate. God saves
as becomes God to save; and thus the dignity of his nature is seen in
the excellence and glory of his work.

1\. It is an awful consideration to the people of the world, that
persecutions and afflictions should be the lot of the true Church, and
should be the proof of its being such; because this shows more than any
thing else the desperate state of mankind, their total enmity to God;
they persecute, not because the followers of God have done or can do
them hurt, but they persecute because they have not the Spirit of Christ
in them! Men may amuse themselves by arguing against the doctrine of
original sin, or the total depravity of the soul of man; but while there
is religious persecution in the world, there is the most absolute
disproof of all their arguments. Nothing but a heart wholly alienated
from God could ever devise the persecution or maltreatment of a man, for
no other cause but that he has given himself up to glorify God with his
body and spirit, which are his.

2\. The everlasting destruction of the ungodly is a subject that should
be continually placed before the eyes of men by the preachers of the
Gospel. How shall a man be induced to take measures to escape a danger
of the existence of which he is not convinced? Show him the hell which
the justice of God has lighted up for the devil and his angels, and in
which all Satan's children and followers must have their eternal
portion. All the perfections of God require that he should render to
every man his due. And what is the due of a sinner or a persecutor, of
one who is a determinate enemy to God, goodness, and good men? Why,
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and the glory of
his power. And if God did not award this to such persons, he could not
be the God of justice.

3\. The grand object of God in giving his Gospel to mankind is to save
them from their sins, make them like himself, and take them to his
eternal glory. He saves according to the measure of his eternal
goodness; the scanty salvation contended for and expected by the
generality of Christians, it would be dishonorable to God to administer.
He saves according to his grace. His own eternal goodness and holiness
is the measure of his salvation to man; not the creeds and expectations
of any class of Christians. To be saved at all, we must not only be
saved in God's way, and upon his own terms, but also according to his
own measure. He who is not filled with the fullness of God cannot expect
the glory of God.

4\. Another proof of the fall and degeneracy of men is, their general
enmity to the doctrine of holiness; they cannot bear the thought of
being sanctified through body, soul, and spirit, so as to perfect
holiness in the fear of God. A spurious kind of Christianity is gaining
ground in the world. Weakness, doubtfulness, littleness of faith,
consciousness of inward corruptions, and sinful infirmities of different
kinds, are by some considered the highest proofs of a gracious state;
whereas in the primitive Church they would have been considered as
evidences that the persons in question had received just light enough to
show them their wretchedness and danger, but not the healing virtue of
the blood of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 2](th2002)

</div>
