<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1002)  [Next](ti1004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 3:0</span></span>

Concerning bishops, their qualifications and work, [Ti1
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001.md). Of deacons, and how they should
be proved, [Ti1 3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md). Of their wives
and children, and how they should be governed, [Ti1
3:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011.md). How Timothy should behave
himself in the Church, [Ti1 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014.md), [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015.md). The great mystery of godliness,
[Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md).

[1 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 3:1</span></span>

This is a true saying - Πιστος ὁ λογος· This is a true doctrine. These
words are joined to the last verse of the preceding chapter by several
of the Greek fathers, and by them referred to the doctrine there stated.

The office of a bishop - Επισκοπης· The episcopacy, overseership or
superintendency. The word ορεγεται, which we translate desire, signifies
earnest, eager, passionate desire; and επιθυμει, which we translate
desire, also signifies earnestly to desire or covet. It is strange that
the episcopacy, in those times, should have been an object of intense
desire to any man; when it was a place of danger, awl exposure to severe
labor, want, persecution, and death, without any secular emolument
whatsoever. On this ground I am led to think that the Spirit of God
designed these words more for the ages that were to come, than for those
which were then; and in reference to after ages the whole of what
follows is chiefly to be understood.

A good work - A work it then was; heavy, incessant, and painful. There
were no unpreaching prelates in those days, and should be none now.
Episcopacy in the Church of God is of Divine appointment, and should be
maintained and respected. Under God, there should be supreme governors
in the Church as well as in the state. The state has its monarch, the
Church has its bishop; one should govern according to the laws of the
land, the other according to the word of God.

What a constitutional king should be, the principles of the constitution
declare; what a bishop should be, the following verses particularly
show.

[1 Timothy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 3:2</span></span>

A bishop then must be blameless - Our term bishop comes from the
Anglo-Saxon, which is a mere corruption of the Greek επισκοπος, and the
Latin episcopus; the former being compounded of επι, over, and
σκεπτομαι, to look or inspect, signifies one who has the inspection or
oversight of a place, persons, or business; what we commonly term a
superintendent. The New Testament writers have borrowed the term from
the Septuagint, it being the word by which they translate the פקיד pakid
of the Hebrew text, which signifies a visiter, one that personally
inspects the people or business over which he presides. It is given by
St. Paul to the elders at Ephesus, who had the oversight of Christ's
flock, [Act 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md); and to such like
persons in other places, [Phi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md);
[Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md), the place in question; and
[Tit 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007.md).

Let us consider the qualifications of a Christian bishop, and then we
shall soon discover who is fit for the office.

First - is Christian bishop must be blameless; ανεπιληπτον, a person
against whom no evil can be proved; one who is everywhere invulnerable;
for the word is a metaphor, taken from the case of an expert and
skillful pugilist, who so defends every part of his body that it is
impossible for his antagonist to give one hit. So this Christian bishop
is one that has so conducted himself, as to put it out of the reach of
any person to prove that he is either unsound in a single article of the
Christian faith, or deficient in the fulfillment of any duty incumbent
on a Christian. He must be irreprehensible; for how can he reprove that
in others which they can reprove in him?

Second - must be the husband of one wife. He should be a married man,
but he should be no polygamist; and have only one wife, i.e. one at a
time. It does not mean that, if he has been married, and his wife die,
he should never marry another. Some have most foolishly spiritualized
this, and say, that by one wife the Church is intended! This silly
quibbling needs no refutation. The apostle's meaning appears to be this:
that he should not be a man who has divorced his wife and married
another; nor one that has two wives at a time. It does not appear to
have been any part of the apostle's design to prohibit second marriages,
of which some have made such a serious business. But it is natural for
some men to tithe mint and cummin in religion, while they neglect the
weightier matters of the law.

Third - must be vigilant; νηφαλεον, from νη, not and πιω, to drink.
Watchful; for as one who drinks is apt to sleep, so he who abstains from
it is more likely to keep awake, and attend to his work and charge. A
bishop has to watch over the Church, and watch for it; and this will
require all his care and circumspection. Instead of νηφαλεον, many MSS.
read νηφαλιον· this may be the better orthography, but makes no
alteration in the sense.

Fourth - must be sober; σωφρονα, prudent or, according to the etymology
of the word, from σως, sound, and φρην, mind, a man of a sound mind;
having a good understanding, and the complete government of all his
passions. A bishop should be a man of learning, of an extensive and well
cultivated mind, dispassionate, prudent, and sedate.

Fifth - must be of good behavior; κοσμιον, orderly, decent, grave, and
correct in the whole of his appearance, carriage, and conduct. The
preceding term, σωφρονα, refers to the mind; this latter, κοσμιον, to
the external manners. A clownish, rude, or boorish man should never have
the rule of the Church of God; the sour, the sullen, and the boisterous
should never be invested with a dignity which they would most infallibly
disgrace.

Sixth - must be given to hospitality; φιλοξενον, literally, a lover of
strangers; one who is ready to receive into his house and relieve every
necessitous stranger. Hospitality, in those primitive times, was a great
and necessary virtue; then there were few inns, or places of public
entertainment; to those who were noted for benevolence the necessitous
stranger had recourse. A Christian bishop, professing love to God and
all mankind, preaching a religion, one half of the morality of which was
included in, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself, would naturally be
sought to by those who were in distress and destitute of friends. To
enable them to entertain such, the Church over which they presided must
have furnished them with the means. Such a bishop as St. Paul, who was
often obliged to labor with his hands for his own support, could have
little to give away. But there is a considerable difference between an
apostolical bishop and an ecclesiastical bishop: the one was generally
itinerant, the other comparatively local; the former had neither house
nor home, the latter had both; the apostolical bishop had charge of the
Church of Christ universally, the ecclesiastical bishop of the Churches
in a particular district. Such should be addicted to hospitality, or
works of charity; especially in these modern times, in which, besides
the spiritualities, they possess the temporalities, of the Church.

Seventh - should be apt to teach; διδακτικον, one capable of teaching;
not only wise himself, but ready to communicate his wisdom to others.
One whose delight is, to instruct the ignorant and those who are out of
the way. He must be a preacher; an able, zealous, fervent, and assiduous
preacher.

He is no bishop who has health and strength, and yet seldom or never
preaches; i.e. if he can preach - if he have the necessary gifts for the
office.

In former times bishops wrote much and preached much; and their labors
were greatly owned of God. No Church since the apostle's days has been
more honored in this way than the British Church. And although bishops
are here, as elsewhere, appointed by the state, yet we cannot help
adoring the good providence of God, that, taken as a body, they have
been an honor to their function; and that, since the reformation of
religion in these lands, the bishops have in general been men of great
learning and probity, and the ablest advocates of the Christian system,
both as to its authenticity, and the purity and excellence of its
doctrines and morality.

Chaucer's character of the Clerke of Oxenford is a good paraphrase on
St. Paul's character of a primitive bishop: -

Of studie tookin he moste cure and hede,

Nought oo word spak he more than there was nede,

And that was selde in forme and and reverence,

And short, and quick, and full of high sentence;

Sowning in moral vertue was speche,

And gladly wolde he lerne, and gladly teache.

[1 Timothy 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 3:3</span></span>

An eighth article in his character is, he must not be given to wine; μη
παροινον. This word not only signifies one who is inordinately attached
to wine, a winebibber or tippler, but also one who is imperious,
abusive, insolent, whether through wine or otherwise. Kypke contends for
this latter acceptation here. See his proofs and examples.

Ninth - He must be no striker; μη πληκτην, not quarrelsome; not ready to
strike a person who may displease him; no persecutor of those who may
differ from him; not prone, as one wittily said,

"To prove his doctrine orthodox

By apostolic blows and knocks."

It is said of Bishop Bonner, of infamous memory, that, when examining
the poor Protestants whom he termed heretics, when worsted by them in
argument he was used to smite them with his fists, and sometimes scourge
and whip them. But though he was a most ignorant and consummate savage,
yet from such a scripture as this he might have seen the necessity of
surrendering his mitre.

Tenth - He must not be greedy of filthy lucre; μη αισχροκερδη, not
desirous of base gain; not using base and unjustifiable methods to raise
and increase his revenues; not trading or trafficking; for what would be
honorable in a secular character, would be base and dishonorable in a
bishop. Though such a trait should never appear in the character of a
Christian prelate, yet there is much reason to suspect that the words
above are not authentic; they are omitted by ADFG, many others, the
Syriac, all the Arabic, Coptic, (and Sahidic), Ethiopic, Armenian, later
Syriac, (but it appears in the margin), the Vulgate and Itala, and by
most of the Greek fathers. Griesbach has left it out of the text, in
which it does not appear that it ever had a legitimate place. The word
covetous, which we have below, expresses all the meaning of this; and it
is not likely that the apostle would insert in the same sentence two
words of the same meaning, because they were different in sound. It
appears to have been borrowed from [Ti1
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md).

Eleventh - He must be patient; επιεικη, meek, gentle; the opposite to
πληκτην, a quarrelsome person, which it immediately follows when the
spurious word αισχροκερδη is removed. Where meekness and patience do not
reign, gravity cannot exist, and the love of God cannot dwell.

Twelfth - He must not be a brawler; αμαχον, not contentious or
litigious, but quiet and peaceable.

Thirteenth - He must not be covetous; αφιλαργυρον, not a lover of money;
not desiring the office for the sake of its emoluments. He who loves
money will stick at nothing in order to get it. Fair and foul methods
are to him alike, provided they may be equally productive. For the sake
of reputation he may wish to get all honourably; but if that cannot be,
he will not scruple to adopt other methods. A brother heathen gives him
this counsel: "Get money if thou canst by fair means; if not, get it by
hook and by crook."

[1 Timothy 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 3:4</span></span>

The fourteenth qualification of a Christian bishop is, that he ruleth
well his own house; του ιδιου οικου καλως προΐσταμενον, one who properly
presides over and governs his own family. One who has the command, of
his own house, not by sternness, severity, and tyranny, but with all
gravity; governing his household by rule, every one knowing his own
place, and each doing his own work, and each work having the proper time
assigned for its beginning and end. This is a maxim of common sense; no
family can be prosperous that is not under subjection, and no person can
govern a family but the head of it, the husband, who is, both by nature
and the appointment of God, the head or governor of his own house. See
the note on [Eph 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022.md).

[1 Timothy 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 3:5</span></span>

For if a man know not - Method is a matter of great importance in all
the affairs of life. It is a true saying, He that does little with his
head must do much with his hands; and even then the business is not half
done for want of method. Now, he who has a proper method of doing
business will show it in every affair of life, even the least. He who
has a disorderly family has no government of that family; he probably
has none because he has no method, no plan, of presiding. It was natural
for the apostle to say, If a man know not how to rule his own house, how
shall he take care of the Church of God? Look at a man's domestic
arrangements; if they be not good, he should not be trusted with any
branch of government, whether ecclesiastical or civil.

[1 Timothy 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 3:6</span></span>

Fifteenth - It is required that he be not a novice - Νεοφυτον· Not a
young plant, not recently ingrafted, that is, one not newly converted to
the faith; (old MS. Bible); one who has been of considerable standing in
the Christian Church, if he have the preceding qualifications, may be
safely trusted with the government of that Church. It is impossible that
one who is not long and deeply experienced in the ways of God can guide
others in the way of life. Hence presbyters or elders were generally
appointed to have the oversight of the rest, and hence presbyter and
bishop seem to have been two names for the same office; yet all
presbyters or elders certainly were not bishops, because all presbyters
had not the qualifications marked above. But the apostle gives another
reason: Lest being lifted up with pride he fall into the condemnation of
the devil. It is natural for man to think himself of more importance
than his fellows when they are intrusted to his government. The
apostle's term τυφωθεις, puffed up, inflated, is a metaphor taken from a
bladder when filled with air or wind. It is a substance, has a certain
size, is light, can be the sport of the wind, but has nothing in it but
air. Such is the classical coxcomb; a mere puffball, a disgrace to his
function, and despised by every intelligent man. Should we not say to
those whom it may concern,

"From such apostles, O ye mitred heads,

Preserve the Church; and lay not careless hands

On skulls that cannot teach, and will not learn."

From these words of the apostle we are led to infer that pride or
self-conceit was the cause of the devil's downfall. In Ecclus. 10 there
are some excellent sayings concerning pride: "Pride is hurtful before
God and man." "Why is earth and ashes proud?" "The beginning of pride is
when one departeth from God." "For pride is the beginning of sin; and he
that hath it shall pour out abomination." "Pride was not made for Men."
See verses 7, 9, 12, 13, and 18, of the above chapter.

[1 Timothy 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 3:7</span></span>

The sixteenth requisite is, that he should have a good report of them
which are without - That he should be one who had not been previously a
profligate, or scandalous in his life. Such a person, when converted,
may be a worthy private member of religious society; but I believe God
rarely calls such to the work of the ministry, and never to the
episcopate. Them that are without are the Jews, Gentiles, and the
unconverted of all kinds. For the meaning of this term see the note on
[Col 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#005.md).

Lest he fall into reproach - For his former scandalous life.

And the snare of the devil - Snares and temptations, such as he fell in
and fell by before. This is called the snare of the devil; for, as he
well knows the constitution of such persons, and what is most likely to
prevail, he infers that what was effectual before to their transgressing
may be so still; therefore on all suitable occasions he tempts them to
their old sins. Backsliders in general fall by those sins to which they
were addicted previously to their conversion. Former inveterate habits
will revive in him who does not continue to deny himself, and watch unto
prayer.

The snare of the devil. - Some would translate παγιδα του διαβολου, the
snare of the accuser; and they give the same meaning to the word in [Ti1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006.md), because it is evident that
διαβολους has that meaning, [Ti1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011.md),
and our translators render it slanderers. Now, though διαβολος signifies
an accuser, yet I do not see that it can, with any propriety, be
restrained to this meaning in the texts in question, and especially as
the word is emphatically applied to Satan himself; for he who, in [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010.md), is called the accuser of the
brethren, is, in [Rev 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009.md), called the
great dragon, the old serpent, the Devil, διαβολος, and Satan.

[1 Timothy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 3:8</span></span>

Likewise must the deacons - The term deacon, διακονος, simply signifies
a regular or stated servant: from δια, through or emphatic, and κονεω,
to minister or serve. See it explained in the note on [Mat
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026.md). As nearly the same
qualifications were required in the deacons as in the bishops, the
reader may consult what is said on the preceding verses.

Grave - Of a sedate and dignified carriage and conduct.

Not double-tongued - Speaking one thing to one person, and another thing
to another, on the same subject. This is hypocrisy and deceit. This word
might also be translated liars.

Not given to much wine - Neither a drunkard, tippler, nor what is called
a jovial companion. All this would be inconsistent with gravity.

Not greedy of filthy lucre - See on [Ti1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003) (note.md).

[1 Timothy 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 3:9</span></span>

Holding the mystery of the faith - Instead of της πιστεως, the faith,
one MS. (the readings of which are found in the margin of a copy of
Mill's Greek text in the Bodleian library, and which is marked 61 in
Griesbach) reads αναστασεως, of the resurrection. This reading, like
many others in this MS., is found nowhere else; and is worthy of little
regard, but as expressing what appeared to the writer to be the
apostle's meaning. One of the greatest mysteries of the faith was
undoubtedly the resurrection of the dead; and this was held in a pure
conscience when the person so exercised himself as to have a conscience
void of offense towards God and towards men. See [Act
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#016.md). What has been since called
Antinomianism, that is, making void the moral law, by a pretended faith
in the righteousness of Christ, is that which the apostle has here
particularly in view.

[1 Timothy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 3:10</span></span>

Let these - be proved - Let them not be young converts, or persons
lately brought to the knowledge of the truth. This is the same in spirit
with what is required of the bishops, [Ti1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006.md).

Let no man be put into an office in the Church till he has given full
proof of his sincerity and steadiness, by having been for a considerable
time a consistent private member of the Church.

Being found blameless - Ανεγκλητοι οντες· Being irreproachable; persons
against whom no evil can be proved. The same as in [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md), though a different word is used.
See the note on [Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002.md).

[1 Timothy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 3:11</span></span>

Even so must their wives be grave - I believe the apostle does not mean
here the wives either of the bishops or deacons in particular, but the
Christian women in general. The original is simply: Γυναικας ὡσαυτως
σεμνας· Let the women likewise be grave. Whatever is spoken here becomes
women in general; but if the apostle had those termed deaconesses in his
eye, which is quite possible, the words are peculiarly suitable to them.
That there was such an order in the apostolic and primitive Church, and
that they were appointed to their office by the imposition of hands, has
already been noticed on [Rom 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001.md)
(note). Possibly, therefore, the apostle may have had this order of
deaconesses in view, to whom it was as necessary to give counsels and
cautions as to the deacons themselves; and to prescribe their
qualifications, lest improper persons should insinuate themselves into
that office.

Not slanderers - Μη διαβολους· Literally, not devils. See on [Ti1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#007) (note.md) This may be properly enough
translated slanderers, backbiters, tale-bearers, etc., for all these are
of their father, the devil, and his lusts they will do. Let all such,
with the vast tribe of calumniators and dealers in scandal, remember
that the apostle ranks them all with malicious, fallen spirits; a
consideration which one would suppose might be sufficient to deter them
from their injurious and abominable conduct.

Sober - See on [Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002) (note.md)

Faithful in all things - The deaconesses had much to do among the poor,
and especially among poor women, in dispensing the bounty of the Church.
They were not only faithfully to expend all they had got, and for the
purpose for which they got it; but they must do this with impartiality,
showing no respect of persons, the degree of distress being the only
rule by which the distribution was to be regulated.

[1 Timothy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 3:12</span></span>

Let the deacons be the husbands of one wife - This is the same that is
required of the bishops. See on [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002) (note.md) [Ti1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004) (note.md), and [Ti1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005) (note.md).

[1 Timothy 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 3:13</span></span>

That have used the office of a deacon well - They who, having been tried
or proved, [Ti1 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010.md), have shown by
their steadiness, activity, and zeal, that they might be raised to a
higher office, are here said to have purchased to themselves a good
degree, βαθμον καλον· for, instead of having to administer to the bodies
and bodily wants of the poor, the faithful deacons were raised to
minister in holy things; and, instead of ministering the bread that
perisheth, they were raised to the presbyterate or episcopate, to
minister the bread of life to immortal souls. And hence the apostle
adds; And great boldness in the faith; πολλην παρῥησιαν, great liberty
of speech; i.e. in teaching the doctrines of Christianity, and in
expounding the Scriptures, and preaching. It seems to have been a
practice dictated by common sense, that the most grave and steady of the
believers should be employed as deacons; the most experienced and
zealous of the deacons should be raised to the rank of elders; and the
most able and pious of the elders be consecrated bishops. As to a bishop
of bishops, that age did not know such. The pope of Rome was the first
who took this title. The same office, but not with the same powers nor
abuse, is found in the patriarch of the Greek Church, and the archbishop
of the Protestant Church. As the deacon had many private members under
his care, so the presbyter or elder had several deacons under his care;
the bishop, several presbyters; and the archbishop, several bishops. But
I speak now more of the modern than of the ancient Church. The
distinction in some of these offices is not so apparent in ancient
times; and some of the offices themselves are modern, or comparatively
so. But deacon, presbyter, and bishop, existed in the apostolic Church,
and may therefore be considered of Divine origin.

[1 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 3:14</span></span>

These things write I - That is: I write only these things; because I
hope to come unto thee shortly.

[1 Timothy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 3:15</span></span>

But if I tarry long - That is: Not withstanding I hope to come to thee
shortly, and therefore do not feel the necessity of writing at large;
yet, lest I should be delayed, I write what I judge necessary to direct
thy conduct in the Church of God.

The house of God - This is spoken in allusion to the ancient tabernacle;
which was God's house, and in which the symbol of the Divine Majesty
dwelt. So the Christian Church is God's house, and every believer is a
habitation of God through the Spirit.

The Church of the living God - The assembly in which God lives and
works; each member of which is a living stone, all of whom, properly
united among themselves, grow up unto a holy temple in the Lord.

The pillar and ground of the truth - Never was there a greater variety
of opinions on any portion of the sacred Scripture than has been on this
and the following verse. Commentators and critics have given senses and
meanings till there is no meaning to be seen. It would be almost
impossible, after reading all that has been said on this passage, for
any man to make up his own mind. To what, or to whom, does the pillar
and ground of the truth refer?

1\. Some say to Timothy, who is called the pillar, etc., because left
there to support and defend the truth of God against false doctrines and
false teachers; and is so called for the same reason that Peter, James,
and John, are said to be pillars, i.e. supporters of the truth of God.
[Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009.md).

2\. Others suppose that the pillar and ground of the truth is spoken of
God; and that ὁς εστι, who is, should be supplied as referring
immediately to Θεος, God, just before. By this mode of interpretation
the passage will read thus: That thou mayest know how thou oughtest to
behave thyself in the house of God, which is the Church of the living
God, Who Is (ὁς εστι) the pillar and ground of the truth. How God may be
fitly termed the pillar and ground of truth, requires no explanation.

3\. Others think that the words should be understood of the Church of
the living God; and in this case the feminine relative ἡτις εστι, which
is, must be repeated immediately after εκκλησια, the Church. The house
of God is the Church of the living God; Which (Church) Is the pillar and
ground of the truth. That is: The full revelation of God's truth is in
the Christian Church. The great doctrines of that Church are the truth
without error, metaphor, or figure. Formerly the truth was but partially
revealed, much of it being shadowed with types, ceremonies, and
comparatively dark prophecies; but now all is plain, and the full
revelation given; and the foundation on which this truth rests are the
grand facts detailed in the Gospel, especially those which concern the
incarnation, miracles, passion, death, and resurrection of Christ, and
the mission of the Holy Spirit.

4\. Lastly, others refer the whole to το της ευσεβειας μυστηριον, the
mystery of godliness; and translate the clause thus: The mystery of
godliness is the pillar and ground of the truth; and, without
controversy, a great thing. This gives a very good sense, but it is not
much favored by the arrangement of the words in the original.

[1 Timothy 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 3:16</span></span>

And, without controversy - Και ὁμολογουμενες· And confessedly, by
general consent, it is a thing which no man can or ought to dispute; any
phrase of this kind expresses the meaning of the original.

God was manifest in the flesh - If we take in the whole of the 14th,
15th, and 16th verses, we may make a consistent translation in the
following manner, and the whole paragraph will stand thus: Hoping to see
thee shortly; but should I tarry long, these things I now write unto
thee, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the
house of God, which is the Church of the living God. The mystery of
godliness, which is the pillar and ground of the truth, is, without
controversy, a great thing. And then he proceeds to show what this
mystery of godliness is, which he sums up in the six following
particulars:

1\. God was manifest in the flesh;

2\. Justified in the Spirit;

3\. Seen of angels;

4\. Preached unto the Gentiles;

5\. Believed on in the world;

6\. Received up into glory.

Though all this makes a very plain and consistent sense, yet we are
perplexed by various readings on the first clause, Θεος εφανερωθη εν
σαρκι, God was manifest in the flesh; for instead of Θεος, God, several
MSS., versions, and fathers, have ὁς or ὁ, who or which. And this is
generally referred to the word mystery; Great is the mystery of
godliness, Which was manifest in the flesh.

The insertion of, Θεος for ὁς, or ὁς for Θεος, may be easily accounted
for. In ancient times the Greek was all written in capitals, for the
common Greek character is comparatively of modern date. In these early
times words of frequent recurrence were written contractedly, thus: for
πατηρ, πρ; Θεος, θς; Κυριος, κς· Ιησους, ιης, etc. This is very frequent
in the oldest MSS., and is continually recurring in the Codex Bexae, and
Codex Alexandrinus. If, therefore, the middle stroke of the Θ, in ΘΣ,
happened to be faint, or obliterated, and the dash above not very
apparent, both of which I have observed in ancient MSS., then ΘΣ, the
contraction for Θεος, God, might be mistaken for ΟΣ, which or who; and
vice versa. This appears to have been the case in the Codex
Alexandrinus, in this passage. To me there is ample reason to believe
that the Codex Alexandrinus originally read ΘΣ, God, in this place; but
the stroke becoming faint by length of time and injudicious handling, of
which the MS. in this place has had a large proportion, some person has
supplied the place, most reprehensibly, with a thick black line. This
has destroyed the evidence of this MS., as now it can neither be quoted
pro or con, though it is very likely that the person who supplied the
ink line, did it from a conscientious conviction that ΘΣ was the
original reading of this MS. I examined this MS. about thirty years ago,
and this was the conviction that rested then on my mind. I have seen the
MS. several times since, and have not changed my opinion. The enemies of
the Deity of Christ have been at as much pains to destroy the evidence
afforded by the common reading in support of this doctrine as if this
text were the only one by which it can be supported; they must be aware
that [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md), and [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md), proclaim the same truth; and
that in those verses there is no authority to doubt the genuineness of
the reading. We read, therefore, God was manifested in the flesh, and I
cannot see what good sense can be taken out of, the Gospel was
manifested in the flesh; or, the mystery of godliness was manifested in
the flesh. After seriously considering this subject in every point of
light, I hold with the reading in the commonly received text.

Justified in the Spirit - By the miracles which were wrought by the
apostle in and through the name of Jesus; as well as by his resurrection
from the dead, through the energy of the Holy Ghost, by which he was
proved to be the Son of God with power. Christ was, justified from all
the calumnies of the Jews, who crucified him as an impostor. All these
miracles, being wrought by the power of God, were a full proof of his
innocence; for, had he not been what he professed to be, God would not
have borne such a decisive testimony to his Messiahship.

Seen of angels - By αγγελοι here, some understand not those celestial or
infernal beings commonly called angels, but apostles and other persons
who became messengers, to carry far and wide and attest the truth of his
resurrection from the dead. If, however, we take the word seen, in its
Jewish acceptation, for made known, we may here retain the term angels
in its common acceptation; for it is certain that previously to our
Lord's ascension to heaven, these holy beings could have little
knowledge of the necessity, reasons, and economy of human salvation; nor
of the nature of Christ as God and man. St. Peter informs us that the
angels desire to look into these things, [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012.md). And St. Paul says the same
thing, [Eph 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009.md), [Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010.md), when speaking of the revelation
of the Gospel plan of salvation, which he calls the mystery, which From
the Beginning of the World had been Hid in God; and which was now
published, that unto the Principalities and Powers in heavenly places
might be Made Known, by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God. Even
those angelic beings have got an accession to their blessedness, by an
increase of knowledge in the things which concern Jesus Christ, and the
whole scheme of human salvation, through his incarnation, passion,
death, resurrection, ascension, and glorification.

Preached unto the Gentiles - This was one grand part of the mystery
which had been hidden in God, that the Gentiles should be made fellow
heirs with the Jews, and be admitted into the kingdom of God. To the
Gentiles, therefore, he was proclaimed as having pulled down the middle
wall of partition between them and the Jews; that, through him, God had
granted unto them repentance unto life; and that they also might have
redemption in his blood, the forgiveness of sins.

Believed on in the world - Was received by mankind as the promised
Messiah, the Anointed of God, and the only Savior of fallen man. This is
a most striking part of the mystery of godliness, that one who was
crucified as a malefactor, and whose kingdom is not of this world, and
whose doctrines are opposed to all the sinful propensities of the human
heart, should, wherever his Gospel is preached, be acknowledged as the
only Savior of sinners, and the Judge of quick and dead! But some would
restrict the meaning to the Jews, whose economy is often denominated
עולם הזה olam hazzeh, this world, and which words both our Lord and the
apostles often use in the same sense. Notwithstanding their prejudices,
many even of the Jews believed on him; and a great company of the
priests themselves, who were his crucifiers, became obedient to the
faith. [Act 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007.md). This was an
additional proof of Christ's innocence.

Received up into glory - Even that human nature which he took of the
Virgin Mary was raised, not only from the grave, but taken up into
glory, and this in the most visible and palpable manner. This is a part
of the mystery of godliness which, while we have every reasonable
evidence to believe, we have not powers to comprehend. His reception
into glory is of the utmost consequence to the Christian faith; as, in
consequence, Jesus Christ in his human nature ever appears before the
throne as our sacrifice and as our Mediator.

1\. The directions given in this chapter concerning bishops and deacons
should be carefully weighed by every branch of the Christian Church. Not
only the offices which are of Divine appointment, such as bishop,
presbyter, and deacon, should be most religiously preserved in the
Church; but, that they may have their full effect, the persons
exercising them should be such as the apostle prescribes. Religion will
surely suffer, when religious order is either contemned or neglected;
and even the words of God will be treated with contempt, if ministered
by unholy persons. Let order, therefore, be duly observed; and let those
who fill these orders be not only wholly irreprehensible in their
conduct, but also able ministers of the new covenant. A wicked man can
neither have, nor communicate, authority to dispense heavenly mysteries;
and a fool, or a blockhead, can never teach others the way of salvation.
The highest abilities are not too great for a preacher of the Gospel;
nor is it possible that he can have too much human learning. But all is
nothing unless he can bring the grace and Spirit of God into all his
ministrations; and these will never accompany him unless he live in the
spirit of prayer and humility, fearing and loving God, and hating
covetousness.

2\. It is well known that almost every Church supposes itself to be The
true Church; and some consider themselves the only Church, and deny
salvation to all who are not of their communion. To such a Church the
two last verses in this chapter have been confidently self-applied, as
being the pillar and ground of the truth - the possessor and dispenser
of all the mysteries of God. But, supposing that the words in [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015.md) are spoken of the Church, it is
the Christian Church, as defined under article the third above, that
must be meant; and we may see from this the vanity of applying the words
to any particular Church, as if it had all the truth without error, and
none else could pretend either to truth or ecclesiastical authority. The
Christian Church is a widely different thing; it is the whole system of
Christianity as laid down in the New Testament; it is built on the great
foundation of prophets and apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone. It is composed of all who hold the doctrines of
Christianity; who acknowledge Jesus as their Teacher, Redeemer, and only
Advocate; of all who love God with all their heart, soul, mind, and
strength, and their neighbor as themselves; or who are labouring after
this conformity to the mind and command of their Creator. It is not
known by any particular name; it is not distinguished by any particular
form in its mode of worship; it is not exclusively here or there. It is
the house of God - it is where God's Spirit dwells, where his precepts
are obeyed, and where pure, unadulterated love to God and man prevails.
It is not in the creed or religious confessions of any denomination of
Christians; for, as all who hold the truth and live a holy life,
acknowledging Jesus alone as the head of the Church and Savior of the
world, are members of his mystical body; (and such may be found in all
sects and parties); so the Church of Christ may be said to be
everywhere, and to be confined nowhere; i.e. in whatever place
Christianity is credited and acknowledged. The wicked of all sorts, no
matter what their profession may be, and all persecutors of religious
people, who differ from them, are without the pale of this Church.
Essentially must their spirit and conduct be changed, before the living
Head of this spiritual building can acknowledge them as members of the
heavenly family.

This text, therefore, will never apply to the Romish Church, till that
Church be, both in doctrine and discipline, what the Christian Church
should be. When it is the established religion of any country it gives
no toleration to those who differ from it; and in Protestant countries
its cry for toleration and secular authority is loud and long. I wish
its partisans the full and free exercise of their religion, even to its
superstitions and nonsense; but how can they expect toleration who give
none? The Protestant Church tolerates it fully; it persecutes the
Protestants to bonds and death when it has power; which then is the true
Church of Christ?

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 4](ti1004.md)

</div>
