<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1003)  [Next](ti1005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 4:0</span></span>

Apostasy from the true faith predicted, and in what that apostasy should
consist, [Ti1 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md). Exhortations to
Timothy to teach the truth, [Ti1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006.md).
To avoid old wives' fables; to exercise himself to godliness, [Ti1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md), [Ti1
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md). To labor, command, and teach,
[Ti1 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#009.md), [Ti1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010.md), [Ti1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#011.md). To act so that none might
despise his youth, [Ti1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md). To give
attendance to reading and preaching, [Ti1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013.md), [Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md). To give up himself wholly to the
Divine work, [Ti1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md). And so doing
he should both save himself and them that heard him, [Ti1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016.md).

[1 Timothy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 4:1</span></span>

Now the Spirit speaketh expressly - Ῥητως· Manifestly, openly. It is
very likely that the apostle refers here to a prophecy then furnished by
the Holy Ghost, and probably immediately after he had written the words
in the preceding verses; and as this prophecy contains things nowhere
else spoken of in the sacred writings, and of the utmost moment to the
Christian Church, we cannot hear or read them with too much reverence or
respect.

In the latter times - This does not necessarily imply the last ages of
the world, but any times consequent to those in which the Church then
lived.

Depart from the faith - Αποστησονται - της πιστεως· They will apostatize
from the faith, i.e. from Christianity; renouncing the whole system in
effect, by bringing in doctrines which render its essential truths null
and void, or denying and renouncing such doctrines as are essential to
Christianity as a system of salvation. A man may hold all the truths of
Christianity, and yet render them of none effect by holding other
doctrines which counteract their influence; or he may apostatize by
denying some essential doctrine, though he bring in nothing heterodox.

Giving heed to seducing spirits - Πνευμασι πλανοις· Many MSS. and the
chief of the fathers have πνευμασι πλανης· spirits of deceit; which is
much more emphatic than the common reading. Deception has her spirits,
emissaries of every kind, which she employs to darken the hearts and
destroy the souls of men. Pretenders to inspiration, and false teachers
of every kind, belong to this class.

And doctrines of devils - Δαιμονιων· Demons; either meaning fallen
spirits, or dead men, spectres, etc., or doctrines inspired by Satan
relative to these, by which he secures his own interest, and provides
for his own worship.

[1 Timothy 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 4:2</span></span>

Speaking lies in hypocrisy - Persons pretending, not only to Divine
inspiration, but also to extraordinary degrees of holiness, self-denial,
mortification, etc., in order to accredit the lies and false doctrines
which they taught. Multitudes of lies were framed concerning miracles
wrought by the relics of departed saints, as they were termed. For, even
in this country, Thomas a Becket was, deemed a saint, his relics wrought
numerous miracles; and his tomb was frequented by multitudes of
pilgrims! However, as he works none now, we may rest assured that he
never did work any. In 1305, King Edward I. was prevailed on by his
clergy to write to Pope Clement V. to canonize Thomas de Cantelupo,
bishop of Hereford, because a multitude of miracles had been wrought by
his influence; In tantum, says the king, quod ipsius meritis et
intercessionibus gloriosis, lumen caecis, surdis auditus, verbum mutis,
et gressus claudis, et alia pleraque beneficia ipsius patrocinium
implorantibus, caelesti dextra conferuntur. "Insomuch that, by his
glorious merits and intercessions, the blind receive their sight, the
deaf hear, the dumb speak, and the lame walk; and many other benefits
are conferred by the right hand of the Divine Being on those who implore
his patronage." And therefore he prays that this dead bishop may be
added to the calendar, "that he and his kingdom may enjoy his suffrages
and merit his patronage in heaven, who had the benefit of his
conversation on earth." Nos attendentes, per Dei gratiam, fideles in
Christo, nosque praecipue, et populum regni nostri, ejus posse
suffragiis adjuvari, ut, quem familiarem habuimus in terris, mereamur
habere patronum in caelis. Foedera, vol. i., p. 976. Edit. 1816.

Having their conscience seared with a hot iron - They bear the marks of
their hypocrisy as evidently and as indelibly in their conscience in the
sight of God, as those who have been cauterized for their crimes do in
their bodies in the sight of men. It was customary in ancient times to
mark those with a hot iron who had been guilty of great crimes, such as
sacrilege, etc. And the heathens supposed that even in the other world
they bear such marks; and by these the infernal judges knew the quantum
of their vices, and appointed the degrees of their punishment. There is
a saying much like that of the apostle in the invective of Claudian
against Rufinus, whom he supposes to be thus addressed by Rhadamanthus,
one of the infernal judges: -

Quid demens manifesta negas? En pectus InUstae

Deformant Maculae! vitiisque inolevit imago,

Nec sese commissa tegunt.

"Thou fool, why dost thou deny what is so manifest? Behold the
deep-burnt marks deform thy conscience; the appearance of them has grown
up with thy vices; neither can the crimes which thou hast committed hide
themselves."

[1 Timothy 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 4:3</span></span>

Forbidding to marry - These hypocritical priests pretending that a
single life was much more favorable to devotion, and to the perfection
of the Christian life. This sentiment was held by the Essenes, a
religious sect among the Jews; and we know that it is a favourite
opinion among the Romanists, who oblige all their clergy to live a
single life by a vow of continency.

To abstain from meats - Both among the heathens, Jews, and Romanists,
certain meats were prohibited; Some always, others at particular times.
This the apostle informs us was directly contrary to the original design
of God; and says that those who know the truth, know this.

[1 Timothy 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 4:4</span></span>

For every creature of God is good - That is: Every creature which God
has made for man's nourishment is good for that purpose, and to be
thankfully received whenever necessary for the support of human life;
and nothing of that sort is at any time to be refused, ουδεν αποβλητον,
rejected or despised. We find a saying very similar to this in Lucian's
Timon: Ουτοι αποβλητα εισι δωρα τα παρα Διος. The gifts which are from
Jove ought not to be Despised. This appears to have been a proverbial
saying among the heathens.

[1 Timothy 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 4:5</span></span>

For it is sanctified by the word of God - Δια λογου Θεου· By the command
of God; probably referring to [Gen
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029.md) : And God said, I have given you
every herb - and every tree - to you it shall be for meat; and to [Gen
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003.md) : Every moving thing that liveth
shall be meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all
things; i.e. I have given you every animal that is proper for food, as I
have given you every herb and fruit proper for nourishment. Therefore,
all this was sanctified, set apart, and appropriated to this use by this
command. And when man is about to use it, he is to sanctify or set it
apart to that use by prayer to God,

1\. That it may answer the end to us for which it was designed;

2\. That we may use it with gratitude and moderation;

3\. That all the strength derived from it may be devoted to God, in
filling up the duties of those situations in which his providence has
placed us.

Those who thank not God for their food, and pray not for his blessing in
the use of it, are unworthy even of a morsel of bread, and of the breath
they breathe. Bishop Newton's opinion of this prophecy I have reserved
to the end of this chapter.

[1 Timothy 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 4:6</span></span>

If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things - Show the
Church that, even now, there is danger of this apostasy; put them on
their guard against it; for the forewarned are half armed. Schoettgen
supposes from this verse that what is spoken above refers to the Jews
alone; and that there is no reference here to a Church which in after
ages might apostatize from, or corrupt, the true doctrine of our Lord
and Savior. Bishop Newton and others are of a different opinion. See at
the end of this chapter.

Nourished up in the words of faith - By acting as I command thee, thou
wilt show that thou art a good minister of Jesus Christ, and that thou
hast been nourished from thy youth upon the doctrines of faith. The
apostle seems to allude here to Timothy's Christian education. See the
preface to this epistle.

Whereunto thou hast attained - Ἡ παρηκολουθηκας· Which thou hast
thoroughly understood. For the meaning of this word, see the note on
[Luk 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#003.md).

[1 Timothy 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 4:7</span></span>

But refuse profane and old wives' fables - This seems to refer
particularly to the Jews, whose Talmudical writings are stuffed with the
most ridiculous and profane fables that ever disgraced the human
intellect. It may with equal propriety be applied to the legends of the
Romish Church. Let any man read the Aurea Legenda, and he will find of
profane and old wives' fables what may stand, with considerable
propriety, column for column with the Talmud. See Joseline's Life of St.
Patrick for miracles, without rhyme or reason, abundantly more numerous
and more stupendous than all the necessary ones wrought by Jesus Christ
and his apostles. This is enough to persuade a man that the Spirit of
God had these very corruptions and this corrupt Church particularly in
view.

Exercise thyself rather unto godliness - To understand this expression
it is necessary to know that the apostle alludes here to the gymnastic
exercises among the Greeks, which were intended as a preparation for,
their contests at the public games. They did this in order to obtain a
corruptible or fading crown, i. e, a chaplet of leaves, which was the
reward of those who conquered in those games; Timothy was to exercise
himself unto godliness, that he might be prepared for the kingdom of
heaven, and there receive a crown that fadeth not away. See the notes on
[Co1 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024.md), etc.

[1 Timothy 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 4:8</span></span>

For bodily exercise profiteth little - Προς ολιγον εστιν ωφελιμος. Those
gymnastic exercises, so highly esteemed among the Greeks, are but little
worth; they are but of short duration; they refer only to this life, and
to the applause of men: but godliness has the promise of this life, and
the life to come; it is profitable for all things; and for both time and
eternity.

But godliness is profitable unto all things - By godliness we are to
understand every thing that the Christian religion either promises or
prescribes: the life of God in the soul of man; and the glory of God as
the object and end of that life. To receive the first, a man must
renounce his sins, deny himself, take up his cross, and follow his Lord
through evil and through good report. To obtain the latter, a man must
labor to enter into that rest which remains for the people of God.

Having promise, of the life that now is - The man that fears, loves, and
serves God, has God's blessing all through life. His religion saves him
from all those excesses, both in action and passion, which sap the
foundations of life, and render existence itself often a burden. The
peace and love of God in the heart produces a serenity and calm which
cause the lamp of life to burn clear, strong, and permanent. Evil and
disorderly passions obscure and stifle the vital spark. Every truly
religious man extracts the uttermost good out of life itself, and
through the Divine blessing gets the uttermost good that is in life;
and, what is better than all, acquires a full preparation here below for
an eternal life of glory above. Thus godliness has the promise of, and
secures the blessings of, both worlds.

[1 Timothy 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 4:9</span></span>

This is a faithful saying - The truth of this doctrine none need doubt;
and every man has it in his power to put this to the proof. See on [Ti1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015) (note.md).

[1 Timothy 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 4:10</span></span>

For therefore we both labor - This verse was necessary to explain what
he had before said; and here he shows that his meaning was not that the
followers of God should enjoy worldly prosperity and exemption from
natural evils; for, said he, it is because we exercise ourselves to
godliness that we have both labor and reproach, and we have these
because we trust In the living God: but still we have mental happiness,
and all that is necessary for our passage through life; for in the midst
of persecutions and afflictions we have the peace of God that passeth
knowledge, and have all our crosses and sufferings so sanctified to us
that we consider them in the number of our blessings.

Who is the Savior of all men - Who has provided salvation for the whole
human race, and has freely offered it to them in his word and by his
Spirit.

Specially of those that believe - What God intends for All, he actually
gives to them that believe in Christ, who died for the sins of the
world, and tasted death for every man. As all have been purchased by his
blood so all may believe; and consequently all may be saved. Those that
perish, perish through their own fault.

[1 Timothy 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 4:11</span></span>

These things command and teach - Let it be the sum and substance of thy
preaching, that true religion is profitable for both worlds; that vice
destroys both body and soul; that Christ tasted death for every man; and
that he saves to the uttermost all them that believe in his name.

[1 Timothy 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 4:12</span></span>

Let no man despise thy youth - Act with all the gravity and decorum
which become thy situation in the Church. As thou art in the place of an
elder, act as an elder. Boyish playfulness ill becomes a minister of the
Gospel, whatever his age may be. Concerning Timothy's age see the
conclusion of the preface to this epistle.

Be thou an example of the believers - It is natural for the flock to
follow the shepherd; if he go wrong, they will go wrong also.

"Himself a wanderer from the narrow way,

His silly sheep, no wonder if they stray."

Though, according to the just judgement of God, they who die in their
sins have their blood on their own head; yet, if they have either gone
into sin or continued in it through the watchman's fault, their blood
will God require at his hand. How many have endeavored to excuse their
transgressions by alleging, in vindication of their conduct, "Our
minister does so, and he is more wise and learned than we." What an
awful account must such have to give to the Head of the Church when he
appears!

In word - Εν λογῳ· In doctrine; teach nothing but the truth of God,
because nothing but that will save souls.

In conversation - Εν αναστροφῃ· In the whole of thy conduct in every
department which thou fillest in all thy domestic as well as public
relations, behave thyself well.

In charity - Εν αγαπῃ· In love to God and man; show that this is the
principle and motive of all thy conduct.

In spirit - Εν πνευματι· In the manner and disposition in which thou
dost all things. How often is a holy or charitable work done in an
unholy, uncharitable, and peevish spirit! To the doer, such work is
unfruitful.

These words are wanting in ACDFG, and several others; both the Syriac,
Erpen's Arabic, Ethiopic, Armenian, Vulgate, and Itala, and many of the
fathers. Griesbach leaves them out of the text. They have in all
probability been added by a later hand.

In faith - Εν πιστει· This word πιστις is probably taken here for
fidelity, a sense which it often bears in the New Testament. It cannot
mean doctrine, for that has been referred to before. Be faithful to thy
trust, to thy flock, to thy domestics, to the public, to thy God.
Fidelity consists in honestly keeping, preserving, and delivering up
when required, whatever is intrusted to our care; as also in improving
whatever is delivered in trust for that purpose. Lose nothing that God
gives, and improve every gift that he bestows.

In purity - Εν ἁγνεια· Chastity of body and mind; a direction peculiarly
necessary for a young minister, who has more temptations to break its
rules than perhaps any other person. "Converse sparingly with women, and
especially with young women," was the advice of a very holy and
experienced minister of Christ.

[1 Timothy 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 4:13</span></span>

Give attendance to reading - Timothy could easily comprehend the
apostle's meaning; but at present this is not so easy. What books does
the apostle mean? The books of the Old Testament were probably what he
intended; these testified of Jesus, and by these he could either
convince or confound the Jews. But, whether was the reading of these to
be public or private? Probably both. It was customary to read the law
and the prophets in the synagogue, and doubtless in the assemblies of
the Christians; after which there was generally an exhortation founded
upon the subject of the prophecy. Hence the apostle says: Give
attendance to reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine. Timothy was
therefore to be diligent in reading the sacred writings at home, that he
might be the better qualified to read and expound them in the public
assemblies to the Christians, and to others who came to these public
meetings.

As to other books, there were not many at that time that could be of
much use to a Christian minister. In those days the great business of
the preacher was to bring forward the grand facts of Christianity, to
prove these, and to show that all had happened according to the
prediction of the prophets; and from these to show the work of God in
the heart, and the evidence of that work in a holy life.

At present the truth of God is not only to be proclaimed, but defended;
and many customs or manners, and forms of speech, which are to us
obsolete, must be explained from the writings of the ancients, and
particularly from the works of those who lived about the same times, or
nearest to them, and in the same or contiguous countries. This will
require the knowledge of those languages in which those works have been
composed, the chief of which are Hebrew and Greek, the languages in
which the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments have been
originally written.

Latin is certainly of the next consequence; a language in which some of
the most early comments have been written; and it is worth the trouble
of being learned, were it only for the sake of the works of St. Jerome,
who translated and wrote a commentary on the whole of the Scriptures;
though in many respects it is both erroneous and superficial.

Arabic and Syriac may be added with great advantage: the latter being in
effect the language in which Christ and his apostles spoke and preached
in Judea; and the former being radically the same with the Hebrew, and
preserving many of the roots of that language, the derivatives of which
often occur in the Hebrew Bible, but the roots never.

The works of various scholars prove of how much consequence even the
writings of heathen authors, chiefly those of Greece and Italy, are to
the illustration of the sacred writings. And he who is best acquainted
with the sacred records will avail himself of such helps, with gratitude
both to God and man. Though so many languages and so much reading are
not absolutely necessary to form a minister of the Gospel, (for there
are many eminent ministers who have not such advantages), yet they are
helps of the first magnitude to those who have them and know how to use
them.

[1 Timothy 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 4:14</span></span>

Neglect not the gift that is in thee - The word χαρισμα here must refer
to the gifts and graces of the Divine Spirit, which Timothy received
when set apart to the work of an evangelist by the imposition of St.
Paul's hands, [Ti2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006.md), and by that of
the presbytery or eldership; for it most evidently appears, from this
verse and that above quoted, that he received this double imposition,
not probably at different times, but on one and the same occasion. These
very gifts and graces might be improved; and we have reason to believe,
if not improved, would be withdrawn by the great Head of the Church.

Given thee by prophecy - It has already been conjectured (see the
preface, and the note on [Ti1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018).md)
that there had been some remarkable prediction relative to the future
destiny and usefulness of Timothy. And probably it was in consequence of
this that he was set apart to the office of evangelist and bishop in the
Church at Ephesus. When apostles laid their hands on men, they
ordinarily received the Holy Spirit with this imposition. This may be
what the apostle calls to the remembrance of Timothy, and tells him not
to neglect what he had received, nor the purpose for which he had
received it.

[1 Timothy 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 4:15</span></span>

Meditate upon these things - Ταυτα μελετα· Revolve them frequently in
thy mind; consider deeply their nature and importance; get them deeply
fastened in thy heart, and let all thy conduct flow from this inward
feeling and conviction. Let the nature, reasons, and motives of thy
ministry, be ever in the view of thy heart and conscience.

Give thyself wholly to them - Εν τουτοις ισθι· Be thou in these things.
Horace has a similar expression: Omnis in hoc sum. "I am absorbed in
this." Occupy thyself wholly with them; make them not only thy chief but
thy sole concern. Thou art called to save thy own soul, and the souls of
them that hear thee; and God has given thee the Divine gifts for this
and no other purpose. To this let all thy reading and study be directed;
this is thy great business, and thou must perform it as the servant and
steward of the Lord. Bengel has a good saying on this verse, which I
will quote: In his qui est, minus erit in sodalitatibus mundanis, in
studiis alienis, in colligendis libris, conchis, nummis, quibus multi
pastores notabilem aetatis partem insistentes conterunt; "He who is
wholly in these things will be little in worldly company, in foreign
studies, in collecting books, shells, and coins, in which many ministers
consume a principal part of their life." Such persons are worthy of the
deepest reprehension, unless all these studies, collections, etc., be
formed with the express view, of illustrating the sacred records; and to
such awful drudgery few Christian ministers are called. Many, when they
have made such collections, seem to know nothing of their use; they only
see them and show them, but can never bring them to their assistance in
the work of the ministry. These should be prayed for and pitied.

That thy profiting may appear to all - By being made a universal
blessing; convincing and converting sinners; and building up the Church
of God on its most holy faith.

[1 Timothy 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 4:16</span></span>

Take heed unto thyself - See that the life of God remains and the work
of God prospers in thine own soul. Take heed to thy doctrine, that the
matter be pure and orthodox; that thou teach nothing for truth but what
God has revealed.

Continue in them - i.e., In taking heed to thyself and to thy doctrine;
for this must be thy continual study. Without this, the Divine influence
shall recede from thy heart, and the Divine gift from thy intellect;
and, like Samson shorn of his strength, thou wilt soon become as another
man, as any common man; thy power will depart from thee, and thou shalt
be no longer able to persuade; the Unction shall depart from thee, and,
destitute of spiritual feeling thyself, thou shalt not be able to cause
others to feel. Take the apostle's advice, and thou shalt save thy own
soul, and the souls of them that hear thee.

In the course of the preceding notes I have referred to Bishop Newton's
opinion and application of the prophecy contained in the first five
verses. Not being fully persuaded in my own, mind to what Church this,
and the prophecy in the Epistle to the Thessalonians, should be applied,
I produce an accredited author, who, for his Dissertations on the
Prophecies, has a high and, honored name in the Church.

"I. The first thing to be considered is, the apostasy here predicted.
'Some shall depart, or rather apostatize, from the faith.' An apostasy
from the faith may be either total or partial; either when we renounce
the whole, or when we deny some principal and essential article of it.
It is not every error, or every heresy, that is apostasy from the faith.
It is a revolt in a principal and essential article, when we worship God
by any image or representation, or when we worship other beings besides
God, and pray unto other mediators besides the one Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus. This is the very essence of Christian
worship, to worship the one true God, through the one true Christ; and
to worship any other god, or any other mediator, is apostasy and
rebellion against God and against Christ. Such is the nature of apostasy
from the faith; and it is implied that this apostasy shall be general,
and affect great numbers. For, though it be said only some shall
apostatize, yet by some, here, many are understood. The original word
frequently signifies a multitude and there are abundant instances in
Scripture where it is used in that sense, as the reader may perceive
from [Joh 6:64-66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#064.md); [Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017.md); [Co1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005.md), [Co1
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006.md). This apostasy may be general and
extensive, and include many but not all.

"II. It is more particularly shown wherein the apostasy should consist,
in the following words: Giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of
devils; or rather: \`Giving heed to erroneous spirits and doctrines
concerning demons.' Spirits seem to be much the same in sense as
doctrines, the latter word may be considered as explanatory of the
former; and error sometimes signifying idolatry, erroneous doctrines may
comprehend idolatrous as well as false doctrines. But it is still
farther added, for explanation, that these doctrines should be doctrines
of devils or of demons, where the genitive case is not to be taken
actively, as if demons were the authors of these doctrines, but
passively, as if demons were the subject of these doctrines. In [Jer
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#008.md); [Act
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#012.md); [Heb
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#002.md), the genitive case is used in this
manner; and, by the same construction, doctrines of demons are doctrines
about or concerning demons. This is, therefore, a prophecy that the
idolatrous theology of demons, professed by the Gentiles ,should be
revived among Christians. Demons, according to the theology of the
Gentiles, were middle powers between the gods and mortal men; and were
regarded as mediators and agents between the gods and men. Of these
demons there were accounted two kinds: one kind were the souls of men
deified or canonized after death; the other kind were such as had never
been the souls of men, nor ever dwelt in mortal bodies. These latter
demons may be paralleled with angels, as the former may with canonized
saints; and as we Christians believe there are good and evil angels, so
did the Gentiles that there were good and evil demons. It appears then
as if the doctrine of demons, which prevailed so long in the heathen
world, was to be revived and established in the Christian Church. And is
not the worship of saints and angels now, in all respects, the same that
the worship of demons was in former times? The name only is different,
the thing is essentially the same. The heathens looked upon their demons
as mediators and intercessors between God and men; and are not the
saints and angels regarded in the same light by many professed
Christians? The promoters of this worship were sensible that it was the
same, and that the one succeeded the other; and as the worship is the
same, so likewise it is performed with the same ceremonies. Nay, the
very same temples, the very same images, the very same altars, which
once were consecrated to Jupiter and the other demons, are now
reconsecrated to the Virgin Mary and other saints. The very same titles
and inscriptions are ascribed to both; the very same prodigies and
miracles are related of these as of those. In short, the whole almost of
paganism is converted and applied to popery, the one is manifestly
formed upon the same plan and principles as the other.

"III. Such an apostasy as this - of reviving the doctrines of demons,
and worshipping the dead - was not likely to take place immediately, it
should prevail and prosper in the latter days. The phrase of the latter
times or days, or the last times or days, signifies any time yet to
come; but denotes more particularly the times of Christianity. The times
of Christianity may properly be called the latter times or days, or the
last times or days, because it is the last of all God's revelations to
mankind. [Heb 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md), [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002.md); [Pe1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020.md).

"IV. Another remarkable peculiarity of this prophecy is, the solemn and
emphatic manner in which it is delivered: The Spirit speaketh expressly.
By the Spirit is meant the Holy Spirit of God, which inspired the
prophets and apostles. The Spirit speaking expressly, may signify his
speaking precisely and certainly, not obscurely and involvedly, as he is
wont to speak in the prophets; or it may be said, The Spirit speaketh
expressly, when he speaks in express words in some place or other of
Divine writ; and the Spirit hath spoken the same thing in express words
before in the prophecy of Daniel. Daniel has foretold, in express words,
the worship of new demons or demi-gods; [Dan
11:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038.md). The mauzzim of Daniel are the
same as the demons of St. Paul; gods protectors, or saints protectors,
defenders and guardians of mankind. This, therefore, is a prophecy, not
merely dictated by private suggestion and inspiration, but taken out of
the written word. It is a prophecy not only of St. Paul's, but of
Daniel's too; or rather of Daniel, confirmed and approved by St. Paul.

"V. The apostle proceeds, [Ti1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md), to
describe by what means and by what persons this apostasy should be
propagated and established in the world. Speaking lies in hypocrisy,
etc.; or rather, through the hypocricy of liars, having their
conscience, etc.; for the preposition rendered in, frequently signifies
through or by. Liars too, or speaking lies, cannot, possibly be joined
with the original word rendered some, and that rendered giving heed,
because they are in the nominative case, and this is in the genitive.
Neither can it well be joined in the construction with the word rendered
devils, or demons; for how can demons, or devils, be said to speak lies
in hypocrisy, and to have their conscience seared, etc.? It is plain,
then, that the great apostasy of the latter times was to prevail,
through the hypocrisy of liars, etc. And has not the great idolatry of
Christians, and the worship of the dead particularly, been diffused and
advanced in the world by such instruments and agents? by fabulous books,
forged under the names of the apostles and saints; by fabulous legends
of their lives; by fabulous miracles, ascribed to their relics; by
fabulous dreams and revelations; and even by fabulous saints, who never
existed but in imagination.

"VI. [Ti1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003.md). Forbidding to marry,
etc. - This is a farther character of the promoters of this apostasy.
The same hypocritical liars who should promote the worship of demons
should also prohibit lawful marriage. The monks were the first who
brought a single life into repute; they were the first also who revived
and promoted the worship of demons. One of the primary and most
essential laws and constitutions of all monks was the profession of a
single life, and it is equally clear that the monks had the principal
share in promoting the worship of the dead. The monks then were the
principal promoters of the worship of the dead in former times. And who
are the great patrons and advocates of the same worship now? Are not
their legitimate successors and descendants, the monks and priests and
bishops of the Church of Rome? And do not they also profess and
recommend a single life, as well as the worship of saints and angels?
Thus have the worship of demons, and the prohibition of marriage,
constantly gone hand in hand together; and as they who maintain one
maintain the other, so it is no less remarkable that they who disclaim
the one, disclaim the other.

"VII. The last mark and character of these men is: Commanding to abstain
from meats, etc. The same lying hypocrites who should promote the
worship of demons, should not only prohibit lawful marriage, but
likewise impose unnecessary abstinence from meats; and these too, as
indeed it is fit they should, usually go together as constituent parts
of the same hypocrisy. It is as much the law of monks to abstain from
meats, as from marriage. Some never eat any flesh; others only certain
kinds, on certain days. Frequent fasts are the rule and boast of their
orders. So lived the monks of the ancient Church; so live, with less
strictness perhaps, but with greater ostentation, the monks and friars
of the Church of Rome; and these have been the principal propagators and
defenders of the worship of the dead, both in former and in latter
times. The worship of the dead is indeed so monstrously absurd as well
as impious, that there was hardly any probability of its ever prevailing
in the world but by hypocrisy and lies. But that these particular sorts
of hypocrisy - celibacy, under pretense of chastity; and abstinence,
under pretense of devotion - should be employed for this purpose, the
Spirit of God alone could foresee and foretell. There is no necessary
connection between the worship of the dead, and forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats; and yet it is certain that the great
advocates for this worship have, by their pretended purity and
mortification, procured the greater reverence to their persons, and the
readier reception to their doctrines. But this idle, popish, monkish
abstinence is as unworthy of a Christian as it is unnatural to a man; it
is preventing the purpose of nature, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God hath created to be received with thanksgiving by
believers, and them who know the truth." See Bishop Newton's
Dissertations on the Prophecies; and Dr. Dodd's notes.

Which mode of interpretation is best, I shall not attempt to say: to
determine the meaning of prophecies is a difficult task; and, in a case
of this kind, I rather choose to trust to the judgment of others than to
my own. It is to be deplored that all the preceding particulars apply
but too well to the corruptions in the Romish Church, therefore to it
they appear peculiarly applicable. But whether God had this Church alone
in view, I dare not affirm.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 5](ti1005.md)

</div>
