<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2.md)  
  [Previous](ti2002)  [Next](ti2004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001.md)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 3:0</span></span>

Dangerous times in the latter days, from the apostasy and wickedness of
men, of whom an affecting description is given, [Ti2
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001.md). It shall happen to them as to
Jannes and Jambres, who withstood Moses, [Ti2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md), [Ti2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009.md). The apostle speaks of his
persecutions and sufferings, and shows that all those who will live a
godly life must suffer persecution, [Ti2
3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010.md), because evil men and seducers
will wax worse and worse, [Ti2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013.md).
Timothy is exhorted to continue in the truths he had received, having
known the Scriptures from a child, [Ti2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014.md), [Ti2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015.md). All Scripture is given by Divine
inspiration, [Ti2 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016.md), [Ti2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017.md).

[2 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 3:1</span></span>

In the last days - This often means the days of the Messiah, and is
sometimes extended in its signification to the destruction of Jerusalem,
as this was properly the last days of the Jewish state. But the phrase
may mean any future time, whether near or distant.

[2 Timothy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti2 3:2</span></span>

For men shall be - The description in this and the following verses the
Papists apply to the Protestants; the Protestants in their turn apply it
to the Papists; Schoettgen to the Jews; and others to heretics in
general. There have been both teachers and people in every age of the
Church, and in every age of the world, to whom these words may be most
legitimately applied. Both Catholics and Protestants have been lovers of
their own selves, etc.; but it is probable that the apostle had some
particular age in view, in which there should appear some very essential
corruption of Christianity.

Lovers of their own selves - Φιλαυτοι· Selfish, studious of their own
interest, and regardless of the welfare of all mankind.

Covetous - Φιλαργυροι· Lovers of money, because of the influence which
riches can procure.

Boasters - Αλαζονες· Vain glorious: self-assuming; valuing themselves
beyond all others.

Proud - Ὑπερηφανοι· Airy, light, trifling persons; those who love to
make a show - who are all outside; from ὑπερ, above, and φαινω, to show.

Blasphemers - Βλασφημοι· Those who speak impiously of God and sacred
things, and injuriously of men.

Disobedient to parents - Γονευσιν απειθεις· Headstrong children, whom
their parents cannot persuade.

Unthankful - Αχαριστοι· Persons without grace, or gracefulness; who
think they have a right to the services of all men, yet feel no
obligation, and consequently no gratitude.

Unholy - Ανοσιοι· Without piety; having no heart reverence for God.

[2 Timothy 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti2 3:3</span></span>

Without natural affection - Αστοργοι· Without that affection which
parents bear to their young, and which the young bear to their parents.
An affection which is common to every class of animals; consequently,
men without it are worse than brutes.

Truce-breakers - Ασπονδοι· From α, negative, and σπονδη, a libation,
because in making treaties libations both of blood and wine were poured
out. The word means those who are bound by no promise, held by no
engagement, obliged by no oath; persons who readily promise any thing,
because they never intend to perform.

False accusers - Διαβολοι· Devils; but properly enough rendered false
accusers, for this is a principal work of the devil. Slanderers;
striving ever to ruin the characters of others.

Incontinent - Ακρατεις· From α, negative, and κρατος, power. Those who,
having sinned away their power of self-government, want strength to
govern their appetites; especially those who are slaves to uncleanness.

Fierce - Ανημεροι· From α, negative, and ἡμερος, mild or gentle. Wild,
impetuous, whatever is contrary to pliability and gentleness.

Despisers of those that are good - Αφιλαγαθοι· Not lovers of good men.
Here is a remarkable advantage of the Greek over the English tongue, one
word of the former expressing five or six of the latter. Those who do
not love the good must be radically bad themselves.

[2 Timothy 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti2 3:4</span></span>

Traitors - Προδοται· From προ, before, and διδωμι, to deliver up. Those
who deliver up to an enemy the person who has put his life in their
hands; such as the Scots of 1648, who delivered up into the hands of his
enemies their unfortunate countryman and king, Charles the First; a
stain which no lapse of ages can wipe out.

Heady - Προπετεις· From προ, forwards, and πιπτω, to fall; headstrong,
precipitate, rash, inconsiderate.

High-minded - Τετυφωμενοι· From τυφος, smoke; the frivolously aspiring;
those who are full of themselves, and empty of all good.

Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God - This is nervously and
beautifully expressed in the Greek, φιληδονοι μαλλον η φιλοθεοι lovers
of pleasure rather than lovers of God; i.e. pleasure, sensual
gratification, is their god; and this they love and serve; God they do
not.

[2 Timothy 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti2 3:5</span></span>

Having a form of godliness - The original word μορφωσις signifies a
draught, sketch, or summary, and will apply well to those who have all
their religion in their creed, confession of faith, catechism, bodies of
divinity, etc., while destitute of the life of God in their souls; and
are not only destitute of this life, but deny that such life or power is
here to be experienced or known. They have religion in their creed, but
none in their hearts. And perhaps to their summary they add a decent
round of religious observances. From such turn away - not only do not
imitate them, but have no kind of fellowship with them; they are a
dangerous people, and but seldom suspected, because their outside is
fair.

[2 Timothy 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 3:6</span></span>

For of this sort are they - He here refers to false teachers and their
insinuating manners, practising upon weak women, who, seeing in them
such a semblance of piety, entertain them with great eagerness, and at
last become partakers with them in their impurities. Among the Jews
there are remarkable cases of this kind on record, and not a few of them
among the full fed monks of the Romish Church. But in what sect or party
have not such teachers been occasionally found? yet neither Judaism,
Protestantism, nor Roman Catholicism makes any provision for such men.

[2 Timothy 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti2 3:7</span></span>

Ever learning - From their false teachers, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, because that teaching never leads to the truth;
for, although there was a form of godliness, which gave them a sort of
authority to teach, yet, as they denied the power of godliness, they
never could bring their votaries to the knowledge of the saving power of
Christianity.

There are many professors of Christianity still who answer the above
description. They hear, repeatedly hear, it may be, good sermons; but,
as they seldom meditate on what they hear, they derive little profit
from the ordinances of God. They have no more grace now than they had
several years ago, though hearing all the while, and perhaps not
wickedly departing from the Lord. They do not meditate, they do not
think, they do not reduce what they hear to practice; therefore, even
under the preaching of an apostle, they could not become wise to
salvation.

[2 Timothy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti2 3:8</span></span>

Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses - This refers to the history
of the Egyptian magicians, given in Exodus 7 (see on [Exo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011) (note.md) and [Exo
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012) (note).md), and particularly the
concluding observations at the end of that chapter, (note) where several
things are said concerning these two men.

Men of corrupt minds - It appears as if the apostle were referring still
to some Judaizing teachers who were perverting the Church with their
doctrines, and loudly calling in question the authority and doctrine of
the apostle.

Reprobate concerning the faith - Αδοκιμοι· Undiscerning or untried; they
are base metal, unstamped; and should not pass current, because not
standard. This metaphor is frequent in the sacred writings.

[2 Timothy 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 3:9</span></span>

But they shall proceed no farther - Such teaching and teachers shall
never be able ultimately to prevail against the truth; for the
foundation of God standeth sure.

Their folly shall be manifest - As the Scriptures, which are the only
rule of morals and doctrine, shall ever be preserved; so, sooner or
later, all false doctrines shall be tried by them: and the folly of men,
setting up their wisdom against the wisdom of God, must become manifest
to all. False doctrine cannot prevail long where the sacred Scriptures
are read and studied. Error prevails only where the book of God is
withheld from the people. The religion that fears the Bible is not the
religion of God. Is Popery or Protestantism this religion?

[2 Timothy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 3:10</span></span>

Thou hast fully known my doctrine - And having long had the opportunity
of knowing me, the doctrine I preached, my conduct founded on these
doctrines, the object I have in view by my preaching, my fidelity to God
and to my trust, my long-suffering with those who walked disorderly, and
opposed themselves to the truth, and did what they could to lessen my
authority and render it suspected, my love to them and to the world in
general, and my patience in all my adversities; thou art capable of
judging between me and the false teachers, and canst easily discern the
difference between their doctrines, conduct, motives, temper, spirit,
etc., and mine.

[2 Timothy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti2 3:11</span></span>

Persecutions - which came unto me at Antioch - The Antioch mentioned
here was Antioch in Pisidia, to which place Paul and Barnabas came in
their first apostolic progress, and where Paul delivered that memorable
discourse which is preserved in the 13th chapter of Acts, Acts 13:16-43.
In this city, it is said, the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable
women, and the chief men of the city, and raised persecution against
Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their coasts; but they shook
of the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium, [Act
13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050.md), [Act
13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051.md). Here there was an assault made
both of the Gentiles and also of the Jews with their rulers, to treat
them despitefully, and to stone them, and they fled unto Lystra and
Derbe; and there came thither certain Jews, who persuaded the people,
and having stoned Paul, drew him out of the city, supposing he had been
dead. The historian informs us that his life was miraculously restored,
and that he departed thence, and came to Derbe, and afterwards returned
to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch, where they had lately been so
grievously persecuted. See [Act 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005.md),
[Act 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006.md), [Act
14:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019.md). These are the persecutions,
etc., to which the apostle alludes; and we find that he mentions them
here precisely in the same order in which, according to the relation of
St. Luke, they occurred. Now it is said here that Timothy fully knew all
these things; and we may naturally suppose they could not be unknown to
him, when it is evident he was either a native of, or resided in, those
parts; for when the apostle, sometime after the above, visited Derbe and
Lystra, behold, a certain disciple was there named Timotheus, well
reported of by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium; [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md), [Act
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#002.md). As these things happened in his
own neighborhood, Timothy must have known them; for a person who had
such a religious education as he had could not be unacquainted with
these persecutions, especially as we may believe that his mother and
grandmother had been converts to Christianity at that time. See several
useful remarks in Dr. Paley's Horae Paulinae, on these circumstances,
page 312.

[2 Timothy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti2 3:12</span></span>

All that will live godly - So opposite to the spirit and practice of the
world is the whole of Christianity, that he who gives himself entirely
up to God, making the Holy Scriptures the rule of his words and actions,
will be less or more reviled and persecuted. "If religion gives no
quarter to vice, the vicious will give no quarter to religion and its
professors."

[2 Timothy 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti2 3:13</span></span>

Evil men and seducers shall wax worse - They will yet get on for a
season, deceiving themselves and deceiving others; but, by and by, their
folly will become manifest to all, [Ti2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#009.md). The word γοητες, which we render
seducers, signifies jugglers, pretenders to magical arts; probably
persons dealing in false miracles, with whom the Church in all ages has
been not a little disgraced.

[2 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 3:14</span></span>

But continue thou - No man, however well instructed in the things of
God, or grounded in Divine grace, is out of the reach of temptation,
apostasy, and final ruin; hence the necessity of watching unto prayer,
depending upon God, continuing in the faith, and persevering unto the
end.

[2 Timothy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti2 3:15</span></span>

From a child thou hast known the Holy Scriptures - The early religious
education of Timothy has been already sufficiently noticed; see [Ti2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005.md), and the preface to the first
epistle. St. Paul introduces this circumstance again here for the
confirmation of Timothy's faith. He had learned the doctrines of
Christianity from a genuine apostle; and, as Christianity is founded on
the law and the prophets, Timothy was able to compare its doctrines with
all that had been typified and predicted, and consequently was assured
that the Christian religion was true.

Able to make thee wise unto salvation - The apostle is here evidently
speaking of the Jewish Scriptures; and he tells us that they are able to
make us wise unto salvation provided we have faith in Jesus Christ. This
is the simple use of the Old Testament. No soul of man can be made wise
unto salvation by it, but as he refers all to Christ Jesus. The Jews are
unsaved though they know these Scriptures, because they believe not in
Christ; for Christ is the end of the law for the justification of all
that believe.

[2 Timothy 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti2 3:16</span></span>

All Scripture is given by inspiration of God - This sentence is not well
translated; the original πασα γραφη θεοκνευστος ωφιλιμος προς
διδασκαλιαν, κ. τ. λ. should be rendered: Every writing Divinely
inspired is profitable for doctrine, etc. The particle και, and, is
omitted by almost all the versions and many of the fathers, and
certainly does not agree well with the text. The apostle is here, beyond
all controversy, speaking of the writings of the Old Testament, which,
because they came by Divine inspiration, he terms the Holy Scriptures,
[Ti2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015.md); and it is of them alone
that this passage is to be understood; and although all the New
Testament came by as direct an inspiration as the Old, yet, as it was
not collected at that time, not indeed complete, the apostle could have
no reference to it.

The doctrine of the inspiration of the sacred writings has been a
subject of much discussion, and even controversy, among Christians.
There are two principal opinions on the subject:

1\. That every thought and word were inspired by God, and that the
writer did nothing but merely write as the Spirit dictated.

2\. That God gave the whole matter, leaving the inspired writers to
their own language; and hence the great variety of style and different
modes of expression.

But as I have treated this subject at large in my Introduction to the
Four Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, I must refer the reader to that
work.

Is profitable for doctrine - To teach the will of God, and to point out
Jesus Christ till he should come.

For reproof - To convince men of the truth; and to confound those who
should deny it, particularly the Jews.

For correction - Προς επανορθωσιν· For restoring things to their proper
uses and places, correcting false notions and mistaken views.

Instruction in righteousness - Προς παιδειαν την εν δικαιοσυνῃ. For
communicating all initiatory religious knowledge; for schooling mankind.
All this is perfectly true of the Jewish Scriptures; and let faith in
Christ Jesus be added, see [Ti2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015.md),
and then all that is spoken in the following verse will be literally
accomplished.

[2 Timothy 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti2 3:17</span></span>

That the man of God - The preacher of righteousness, the minister of the
Gospel, the person who derives his commission from God, and always
appears as his herald and servant.

May be perfect - Αρτιος· From αρω, to fit or adapt. It properly
signifies an integer or whole number in arithmetic, to which nothing
needs to be added to make it complete.

Throughly furnished - Εξηρτισμενος· From εξ, intensive, and αρτιος,
complete; see above. Not only complete in himself as to his integrity,
religious knowledge, faith in Jesus, and love to God and man, but that
he should have all those qualifications which are necessary to complete
the character, and insure the success of a preacher, of the Gospel.
Timothy was to teach, reprove, correct, and instruct others; and was to
be to them a pattern of good works.

From what the apostle says here concerning the qualifications of a
Christian minister, we may well exclaim: Who is capable of these things?
Is it such a person as has not intellect sufficient for a common trade
or calling? No. A preacher of the Gospel should be a man of the soundest
sense, the most cultivated mind, the most extensive experience, one who
is deeply taught of God, and who has deeply studied man; one who has
prayed much, read much, and studied much; one who takes up his work as
from God, does it as before God, and refers all to the glory of God; one
who abides under the inspiration of the Almighty, and who has hidden the
word of God in his heart, that he might not sin against him. No minister
formed by man can ever be such as is required here. The school of
Christ, and that alone, can ever form such a preacher.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 4](ti2004.md)

</div>
