<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2.md)  
  [Previous](ti2001)  [Next](ti2003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001.md)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 2:0</span></span>

He exhorts Timothy to constancy, fidelity, and courage; and to acquit
himself as a true soldier of Jesus Christ; and patiently expect the
fruit of his labors, [Ti2 2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001.md). What
the apostle's doctrine was relative to Christ, [Ti2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md). He mentions his own sufferings
and consolations, [Ti2 2:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md). What
Timothy is to preach, how he is to acquit himself, and what he is to
shun, [Ti2 2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014.md). Of Hymeneus and
Philetus, and their errors, [Ti2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017.md),
[Ti2 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018.md). Of the foundation of God,
and its security, [Ti2 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md). The
simile of a great house and its utensils, [Ti2
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020.md), [Ti2
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021.md). Timothy is to avoid youthful
lusts, and foolish and unlearned questions, [Ti2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022.md), [Ti2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023.md). How he is to act in reference to
false teachers, [Ti2 2:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md).

[2 Timothy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 2:1</span></span>

Be strong in the grace - Though the genuine import of the word grace is
favor, yet it often implies an active principle communicated from God;
light directing how to act, and power enabling to act according to the
light.

[2 Timothy 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti2 2:2</span></span>

The things that thou hast heard of me - Those doctrines which I have
preached the most publicly, and which many persons can attest. But he
seems to refer here to the doctrines delivered to him when, in the
presence of many witnesses, he laid his hands upon him; see [Ti1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#012.md). Then the apostle gave him the
proper form of sound words which he was to teach; and now he tells him
to commit those truths to faithful men in the same way that they were
committed to him, that the truth might be preserved in the Church, and
holy men appointed successively to preach it. These truths are still
continued in the Church, and still there are faithful men who proclaim
them. But where is the uninterrupted apostolical succession! Who can
tell? Probably it does not exist on the face of the world. All the
pretensions to it by certain Churches are as stupid as they are idle and
futile. He who appeals to this for his authority as a Christian
minister, had best sit down till he has made it out; and this will be by
the next Greek kalends.

[2 Timothy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti2 2:3</span></span>

Endure hardness - He considers a Christian minister under the notion of
a soldier, not so much for his continual conflicts with the world, the
devil, and the flesh, for these are in a certain sense common to all
Christians, but for the hardships and difficulties to which he must be
exposed who faithfully preaches the Gospel of Christ.

[2 Timothy 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti2 2:4</span></span>

No man that warreth entangleth, etc. - It is well remarked by Grotius,
on this passage, that the legionary soldiers among the Romans were not
permitted to engage in husbandry, merchandise, mechanical employments,
or any thing that might be inconsistent with their calling. Many canons,
at different times, have been made to prevent ecclesiastics from
intermeddling with secular employments. The who will preach the Gospel
thoroughly, and wishes to give full proof of his ministry, had need to
have no other work. He should be wholly in this thing, that his
profiting may appear unto all. There are many who sin against this
direction. They love the world, and labor for it, and are regardless of
the souls committed to their charge. But what are they, either in number
or guilt, compared to the immense herd of men professing to be Christian
ministers, who neither read nor study, and consequently never improve?
These are too conscientious to meddle with secular affairs, and yet have
no scruple of conscience to while away time, be among the chief in
needless self-indulgence, and, by their burdensome and monotonous
ministry, become an incumbrance to the Church! Do you inquire: In what
sect or party are these to be found? I answer: In All. Idle drones: -

Fruges consumere nati,

"Born to consume the produce of the soil,"

disgrace every department in the Christian Church. They cannot teach
because they will not learn.

[2 Timothy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti2 2:5</span></span>

If a man also strive for masteries - Εαν δε και αθλῃ τις· If a man
contend in the public games - the Olympic or Isthmian games among the
Greeks, so often alluded to and particularly explained in the notes on
[Co1 9:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024.md), to which the reader is
referred for a full illustration of this verse.

Is he not crowned - Though he may have conquered, except he strive
lawfully - unless he enter according to the rules of the athlete, and
act as these direct. No man, however zealous he may have been, is to
expect the Well done, good and faithful servant, from Jesus Christ,
unless he have labored in the word and doctrine, preached the truth as
it is in Jesus, and built up the Church upon Him who is its only
Foundation.

[2 Timothy 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 2:6</span></span>

The husbandman that laboureth - That is: The husbandman must first till
his ground before he can expect a crop; and he must till it according to
the proper rules of agriculture, else he cannot have a crop. The
combatant must fight and conquer, and fight according to the laws of the
agones, before he can be crowned; so the Christian minister must labor
in the spiritual vineyard, and labor too under the eye and according to
the direction of his Master, before he can expect that crown of
righteousness that fadeth not away.

[2 Timothy 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti2 2:7</span></span>

Consider what I say - Apply my metaphors and similitudes in a proper
manner.

And the Lord give thee understanding - But instead of δῳη, may he give,
ACDEFG, several others, besides versions and fathers, have δωσει he will
give. Consider thou properly, and God will give thee a proper
understanding of all things that concern thy own peace, and the peace
and prosperity of his Church. Think as well as read.

[2 Timothy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti2 2:8</span></span>

Remember that Jesus Christ - The apostle seems to say: Whatever
tribulations or deaths may befall us, let us remember that Jesus Christ,
who was slain by the Jews, rose again from the dead, and his
resurrection is the proof and pledge of ours. We also shall rise again
to a life of glory and blessedness.

According to my Gospel - The false teaching of Hymeneus and Philetus
stated that the resurrection was past already. Paul preached the
resurrection from the dead; and founded his doctrine on the resurrection
and promise of Christ. This was his Gospel; the other was of a different
nature.

[2 Timothy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 2:9</span></span>

Wherein I suffer trouble, as an evil doer - This verse contains one of
the proofs that this epistle was written while St. Paul was a prisoner
the second time at Rome. See the preface, where this is particularly
considered.

[2 Timothy 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 2:10</span></span>

For the elect's sake - For the sake of the Gentiles, elected by God's
goodness to enjoy every privilege formerly possessed by the Jews, and,
in addition to these, all the blessings of the Gospel; the salvation of
Christ here, and eternal glory hereafter.

[2 Timothy 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti2 2:11</span></span>

If we be dead with him - That is: As surely as Christ rose again from
the dead, so surely shall we rise again; and if we die for him, we shall
surely live again with him. This, says the apostle, is πιστος ὁ λογος, a
true doctrine. This is properly the import of the word; and we need not
seek, as Bp. Tillotson and many others have done, for some saying of
Christ which the apostle is supposed to be here quoting, and which he
learned from tradition.

[2 Timothy 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti2 2:12</span></span>

If we suffer - with him - These are other parts of the true doctrine,
which the apostle mentions above.

[2 Timothy 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti2 2:13</span></span>

If we believe not - Should we deny the faith and apostatize, he is the
same, as true to his threatenings as to his promises; he cannot deny -
act contrary to, himself.

[2 Timothy 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 2:14</span></span>

That they strive not about words - Words, not things, have been a most
fruitful source of contention in the Christian world; and among
religious people, the principal cause of animosity has arisen from the
different manner of apprehending the same term, while, in essence, both
meant the same thing. All preachers and divines should be very careful,
both in speaking and writing, to explain the terms they use, and never
employ them in any sense but that in which they have explained them.

The subverting of the hearers - This is the general tendency of all
polemical divinity and controversial preaching, when angry passions are
called in to support the doctrines of the Gospel.

[2 Timothy 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti2 2:15</span></span>

Study to show thyself approved unto God - Endeavour so to cultivate and
improve thy heart and mind, that thou mayest not be a reproach to him
from whom thou professest to receive thy commission.

Rightly dividing the word of truth - It is generally supposed that the
apostle alludes here to the care taken to divide the sacrifices under
the law; the priests studied, in dividing the victim down the spine, to
do it so scrupulously that one half of the spinal marrow should be found
on each side the backbone. Probably nothing was much farther from the
apostle's thoughts than this view, which is now commonly taken of the
subject. Indeed this scrupulously dividing does not appear to have been
any original ordinance among the Jews; much stress was laid upon it in
later times, but from the beginning it was not so. The word ορθοτομειν
signifies,

1\. Simply to cut straight, or to rectify.

2\. To walk in the right way; it is thus used by Gregory Nazianzen, who,
in Orat. Apol. fugae, opposes ορθοτομειν to κακως ὁδευειν, walking in a
right way to walking in a bad way. Thus, καινοτομειν signifies to walk
in a new way, and κατευθυνειν to walk in a straight way. See Kypke.

Therefore, by rightly dividing the word of truth, we are to understand
his continuing in the true doctrine, and teaching that to every person;
and, according to our Lord's simile, giving each his portion of meat in
due season - milk to babes, strong meat to the full grown, comfort to
the disconsolate, reproof to the irregular and careless; in a word,
finding out the necessities of his hearers, and preaching so as to meet
those necessities.

[2 Timothy 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti2 2:16</span></span>

Shun profane and vain babblings - This is the character he gives of the
preaching of the false teachers. Whatever was not agreeable to the
doctrine of truth was, in the sight of God, empty and profane babbling;
engendering nothing but ungodliness, and daily increasing in that.

[2 Timothy 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti2 2:17</span></span>

Their word will eat as doth a canker - Ὡς γαγγραινα· As a gangrene; i.e.
as a mortification in the flesh, where the circulation is entirely
stopped, and putrefaction takes place, which continues to corrupt all
the circumjacent flesh, spreading more and more till death takes place,
unless stopped by a timely and judicious application of medicine. Such
is the influence of false doctrine; it fixes its mortal seed in the
soul, which continues to corrupt and assimilate every thing to itself,
till, if not prevented by a timely application of the word of life,
under the direction of the heavenly Physician, it terminates in the
bitter pains of an eternal death. To such a gangrene the apostle
compares the corrupt doctrines of Hymeneus and Philetus.

[2 Timothy 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti2 2:18</span></span>

Who concerning the truth have erred - They had the truth, but erred or
wandered from it, saying the resurrection was already past, and thus
denying the resurrection of the body, and, by consequence, future
rewards and punishments; and this necessarily sapped the foundation of
all religion: and thus the gangrene had, in reference to their unhappy
votaries, a rapid and unchecked operation.

[2 Timothy 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti2 2:19</span></span>

The foundation of God standeth sure - The word θεμελιος signifies
literally a foundation, and especially the foundation of a building; and
metaphorically, the building itself, and often a noble mansion or
palace. In this place the apostle compares the religion of Christ to a
great or noble mansion. See [Ti2 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020.md).
And as this religion is founded on the authority and power of the
Almighty, it necessarily must stand sure and be permanent. This house
has an inscription on it, for so σφραγις, seal, is frequently
understood; and this is evidently an allusion to the ancient temples.
Above the door of the temple of Delphi there was the Greek word ει thou
art, on which Plutarch has written an express treatise. In many of the
Mohammedan mosques the walls are covered with inscriptions, which are
ordinarily sentences taken from the Koran, relative to the majesty of
God, or the nature of his worship. And we know that there was an
inscription on the mitre of the high priest among the Jews, viz.: קדש
ליהוה kodesh laihovah, "Holiness to the Lord;" [Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036.md); [Exo
39:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#030.md). See also [Zac
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#020.md). And this inscription may here
be represented as being made with the seal of God, for he stamps this on
all things belonging to himself and his worship.

But some suppose θεμελιος here to signify a contract or covenant by
which two parties are bound to fulfill certain conditions and duties,
the obligation to which, each takes on him by sealing the instrument
with his seal. Among the Asiatics, these seals have scarcely ever any
image or figure on them, but always some very expressive inscription. I
have seen many of these, and several of them are now before me. The
twofold inscription, i.e. one on the seal of each party, may be here
alluded to; that on God's seal is, Εγνω Κυριος τους οντας αὑτου· The
Lord approveth of them that are his. That on the seal of his followers
is, Αποστητω απο αδικιας πας ὁ ονομαζων το ονομα Κυριου. Let every one
who nameth the name of the Lord (every Christian) depart from iniquity.
Thus each has his peculiar inscription.

Κυριου, Lord, instead of Χριστου, Christ, is the reading of almost all
the MSS. of importance, and the principal versions.

The Lord knoweth - i.e. Approves, watches over, and provides for, them
that are his true followers. To this his followers most cheerfully
subscribe, and say: Let every one that nameth this Lord avoid every
appearance of evil.

[2 Timothy 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti2 2:20</span></span>

But in a great house - Here the apostle carries on the allusion
introduced in the preceding verse. As the foundation of God refers to
God's building, i.e. the whole system of Christianity, so here the great
house is to be understood of the same; and the different kinds of
vessels mean the different teachers, as well as the different kinds of
members. In this sacred house at Ephesus there were vessels of gold and
silver - eminent, holy, sincere, and useful teachers and members, and
also vessels of wood and of earth - false and heretical teachers, such
as Hymeneus and Philetus, and their followers. There are also in such
houses vessels employed, some in a more honorable, others in a less
honorable, office. To these he seems also to compare the same persons.

[2 Timothy 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ti2 2:21</span></span>

If a man therefore purge himself from these - He that takes heed to his
ways and to his doctrines, and walks with God, will separate himself,
not only from all false doctrine, but from all wicked men, and thus be
sanctified and proper to be employed by the Master in every good word
and work. The apostle has not made the application of these different
similes, and it is very difficult to tell what he means.

[2 Timothy 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ti2 2:22</span></span>

Flee also youthful lusts - Not only all irregular and sensual desires,
but pride, ambition, and, above all, the lust of power, to which most
men will sacrifice all other propensities, their ease, pleasure, health,
etc. This is the most bewitching passion in the human heart. Both in
Church and state it is ruinous; but particularly so in the former.
Timothy was now between thirty and forty years of age, the very age in
which ambition and the love of power most generally prevail. Carnal
pleasures are the sins of youth; ambition and the love of power the sins
of middle age; covetousness and carking cares the crimes of old age.

Follow righteousness - Flee from sin, pursue goodness. Righteousness -
whatever is just, holy, and innocent. Faith - fidelity both to God and
man, improving that grace by which thy soul may be saved, and faithfully
discharging the duties of thy office, that thou mayest save the souls of
others. Charity - love to God and man. Peace among all the members of
the Church, and as far as possible with all men; but especially among
those who invoke the Lord out of a pure desire to glorify his name.

[2 Timothy 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ti2 2:23</span></span>

Foolish and unlearned questions - See the notes on [Ti1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004.md); [Ti1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007) (note.md), and [Tit
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009) (note.md).

[2 Timothy 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ti2 2:24</span></span>

The servant of the Lord must not strive - See on [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002) (note.md), [Ti1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#003) (note.md).

[2 Timothy 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ti2 2:25</span></span>

Those that oppose - Αντιδιατιθεμενους. This seems to refer to those who
opposed the apostle's authority; and hence the propriety of the allusion
to the rebellion of Korah and his company. See observations at the end
of the chapter.

If God peradventure - He was to use every means which he had reason to
believe God might bless; and the apostle intimates that, bad as they
were, they were not out of the reach of God's mercy.

[2 Timothy 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ti2 2:26</span></span>

And that they may recover themselves - The construction of this verse is
extremely difficult, though the sense given by our translation is plain
enough. I shall set down the original, and the principal English
translations: -

Και ανανηψωσιν εκ της του διαβολου παγιδος, εζωγρημενοι ὑπ' αυτου εις
εκεινου θελημα.

And thei rise agein fro snaaris of the debyl, of whome thei ben holde
captyffis at his wille. - Wiclif. First translation into English, 1378.

And to turne agayne from the snare of devell, which are holden in prison
of him at his will. - Coverdale. First printed English Bible, 1535.

That they may come to themselves agayne out of the snare of the devyll,
which are now taken of him at hys will. - Edward VIth's Bible, by Becke,
1549.

And they may recover their senses to perform his will, after being
rescued alive by the servant of the Lord out of the snare of the devil.
- Wakefield; who refers αυτου, him, to the servant of the Lord, [Ti2
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md).

And being caught alive by him out of the snare of the devil, they may
awake to do his will. - Macknight; who remarks that αυτου, the relative,
means the servant of the Lord; and εκεινου, the demonstrative, refers to
God, mentioned [Ti2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015.md).

I leave these different translations with the reader.

I Have referred, in the preceding notes, to inscriptions which appear on
the buildings and coins of the Asiatics; such inscriptions are, in
general, very curious, and carry with them a considerable show of piety
to God, in the acknowledgment of his providence and mercy. I shall quote
one merely as a curiosity, without supposing it to be immediately
applicable to the illustration of the text.

There is extant a gold circular coin of the Great Mogul Shah Jehan,
struck at Delhi, A. H. 1062, a.d. 1651, five inches and a half in
diameter; on each side of this coin is a square, the angles of which
touch the periphery; within this square, and in the segments, there are
the following inscriptions: -

1\. Within the square, on one side,

The bright star of religion, Mohammed (a second Sahib Kiran) Shah Jehan,
the victorious emperor.

2\. In the segment on the upper side of the square,

The impression upon this coin of 200 mohurs, was struck through the
favor of God.

3\. On the lateral segment to the left,

By the second Sahib Kiran, Shah Jehan, the defender of the faith.

4\. On the bottom segment,

May the golden countenance from the sculpture of this coin enlighten the
world.

5\. On the lateral segment to the right,

As long as the splendid face of the moon is illuminated by the rays of
the sun!

1\. On the reverse, within the square,

There is no god but God; and Mohammed is the prophet of God. Struck in
the capital of Shah Jehanabad, A. H. 1062.

2\. On the top of the square,

Religion was illuminated by the truth of Abu Beker.

3\. On the left hand compartment,

The faith was strengthened by the justice of Omar.

4\. On the bottom compartment,

Piety was refreshed by the modesty and mildness of Othman.

5\. On the right hand compartment,

The world was enlightened by the learning of Aly.

On these inscriptions it may be just necessary to observe that Abu
Beker, Omar, Othman, and Aly, were the four khalifs who succeeded
Mohammed. Abu Beker was the father of Ayesha, one of Mohammed's wives.
Othman was son-in-law of Mohammed, having married his two daughters,
Rakiah, and Omal-Calthoom. And Aly, son of Abi Taleb, Mohammed's uncle,
was also one of the sons-in-law of Mohammed, having married Fatima, the
daughter of his favourite wife, Ayesha. The Ottoman empire was not so
called from Othman, the third khalif, but from Ottoman, the successful
chief, who conquered a small part of the Grecian empire in Asia, and
thus laid the foundation for the Turkish.

Grotius and others have supposed that the apostle alludes to the custom
of putting an inscription on the foundation stone of a city or other
building, giving an account of the time in which it was founded, built,
etc. Sometimes engraved stones were placed over the principal gates of
cities and fortresses, particularly in the east, specifying the date of
erection, repairs, etc., and containing some religious sentiment or
verse from the Koran. But I do not think it likely that the apostle
refers to any thing of this kind. There appears to be an allusion here
to the rebellion of Korah and his company against the authority of
Moses, [Num 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#005.md), where, it is said:
The Lord will show who are his: here the words of the Septuagint are
nearly the same that the apostle uses in this verse, εγνω ὁ Θεος τους
οντας αὑτου· God knoweth or approveth of them that are his. And the
words in [Num 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#026.md), Depart from the
tents of these wicked men, are similar to those of the apostle, Let
every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from iniquity. We may
therefore take it for granted that those false teachers, the chief of
whom were Hymeneus and Philetus, had risen up against the authority of
St. Paul; and he, in effect, informs Timothy here that God will deal
with them as he did with Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their company.
And as the true Israelites were to separate themselves from the tents of
those wicked men, so he and the believers at Ephesus were to hold no
sort of communion with those workers of iniquity. This subject he
farther illustrates by a contract between two parties, each of which
sets his seal to the instrument, the seal bearing the motto peculiar to
the party. This I conceive to be the meaning; but the common mode of
interpretation will, it is probable, be most commonly followed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 3](ti2003.md)

</div>
