<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2000)  [Next](ti2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

Paul's address to Timothy, and declaration of his affection for him,
[Ti2 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001). His account of the piety
of Timothy's mother and grandmother, and the religious education they
had given their son, [Ti2 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005). He
exhorts him to stir up the gift of God that is in him, and not to be
ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, [Ti2
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006). How God has saved them that
believe; and how Christ has brought life and immortality to light by the
Gospel, [Ti2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009), [Ti2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010). The apostle's call to preach it,
and the persecutions which he had been obliged in consequence to endure,
[Ti2 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011), [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012). Timothy is exhorted to hold fast
the form of sound words, [Ti2 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013),
[Ti2 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014). And is informed of the
apostasy of several in Asia: and particularly of Phygellus and
Hermogenes, [Ti2 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015). And of the
great kindness of Onesiphorus to the apostle in his imprisonment, [Ti2
1:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#016).

[2 Timothy 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 1:1</span></span>

Paul an apostle - St. Paul at once shows his office, the authority on
which he held it, and the end for which it was given him. He was an
apostle - an extraordinary ambassador from heaven. He had his
apostleship by the will of God - according to the counsel and design of
God's infinite wisdom and goodness. And he was appointed that he might
proclaim that eternal life which God had in view for mankind by the
incarnation of his Son Jesus Christ, and which was the end of all the
promises he had made to men, and the commandments he had delivered to
all his prophets since the world began. The mention of this life was
peculiarly proper in the apostle, who had now the sentence of death in
himself, and who knew that he must shortly seal the truth with his
blood. His life was hidden with Christ in God; and he knew that, as soon
as he should be absent from the body, he should be present with the
Lord. With these words he both comforted himself and his son Timothy.

[2 Timothy 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti2 1:2</span></span>

To Timothy, my dearly beloved son - See the note on [Ti1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002).

[2 Timothy 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti2 1:3</span></span>

Whom I serve from my forefathers - Being born a Jew, I was carefully
educated in the knowledge of the true God, and the proper manner of
worshipping him.

With pure conscience - Ever aiming to please him, even in the time when
through ignorance I persecuted the Church.

Without ceasing I have remembrance of thee - The apostle thanks God that
he has constant remembrance of Timothy in his prayers. It is a very rare
thing now in the Christian Church, that a man particularly thanks God
that he is enabled to pray for Others. And yet he that can do this most
must have an increase of that brotherly love which the second greatest
commandment of God requires: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. It
is also a great blessing to be able to maintain the spirit of a pure
friendship, especially through a considerable lapse of time and absence.
He that can do so may well thank God that he is saved from that
fickleness and unsteadiness of mind which are the bane of friendships,
and the reproach of many once warm-hearted friends.

[2 Timothy 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti2 1:4</span></span>

Being mindful of thy tears - Whether the apostle refers to the affecting
parting with the Ephesian Church, mentioned [Act
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#037), or to the deep impressions made
on Timothy's heart when he instructed him in the doctrine of Christ
crucified, or to some interview between themselves, it is not certainly
known. The mention of this by the apostle is no small proof of his most
affectionate regards for Timothy, whom he appears to have loved as a
father loves his only son.

[2 Timothy 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti2 1:5</span></span>

The unfeigned faith that is in thee - Timothy had given the fullest
proof of the sincerity of his conversion, and of the purity of his
faith.

Which dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois - In [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001), we are informed that Paul came
to Derbe and Lystra; and behold, a certain disciple was there, named
Timotheus, the son of a certain woman, who was a Jewess, and believed;
but his father was a Greek. Luke, the historian, it appears, was not
particularly acquainted with the family; Paul evidently was. Luke
mentions the same circumstance which the apostle mentions here; but in
the apostle's account there are particulars which argue an intimate
acquaintance with the family and its history. Luke says Timothy's father
was a Greek, consequently we may believe him to have been then in his
heathen state; Paul, in mentioning the grandmother, mother, and son,
passes by the father in silence; which intimates that either the father
remained in his unconverted state, or was now dead. Lois and Eunice are
both Grecian, and indeed heathen names; hence we are led to conclude
that, although Timothy's mother was a Jewess according to St. Luke, yet
she was a Grecian or Hellenist by birth. Lois, the grandmother, appears
to have been the first convert to Christianity: she instructed her
daughter Eunice, and both brought up Timothy in the Christian faith; so
that he had a general knowledge of it before he met with St. Paul at
Lystra. There, it appears the apostle was the instrument of the
conversion of his heart to God; for a man may be well instructed in
Divine things, have a very orthodox creed, and yet his heart not be
changed. Instruction precedes conversion; conversion should follow it.
To be brought up in the fear of God is a great blessing; and a truly
religious education is an advantage of infinite worth.

[2 Timothy 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 1:6</span></span>

Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee - The gift which Timothy had
received was the Holy Spirit; and through him, a particular power to
preach and defend the truth. This gift is represented here, under the
notion of a fire, which, if it be not frequently stirred up, and fresh
fuel added to it, will go out. This is the precise idea which the
apostle had in his mind; hence the term αναζωπυρειν, which signifies to
stir up the fire; to add fresh fuel to it. From this it plainly appears,
that if Timothy had not continued to be a daily worker with God, he
would have received the grace of God in vain. The Latins have a similar
metaphor, excitare igniculos ingenii, to stir up the sparks of genius.

By the putting on of my hands - See on [Ti1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014) (note).

[2 Timothy 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti2 1:7</span></span>

God hath not given us the spirit of fear - Here is an allusion to the
giving of the law on mount Sinai. This was communicated with such
terrible majesty as to engender fear in all the Israelites: even Moses,
on the occasion, did exceedingly fear and tremble. The Gospel was
ushered in, in a much milder manner; every thing was placed on a level
with the human intellect; and within reach of every human spirit.
Nothing was terrific, nothing forbidding; but all was inviting. The very
spirit and genius of it was a spirit of power, of love, and of a sound
mind.

Instead of δειλιας, fear, some MSS. and versions have δουλειας,
servitude or bondage; God hath not given unto us the spirit of Bondage -
but of power, δυναμεως, to work miracles, to confound enemies, to
support us in trials, and enable us to do that which is lawful and right
in his sight. And of love, which enables us to hear, believe, hope, and
endure all things; and is the incentive to all obedience. Of a sound
mind, σωφρονισμου, of self-possession and government, according to some.
But a sound mind implies much more; it means a clear understanding, a
sound judgment, a rectified will, holy passions, heavenly tempers; in a
word, the whole soul harmonized in all its powers and faculties; and
completely regulated and influenced so as to think, speak, and act
aright in all things. The apostle says, God hath given the spirit of
these things; they are not factitious; they are not assumed for times
and circumstances; they are radical powers and tempers; each produced by
its proper principle.

[2 Timothy 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti2 1:8</span></span>

Be not - ashamed of the testimony - The testimony of Christ is the
Gospel in general, which proclaims Christ crucified, and redemption
through his blood. In the sight of the world, there appeared to be
reason why a man should be ashamed of this; ashamed of him who was
crucified as a malefactor; but, when this Gospel became the power of God
to the salvation of every one that believed, it was a subject to exult
in. Hence the apostle, [Rom 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)
(note), said, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.

Nor of me his prisoner - When our friends are in power and credit, we
can readily acknowledge them, and take opportunities to show that we
have such and such connections; but when the person falls into disgrace
or discredit, though we cannot pretend not to know him, yet we take care
not to acknowledge him. This induced Cicero, in relation to friendships,
to give for a maxim - Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur: "A true
friend is known in adverse circumstances;" and from this we have
borrowed our proverb, A friend in need, is a friend indeed.

Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel - No parent could love
a child better than Paul loved Timothy; and, behold! he who could wish
him nothing but what was great, honorable, and good, wishes him to be a
partaker of the afflictions of the Gospel! Because, to suffer for
Christ, and suffer with Christ, was the highest glory to which any human
being in this state could arrive. The royal way to the crown of glory,
is by the cross of Christ.

According to the power of God - While thou hast no more affliction than
thou hast grace to sustain thee under, thou canst have no cause to
complain. And God will take care that if a faithful discharge of thy
duty shall expose thee to afflictions, his power manifested in thee
shall be in proportion to thy necessities. His load cannot be
oppressive, who is strengthened to bear it by the power of God.

[2 Timothy 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti2 1:9</span></span>

Who hath saved us - From sin; the spirit of bondage, and all tormenting
fear. This is the design of the Gospel.

And called us with a holy calling - Invited us to holiness and comfort
here; and to eternal glory hereafter.

Not according to our works - We have not deserved any part of the good
we have received; and can never merit one moment of the exceeding great
and eternal weight of glory which is promised. See the notes on the
parallel passages.

Before the world began - Προ χρονων αιωνιων. Before the Mosaic
dispensation took place, God purposed the salvation of the Gentiles by
Christ Jesus; and the Mosaic dispensation was intended only as the
introducer of the Gospel. The law was our schoolmaster unto Christ, [Gal
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024). See the parallel places, and the
notes there.

[2 Timothy 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 1:10</span></span>

But is now made manifest - This purpose of God to save the Gentiles as
well as the Jews, and call them to the same state of salvation by Jesus
Christ, was, previously to the manifestation of Christ, generally
hidden; and what was revealed of it, was only through the means of types
and ceremonies.

Who hath abolished death - Καταργησαντος μεν τον θανατον. Who has
counterworked death; operated against his operations, destroyed his
batteries, undersunk and destroyed his mines, and rendered all his
instruments and principles of attack useless. By death here, we are not
to understand merely natural death, but that corruption and
decomposition which take place in consequence of it; and which would be
naturally endless, but for the work and energy of Christ. By him alone,
comes the resurrection of the body; and through him eternal life and
glory are given to the souls of believers.

Brought life and immortality to light - The literal translation of the
original is, He hath illustrated life and incorruption by the Gospel.
Life eternal, or the doctrine of life eternal, even implying the
resurrection of the body, was not unknown among the Jews. They expected
this, for they found it in their prophets. It abounded among them long
before the incarnation: and they certainly never borrowed any notion in
it from the Christians; therefore the Gospel could not be stated as
bringing to light what certainly was in the light before that time. But
this doctrine was never illustrated and demonstrated before; it existed
in promise, but had never been practically exhibited. Jesus Christ died,
and lay under the empire of death; he arose again from the dead, and
thus illustrated the doctrine of the resurrection: he took the same
human body up into heaven, in the sight of his disciples; and ever
appears in the presence of God for us; and thus, has illustrated the
doctrine of incorruption. In his death, resurrection, and ascension, the
doctrine of eternal life, and the resurrection of the human body, and
its final incorruptibility, are fully illustrated by example, and
established by fact.

[2 Timothy 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti2 1:11</span></span>

Whereunto I am appointed a preacher - Κηρυξ, a herald. See the notes at
[Mat 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017).

And an apostle - Sent immediately from God to man.

A teacher - One whose business it is to instruct men, and particularly
the Gentiles, to whom he was especially sent; to proclaim the doctrines
of eternal life, the resurrection and final incorruptibility of the
human body; and, in a word, the salvation both of the body and soul of
man by Christ Jesus.

[2 Timothy 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti2 1:12</span></span>

I am not ashamed - Though I suffer for the Gospel, I am not ashamed of
the Gospel; nor am I confounded in my expectation; his grace being at
all times sufficient for me.

For I know whom I have believed - I am well acquainted with the
goodness, mercy, and power of Christ; and know that I cannot confide in
him in vain.

That which I have committed unto him - This is variously understood.
Some think he means his life, which he had put, as it were, into the
hands of Christ, in order that he might receive it again, in the
resurrection, at the great day. Others think he means his soul. This he
had also given into the hands of his faithful Creator, knowing that
although wicked men might be permitted to take away his life, yet they
could not destroy his soul, nor disturb its peace. Others think that he
is speaking of the Gospel, which he knows will be carefully preserved by
the great Head of the Church; for, though he shall be soon called to
seal the truth with his blood, yet he knows that God will take care that
the same truth shall be proclaimed to the world by others, whom God
shall raise up for that very purpose.

[2 Timothy 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti2 1:13</span></span>

Hold fast the form of sound words - The word ὑποτυπωσις signifies the
sketch, plan, or outline of a building, picture, etc.; and here refers
to the plan of salvation which the apostle had taught Timothy. No man
was left to invent a religion for his own use, and after his own mind.
God alone knows that with which God can be pleased. If God did not give
a revelation of himself, the inventions of man, in religious things,
would be endless error, involving itself in contortions of unlimited
confusion. God gives, in his mercy to man, a form of sound words or
doctrines; a perfect plan and sketch of the original building; fair and
well defined outlines of every thing which concerns the present and
eternal welfare of man, and his own glory.

In faith and love - Faith credits the Divine doctrines. Love reduces
them all to practice. Faith lays hold on Jesus Christ, and obtains that
love by which every precept is cheerfully and effectually obeyed.

[2 Timothy 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 1:14</span></span>

That good thing - The everlasting Gospel, keep by the Holy Ghost; for
without a continual spiritual energy man can do nothing. This indwelling
Spirit will make them effectual to thy own salvation, and enable thee to
preach them to the salvation of the souls of others.

[2 Timothy 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti2 1:15</span></span>

All they which are in Asia - It seems as if the apostle must refer to
the Asiatic Christians which were then at Rome, or had been lately
there. Finding the apostle in disgrace, and thinking it dangerous to own
him or his cause, they neither visited him, or confessed Christianity.
He cannot be speaking of any general defection of the Asiatic Churches,
but of those Asiatics who had professed a particular friendship for him.

Phygellus and Hermogenes - These were two of the persons of whom he
complains; but who they were, or what office they held, or whether they
were any thing but private Christians who had for a time ministered to
St. Paul in prison, and, when they found the state determined to destroy
him, ceased to acknowledge him, we cannot tell.

[2 Timothy 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti2 1:16</span></span>

The Lord give mercy - Onesiphorus had acknowledged him, and continued to
do so; he, and his house, or family, ministered to him in prison, and
were not ashamed of their imprisoned pastor, nor of the cause for which
he was in disgrace and suffering. As he showed mercy to the apostle, the
apostle prays the Lord to show mercy to him.

[2 Timothy 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti2 1:17</span></span>

When he was in Rome - Onesiphorus was no doubt an Asiatic, (probably an
Ephesian, see below), who had frequent business at Rome; and when he
came sought out the apostle, who, it is supposed, had been confined in
some close and private prison, (see the preface), so that it was with
great difficulty he could find him out. This man had entertained the
apostle when he was at Ephesus, and now he sought him out at Rome. Pure
love feels no loads. Here was a true friend, one that sticketh closer
than a brother.

[2 Timothy 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti2 1:18</span></span>

The Lord grant - that he may find mercy of the Lord - Some think that
this is a prayer to God the Father to communicate grace to him, that he
might find mercy in the great day at the hand of Jesus Christ the Judge.
It is probably only a Hebraism for, God grant that he may here be so
saved by Divine grace, that in the great day he may receive the mercy of
the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. See a similar form of
expression, [Gen 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#016); [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024); [Exo
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#001), [Exo
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002).

It is impossible to read this chapter over without feeling deeply
interested for this most noble and amiable of men. To what trials did
God expose him! His life was a life of perils and tribulations, his
labors were superabundant, and his success all but incredible. Wherever
he went, he left a track of light and life behind him. To him, as the
grand instrument of God, the Gentiles, the whole habitable world, owe
their salvation. Yet see him, in his old age, neglected by his friends,
apparently forsaken of God, and abandoned to the hands of ruthless men;
in prison and in chains; triumphing over sufferings and death; perfectly
unshaken, unstumbled, with the evils with which he is obliged to
contend, having the fullest persuasion of the truth of the doctrines
which he had preached, and the strongest and most encouraging
anticipation of the glory that was about to be revealed. He felt no
evil, and he feared none. Sin had lost its power, and death its sting;
the grave its victory, and hell its horrors. He had the happiness which
heathenism spoke of, but could not attain, because it knew not the great
Source whence it must proceed. This God he knew, feared, loved, obeyed,
and was happy. Who but the righteous man can sing: -

Felix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas;

Atque metus omnes et inexorabile fatum

Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari! -

Illum non populi fasces, non purpura regum

Flexit, et infidos agitans discordia fratres; -

Non res Romanae, perituraque regna.

Virg. Georg. ii. v. 490.

No murmur is heard from his heart; he is persuaded that all things work
together for good to them that love God; the miserable uncertainty of
friendship, the defection of cowardly brethren, and the apostasy of once
zealous professors, did not move him. As far as it is lawful, he courts
death, knowing that to be absent from the body is to be present with the
Lord. Glorious system of truth by which such an apostle was formed! and
glorious apostle by whom this system was illustrated and confirmed! The
character and conduct of St. Paul must make Christianity doubly amiable
to believers and highly respectable even to its enemies.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 2](ti2002)

</div>
