<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](tit000)  [Next](tit002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

The apostle's statement of his character, his hope, and his function,
[Tit 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001). His address to Titus, and
the end for which he left him in Crete, [Tit
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004), [Tit
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005). The qualifications requisite in
those who should be appointed elders and bishops in the Church of God,
[Tit 1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006). Of false teachers, [Tit
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010), [Tit
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#011). The character of the Cretans,
and how they were to be dealt with, [Tit
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012). Of the pure, the impure, and
false professors of religion, [Tit
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015), [Tit
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016).

[Titus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">tit 1:1</span></span>

Paul, a servant of God - In several places of his other epistles St.
Paul styles himself the servant of Jesus Christ, but this is the only
place where he calls himself the servant of God. Some think that he did
this to vindicate himself against the Jews, who supposed he had
renounced God when he admitted the Gentiles into his Church. But if thus
to vindicate himself was at all necessary, why was it not done in his
Epistle to the Romans, the grand object of which was to prove that the
Gentiles came legally into the Church on believing in Christ, with out
submitting to circumcision, or being laid under obligation to observe
the rites and ceremonies of the Jewish law? This reason seems too
fanciful. It is very likely that in the use of the phrase the apostle
had no particular design; for, according to him, he who is the servant
of Christ is the servant of God, and he who is God's servant is also the
servant of Christ.

The faith of God's elect - The Christians, who were now chosen in the
place of the Jews, who, for their obstinate rejection of the Messiah,
were reprobated; i.e. cast out of the Divine favor.

The acknowledging of the truth - For the propagation of that truth, or
system of doctrines, which is calculated to promote godliness, or a holy
and useful life.

[Titus 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">tit 1:2</span></span>

In hope of eternal life - In expectation of a state of being and well
being which should last through eternity, when time should be no more.
This includes, not only the salvation of the soul and its eternal
beatification, but also the resurrection of the body. This was a point
but ill understood, and not very clearly revealed, under the Mosaic law;
but it was fully revealed under the Gospel, and the doctrine illustrated
by the resurrection and ascension of Christ.

Which God, that cannot lie, promised - We have often seen that the
phrase, the foundation of the world, means the Jewish economy, and,
before the foundation of the world, the times antecedent to the giving
of the law. This is evidently the meaning here. See [Ti2
1:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009).

Supposing the word αιωνιων in this verse to signify eternal, says Dr.
Macknight, the literal translation of προ χρονων αιωνιων would be,
before eternal times; but that being a contradiction in terms, our
translators, contrary to the propriety of the Greek language, have
rendered it before the world began, as Mr. Locke observes on [Rom
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025). The true literal translation is
before the secular times, referring us to the Jewish jubilees, by which
times were computed among the Hebrews, as among the Gentiles they were
computed by generations of men. Hence, [Col
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026), The mystery which was kept hid
απο των αιωνων και απο των γενεων, from the ages and from the
generations, signifies the mystery which was kept hid from the Jews and
from the Gentiles.

[Titus 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">tit 1:3</span></span>

But hath in due times - Καιροις ιδιοις· In its own times. See [Ti1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006); [Gal
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004); [Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010); [Eph
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007). God caused the Gospel to be
published in that time in which it could be published with the greatest
effect. It is impossible that God should prematurely hasten, or
causelessly delay, the accomplishment of any of his works. Jesus was
manifested precisely at the time in which that manifestation could best
promote the glory of God and the salvation of man.

Manifested his word - Τον λογον αὑτου· His doctrine - the doctrine of
eternal life, by the incarnation, passion, death, and resurrection of
Jesus Christ.

Which is committed unto me - That is, to preach it among the Gentiles.

According to the commandment of God our Savior - This evidently refers
to the commission which he had received from Christ. See [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015) : "He is a chosen vessel unto me,
to bear my name before the Gentiles." For, "I have appeared unto thee
for this purpose, to make thee a minister and a witness both of these
things which thou hast seen, and of those things in the which I will
appear unto thee; delivering thee from the people and from the Gentiles,
unto whom now I send thee; to open their eyes, to turn them from
darkness to light," etc,; [Act 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016),
etc. This is the commandment; and according to it he became the apostle
of the Gentiles.

God our Savior. - As the commission was given by Jesus Christ alone, the
person whom he terms here God our Savior must be Jesus Christ only; and
this is another proof that St. Paul believed Jesus Christ to be God.
This eternal life God had promised in a comparatively obscure way before
the foundation of the world, the Jewish dispensation; but now under the
Gospel, he had made it manifest - produced it with all its brightness,
illustrations, and proofs.

[Titus 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">tit 1:4</span></span>

To Titus, mine own son - Him whom I have been the instrument of
converting to the Christian faith; and in whom, in this respect, I have
the same right as any man can have in his own begotten son. See the
preface; and see on [Ti1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002) (note).

[Titus 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">tit 1:5</span></span>

For this cause left I thee in Crete - That St. Paul had been in Crete,
though nowhere else intimated, is clear from this passage. That he could
not have made such an important visit, and evangelized an island of the
first consequence, without its being mentioned by his historian, Luke,
had it happened during the period embraced in the Acts of the Apostles,
must be evident. That the journey, therefore, must have been performed
after the time in which St. Luke ends his history, that is, after St.
Paul's first imprisonment at Rome, seems almost certain.

Set in order the things that are wanting - It appears from this that the
apostle did not spend much time in Crete, and that he was obliged to
leave it before he had got the Church properly organized. The supplying
of this defect, he tells Titus, he had confided to him as one whose
spiritual views coincided entirely with his own.

Ordain elders in every city - That thou mightest appoint, καταστησῃς,
elders - persons well instructed in Divine things, who should be able to
instruct others, and observe and enforce the discipline of the Church.
It appears that those who are called elders in this place are the same
as those termed bishops in [Tit 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007).
We have many proofs that bishops and elders were of the same order in
the apostolic Church, though afterwards they became distinct. Lord Peter
King, in his view of the primitive Church, has written well on this
subject.

In every city. - Κατα πολιν. This seems to intimate that the apostle had
gone over the whole of the hecatompolis or hundred cities for which this
island was celebrated. Indeed it is not likely that he would leave one
in which he had not preached Christ crucified.

[Titus 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">tit 1:6</span></span>

If any be blameless - See the notes on [Ti1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002), etc.

Having faithful children - Whose family is converted to God. It would
have been absurd to employ a man to govern the Church whose children
were not in subjection to himself; for it is an apostolic maxim, that he
who cannot rule his own house, cannot rule the Church of God; [Ti1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005).

[Titus 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">tit 1:7</span></span>

Not self-willed - Μη αυθαδη· Not one who is determined to have his own
way in every thing; setting up his own judgment to that of all others;
expecting all to pay homage to his understanding. Such a governor in the
Church of God can do little good, and may do much mischief.

Not soon angry - Μη οργιλον· Not a choleric man; one who is irritable;
who is apt to be inflamed on every opposition; one who has not proper
command over his own temper.

[Titus 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">tit 1:8</span></span>

A lover of hospitality - Φιλοξενον· A lover of strangers. See the note
on [Ti1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002). Instead of φιλοξενον, one
MS. has φιλοπτωχον, a lover of the poor. That minister who neglects the
poor, but is frequent in his visits to the rich, knows little of his
Master's work, and has little of his Master's spirit.

A lover of good men - Φιλαγαθον· A lover of goodness or of good things
in general.

Sober - Prudent in all his conduct. Just in all his dealings. Holy in
his heart.

Temperate - self-denying and abstemious, in his food and raiment; not
too nice on points of honor, nor magisterially rigid in the exercise of
his ecclesiastical functions. Qualifications rarely found in spiritual
governors.

[Titus 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">tit 1:9</span></span>

Holding fast the faithful word - Conscientiously retaining, and
zealously maintaining, the true Christian doctrine, κατα την διδαχην,
according to the instructions, or according to the institutions, form of
sound doctrine, or confession of faith, which I have delivered to thee.

That he may be able by sound doctrine - If the doctrine be not sound,
vain is the profession of it, and vain its influence. It is good to be
zealously affected in a good thing; but zeal for what is not of God will
do no good to the souls of men, how sincere soever that zeal may be.

To exhort - Them to hold the faith, that they may persevere.

And to convince - Refute the objections, confound the sophistry, and
convert the gainsayers; and thus defend the truth.

[Titus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">tit 1:10</span></span>

There are many unruly - Persons who will not receive the sound doctrine,
nor come under wholesome discipline.

Vain talkers - Empty boasters of knowledge, rights, and particular
privileges; all noise, empty parade, and no work.

Deceivers - Of the souls of men by their specious pretensions.

They of the circumcision - The Judaizing teachers, who maintained the
necessity of circumcision, and of observing the rites and ceremonies of
the Mosaic law, in order to the perfecting of the Gospel.

[Titus 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">tit 1:11</span></span>

Whose mouths must be stopped - Unmask them at once; exhibit them to the
people; make manifest their ignorance and hypocrisy; and let them be
confounded before the people whom they are endeavoring to seduce.

Subvert whole houses - Turn whole Christian families from the faith,
attributing to the broad way what belongs only to the strait gate;
ministering to disorderly passions, and promising salvation to their
proselytes, though not saved from their sins.

[Titus 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">tit 1:12</span></span>

One of themselves, even a prophet of their own - This was Epimenides,
who was born at Gnossus, in Crete, and was reckoned by many the seventh
wise man of Greece, instead of Periander, to whom that honor was by them
denied. Many fabulous things are related of this poet, which are not
proper to be noticed here. He died about 538 years before the Christian
era. When St. Paul calls him a prophet of their own, he only intimates
that he was, by the Cretans, reputed a prophet. And, according to
Plutarch, (in Solone), the Cretans paid him divine honors after his
death. Diogenes Laertius mentions some of his prophecies: beholding the
fort of Munichia, which guarded the port of Athens, he cried out: "O
ignorant men! if they but knew what slaughters this fort shall occasion,
they would pull it down with their teeth!" This prophecy was fulfilled
several years after, when the king, Antipater, put a garrison in this
very fort, to keep the Athenians in subjection. See Diog. Laert., lib.
i. p. 73.

Plato, De Legibus, lib. ii., says that, on the Athenians expressing
great fear of the Persians, Epimenides encouraged them by saying "that
they should not come before ten years, and that they should return after
having suffered great disasters." This prediction was supposed to have
been fulfilled in the defeat of the Persians in the battles of Salamis
and Marathon.

He predicted to the Lacedemonians and Cretans the captivity to which
they should one day be reduced by the Arcadians. This took place under
Euricrates, king of Crete, and Archidamus, king of Lacedemon; vide Diog.
Laert., lib. i. p. 74, edit. Meibom.

It was in consequence of these prophecies, whether true or false, that
his countrymen esteemed him a prophet; that he was termed ανηρ αθειος, a
divine man, by Plato; and that Cicero, De Divin., lib. i., says he was
futura praesciens, et vaticinans per furorem: "He knew future events,
and prophesied under a divine influence." These things are sufficient to
justify the epithet of prophet, given him here by St. Paul. It may also
be remarked that vates and poeta, prophet and poet, were synonymous
terms among the Romans.

The Cretians are always liars - The words quoted here by the apostle
are, according to St. Jerome, Socrates, Nicephorus, and others, taken
from a work of Epimenides, now no longer extant, entitled Περι χρησμων·
Concerning Oracles. The words form a hexameter verse: -

Κρητες αει ψευσται, κακα θηρια, γαστερες αργαι.

The Cretans are always liars; destructive wild beasts; sluggish
gluttons.

That the Cretans were reputed to be egregious liars, several of the
ancients declare; insomuch that Κρητιζειν, to act like a Cretan,
signifies to lie; and χρησθαι Κρητισμῳ, to deceive. The other Greeks
reputed them liars, because they said that among them was the sepulchre
of Jupiter, who was the highest object of the Greek and Roman worship.
By telling this truth, which all others would have to pass for a lie,
the Cretans showed that the object of their highest admiration was only
a dead man.

Evil beasts - Ferocious and destructive in their manners.

Slow bellies - Addicted to voluptuousness, idleness, and gluttony;
sluggish or hoggish men.

[Titus 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">tit 1:13</span></span>

This witness is true - What Epimenides said of them nearly 600 years
before continued still to be true. Their original character had
undergone no moral change.

Rebuke them sharply - Αποτομως· Cuttingly, severely; show no indulgence
to persons guilty of such crimes.

That they may be sound in the faith - That they may receive the
incorrupt doctrine, and illustrate it by a holy and useful life.

[Titus 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">tit 1:14</span></span>

Not giving heed to Jewish fables - See on [Ti1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004) (note); [Ti1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007) (note).

Commandments of men - The injunctions of the scribes and Pharisees,
which they added to the law of God.

That turn from the truth - For such persons made the word of God of none
effect by their traditions. Sometimes the verb αποστρεφομαι signifies to
be averse from, slight, or despise. So, here, the persons in question
despised the truth, and taught others to do the same.

[Titus 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">tit 1:15</span></span>

Unto the pure all things are pure - This appears to have been spoken in
reference to the Jewish distinctions of clean and unclean meats. To the
genuine Christian every kind of meat proper for human nourishment is
pure, is lawful, and may be used without scruple. This our Lord had long
before decided. See on [Luk 11:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#039)
(note).

But unto them that are defiled - In their consciences, and unbelieving,
απιστοις, unfaithful both to offered and received grace, nothing is pure
- they have no part in Christ, and the wrath of God abides upon them.
Their mind is contaminated with impure and unholy images and ideas, and
their conscience is defiled with the guilt of sins already committed
against God.

[Titus 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">tit 1:16</span></span>

They profess that they know God - He still speaks concerning the
unbelieving Jews, the seducing teachers, and those who had been seduced
by their bad doctrine. None were so full of pretensions to the knowledge
of the true God as the Jews. They would not admit that any other people
could have this knowledge; nor did they believe that God ever did or
ever would reveal himself to any other people; they supposed that to
give the law and the prophets to the Gentiles would be a profanation of
the words of God. Hence they became both proud, uncharitable, and
intolerant; and in this disposition they continue till the present day.

But in works they deny him - Their profession and practice were at
continual variance. Full of a pretended faith, while utterly destitute
of those works by which a genuine faith is accredited and proved. Dio
Cassius represents Caesar as saying of his mutinous soldiers: Ονομα
Ῥωμαιων εχοντας, εργα δε Κελτων δρωντας. "Having the name of Romans,
while they had the manners of the Gauls." How near are those words to
the saying of the apostle!

Being abominable - Βδελυκτοι. This word sometimes refers to unnatural
lusts.

And disobedient - Απειθεις· Unpersuadable, unbelieving, and consequently
disobedient. Characters remarkably applicable to the Jews through all
their generations.

Unto every good work reprobate - Αδοκιμοι· Adulterate; like bad coin,
deficient both in the weight and goodness of the metal, and without the
proper sterling stamp; and consequently not current. If they did a good
work, they did not do it in the spirit in which it should be performed.
They had the name of God's people; but they were counterfeit. The
prophet said; Reprobate silver shall men call them.

1\. Though the principal part of this chapter, and indeed of the whole
epistle, may be found in nearly the same words in the First Epistle to
Timothy, yet there are several circumstances here that are not so
particularly noted in the other; and every minister of Christ will do
well to make himself master of both; they should be carefully registered
in his memory, and engraven on his heart.

2\. The truth, which is according to godliness, in reference to eternal
life, should be carefully regarded. The substantial knowledge of the
truth must have faith for its foundation, godliness for its rule, and
eternal life for its object and end. He who does not begin well, is
never likely to finish fair. He who does not refer every thing to
eternity, is never likely to live either well or happily in time.

3\. There is one subject in this chapter not sufficiently attended to by
those who have the authority to appoint men to ecclesiastical offices;
none should be thus appointed who is not able, by sound doctrine, both
to exhort and convince the gainsayers. The powers necessary for this are
partly natural, partly gracious, and partly acquired.

1\. If a man have not good natural abilities, nothing but a miracle from
heaven can make him a proper preacher of the Gospel; and to make a man a
Christian minister, who is unqualified for any function of civil life,
is sacrilege before God.

2\. If the grace of God do not communicate ministerial qualifications,
no natural gifts, however splendid, can be of any avail. To be a
successful Christian minister, a man must feel the worth of immortal
souls in such a way as God only can show it, in order to spend and be
spent in the work. He who has never passed through the travail of the
soul in the work of regeneration in his own heart, can never make plain
the way of salvation to others.

3\. He who is employed in the Christian ministry should cultivate his
mind in the most diligent manner; he can neither learn nor know too
much. If called of God to be a preacher, (and without such a call he had
better be a galley slave), he will be able to bring all his knowledge to
the assistance and success of his ministry. If he have human learning,
so much the better; if he be accredited, and appointed by those who have
authority in the Church, it will be to his advantage; but no human
learning, no ecclesiastical appointment, no mode of ordination, whether
Popish, Episcopal, Protestant, or Presbyterian, can ever supply the
Divine unction, without which he never can convert and build up the
souls of men. The piety of the flock must be faint and languishing when
it is not animated by the heavenly zeal of the pastor; they must be
blind if he be not enlightened; and their faith must be wavering when he
can neither encourage nor defend it.

4\. In consequence of the appointment of improper persons to the
Christian ministry, there has been, not only a decay of piety, but also
a corruption of religion. No man is a true Christian minister who has
not grace, gifts, and fruit; if he have the grace of God, it will appear
in his holy life and godly conversation. If to this he add genuine
abilities, he will give full proof of his ministry; and if he give full
proof of his ministry, he will have fruit; the souls of sinners will be
converted to God through his preaching, and believers will be built up
on their most holy faith. How contemptible must that man appear in the
eyes of common sense, who boasts of his clerical education, his
sacerdotal order, his legitimate authority to preach, administer the
Christian sacraments, etc., while no soul is benefited by his ministry!
Such a person may have legal authority to take tithes, but as to an
appointment from God, he has none; else his word would be with power,
and his preaching the means of salvation to his perishing hearers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 2](tit002)

</div>
