<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac011)  [Next](zac013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 12:0</span></span>

The first part of this chapter, with several passages in chap. 14,
relates to an invasion that shall be made on the inhabitants of Judea
and Jerusalem in the latter ages of the world, some time after the
restoration and settlement of the Jews in their own land. It also
describes, in very magnificent terms, the signal interposition of God in
their favor. From this the prophet proceeds in the latter part of the
chapter, [Zac 14:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010.md), to describe
the spiritual mercies of God to converting his people; and gives a very
pathetic and affecting account of the deep sorrow of that people, when
brought to a sense of their great sin in crucifying the Messiah,
comparing it to the sorrow of a parent for his first-born and only son,
or to the lamentations made for Josiah in the valley of Megiddon, [Ch2
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024.md), [Ch2
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025.md). A deep, retired sorrow, which
will render the mourners for a season insensible to all the comforts and
enjoyments of the most endearing society.

[Zechariah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 12:1</span></span>

The burden of the word of the Lord - This is a new prophecy. It is
directed both to Israel and Judah, though Israel alone is mentioned in
this verse.

Which stretcheth forth the heavens - See on [Isa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#005) (note.md).

Formeth the spirit of man within him - Then it is not the same substance
with his body. It is a Spirit within Him.

[Zechariah 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 12:2</span></span>

Jerusalem a cup of trembling - The Babylonians, who captivated and
ruined the Jews, shall in their turn be ruined.

I incline to think that what is spoken in this chapter about the Jews
and Jerusalem, belongs to the "glory of the latter times."

Shall be in the siege - This may refer to some war against the Church of
Christ, such as that mentioned [Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009.md).

[Zechariah 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 12:3</span></span>

A burdensome stone - Probably referring to that stone which was thrown
on the breast of a culprit adjudged to lose his life by stoning, by
which the whole region of the thorax, heart, lungs, liver, etc., was
broken to pieces.

[Zechariah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 12:4</span></span>

I will smite every horse - Some apply this to the wars of the Maccabees
with the Syrians; but it is more likely to be a prophecy not yet
accomplished. The terms are too strong for such petty and evanescent
victories as those of the Maccabees.

[Zechariah 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 12:5</span></span>

The governors of Judah - This supposes a union between the two kingdoms
of Israel and Judah.

[Zechariah 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 12:6</span></span>

Jerusalem shall be inhabited again - This seems to refer to the future
conversion of the Jews, and their "return to their own land."

[Zechariah 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 12:7</span></span>

The Lord also shall save the tents of Judah first - This, I suppose,
refers to the same thing. The Gospel of Christ shall go from the least
to the greatest. Eminent men are not the first that are called; the poor
have the Gospel preached to them. And this is done in the wise
providence of God, that the "glory of the house of David," etc., that
secular influence may appear to have no hand in the matter; and that God
does not send his Gospel to a great man, because he is such.

[Zechariah 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 12:8</span></span>

He that is feeble among them - shall be as David - Here is a marked
difference between Judaism and Christianity. So clear, full, and
efficient shall be the salvation of believers under the Gospel that the
feeblest among them shall be as strong, as full of courage, and as
successful as David when he went against Goliath. The least in the
kingdom of heaven was greater than John the Baptist.

And the house of David - as the angel of the Lord - The family the
Church of the true David, the Lord Jesus, shall be as the angel of the
Lord; shall stand in the Divine presence like Gabriel; for Christ hath
said, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God." So "we
all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed from glory into glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord." Thus the
house of David, the true Christians, shall here walk with, after, and
before God.

[Zechariah 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 12:9</span></span>

I will seek to destroy all the nations - When this time shall arrive,
all nations that "will not receive the faith of our Lord Jesus" shall be
destroyed, when the longsuffering of God shall no longer wait upon them.
This seems to belong to a period yet very remote.

[Zechariah 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 12:10</span></span>

I will pour upon the house of David - This is the way in which the Jews
themselves shall be brought into the Christian Church.

1\. "They shall have the spirit of grace," God will show them that he
yet bears favor to them.

2\. They shall be excited to fervent and continual prayer for the
restoration of the Divine favor.

3\. Christ shall be preached unto them; and they shall look upon and
believe in him whom they pierced, whom they crucified at Jerusalem.

4\. This shall produce deep and sincere repentance; they shall mourn,
and be in bitterness of soul, to think that they had crucified the Lord
of life and glory, and so long continued to contradict and blaspheme,
since that time.

[Zechariah 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 12:11</span></span>

A great mourning - A universal repentance.

As the mourning of Hadadrimmon - They shall mourn as deeply for the
crucified Christ as their forefathers did for the death of Josiah, who
was slain at Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. See [Ch2
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#024.md), [Ch2
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025.md).

[Zechariah 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 12:12</span></span>

Every family apart - The meaning of the word apart, which recurs here so
often, may be this: Their sorrow shall be so deep and distressing, that
every one will endeavor to avoid another, and vent his grief and
distress of soul in private. And even husbands and wives shall separate
from each other in this general mourning, as they were obliged to do by
law in certain circumstances. See [Co1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005) (note.md), and the note there.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 13](zac013.md)

</div>
