<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac002)  [Next](zac004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 3:0</span></span>

While the Jews were rebuilding their temple, their adversaries
endeavored to stop the work, Ezra 5. This vision is therefore calculated
to give them the strongest encouragement that God, after plucking them
as brands out of the fire (or captivity of Babylon), would not now give
them up, but would continue to prosper and favor them; and that
notwithstanding the interruptions they should meet with, the work should
be finished under the gracious superintendence of Providence; and their
high priest, clothed in his pontifical robes, would soon officiate in
the holy of holies, [Zac 3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001). The
subject is then, by an easy transition, applied to a much greater future
deliverance and restoration, of which Joshua and his companions,
delivered now, are declared to be figures or types; for that the Messiah
or Branch, the great high priest typified by Joshua, would be
manifested; and, like the principal stone represented in the vision,
become the chief corner stone of his Church; that the all-seeing eye of
God would constantly guard it; and that by his atonement he would
procure for it peace and pardon, [Zac
3:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008).

[Zechariah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 3:1</span></span>

And he showed me Joshua the high priest - The Angel of the Lord is the
Messiah, as we have seen before; Joshua, the high priest, may here
represent the whole Jewish people; and Satan, the grand accuser of the
brethren. What the subject of dispute was, we perhaps learn from [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009). Michael and Satan disputed about
the body of Moses. This could not refer to the natural body of the
Jewish lawgiver, which had been dead about owe thousand years; it must
therefore refer to that body of laws given to the Jews by Moses, for the
breach of which Satan, who was their tempter to disobedience, now comes
forward as their accuser; that, exciting the justice of God against
them, they may be all brought to perdition. There is a paronomasia here:
-

Satan standing at his right hand to resist him - שטן Satan signifies an
adversary. לשטנו lesiteno, to be his adversary, or accuser.

[Zechariah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 3:2</span></span>

Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire? - The Jews were nearly
destroyed because of their sins; a remnant of them is yet left, and God
is determined to preserve them. He has had mercy upon them, and forgiven
them their sins. Wouldst thou have them destroyed? It is God that hath
justified them; who art thou that condemnest them? The Lord rebuke thee!
God confound thee for what thou hast done, and for what thou desirest
farther to do! It is evident that [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009) relates to this circumstance - the
very same phraseology which occurs here. See the notes on [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009), where the subject is largely
considered. With difficulty has this remnant escaped, and God will not
permit fresh evils to fall upon them, by which they might be totally
consumed. This was Satan's design, who accuses the followers of God day
and night. See [Rev 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010).

[Zechariah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 3:3</span></span>

Joshua was clothed with filthy garments - The Jewish people were in a
most forlorn, destitute, and to all human appearance despicable,
condition; and besides all, they were sinful, and the priesthood defiled
by idolatry; and nothing but the mercy of God could save them.

[Zechariah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 3:4</span></span>

Take away the filthy garments - The Jews wore sackcloth in times of
public calamity; probably the filthy garments refer to this. Let their
clothing be changed. I have turned again their captivity; I will fully
restore them, and blot out all their iniquities.

[Zechariah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 3:5</span></span>

A fair mitre upon his head - To signify that he had renewed to him the
office of the high priesthood, which had been defiled and profaned
before. The mitre was the bonnet which the high priest put on his head
when he entered into the sanctuary, [Exo
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#004), etc.

Clothed him with garments - Referring to the vestments of the high
priest. The true high priest, who is over the house of God, will
establish his office among them, when they shall acknowledge him as
their Messiah, and seek redemption in the blood of the sacrifice which
he has offered for their sins; and not for theirs only, but for the sins
of the whole world.

[Zechariah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 3:7</span></span>

If thou wilt walk in my ways - If ye, Israelites, priests and people,
now restored to your own land, will walk in my ways, etc., ye shall be a
part of my family; and have places - mansions - in eternal glory, with
all them that are sanctified.

[Zechariah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 3:8</span></span>

O Joshua - thou, and thy fellows - Thy countrymen, who have now returned
from your captivity, in a very wonderful manner. אנשי מופת anshey
mopheth, figurative men, men whose office and ministration prefigured
the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore it is immediately added, "I will
bring forth my servant The Branch." Abp. Newcome thinks this means
Zerubbabel, so called because he was the grandson of Jehoiakim, or
Jeconiah, king of Judah, [Mat 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#012),
and heir to the throne of Judah. The Chaldee has, "My servant the
Messiah." See the note on [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002)
(note). I think the word cannot apply to Zerubbabel, except as a type of
Christ; in that sense it may be understood of him. See [Zac
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011), [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012).

[Zechariah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 3:9</span></span>

For behold the stone that I have laid - Alluding no doubt to the
foundation stone of the temple: but this represented Christ Jesus:
"Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a Stone, a tried stone, a
precious Corner Stone, a Sure Foundation," [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016). This means Christ, and none
other; on him his whole Church rests, as a building does on its
foundation.

Upon one stone shall be seven eyes - This is supposed to mean the
providence of God, as under it all the work should be completed.

There may be an allusion to the seven counsellors, which stood always
about the persons of the Asiatics sovereigns; and those who were the
governors of provinces were termed the eyes of the king. To this there
is an allusion in [Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004). In Christ
there is a plentitude of wisdom, power, goodness, mercy, truth, love,
and compassion, to direct, protect, save, uphold, purify, govern, and
preserve all the souls that trust in him.

I will engrave the graving thereof - This is an allusion to engraving
precious stones, in which the ancients greatly excelled. Heads, animals,
and various devices were the subjects of those engravings. But what was
this engraving? Was it not the following words? I will remove the
iniquity of that land in one day;" and was not this when Jesus Christ
expired upon the cross? This was the grand, the only atonement,
satisfaction, and sacrifice for the sins of the whole world. Does not
our Lord refer to this place, [Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027) (note)? Him hath God thy Father
sealed; and on the inscription there was, "This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased." See the note on the above passage.

[Zechariah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 3:10</span></span>

Shall ye call every man his neighbour - See on [Isa
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#016) (note). Every one shall be
inviting and encouraging another to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ;
and thus taste and see that God is good. See on [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002) (note), [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003) (note). And there shall be the
utmost liberty to preach, believe on, and profess the faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 4](zac004)

</div>
