<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac005)  [Next](zac007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 6:0</span></span>

The vision of the four chariots drawn by several sorts of horses, [Zac
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001.md). The other vision in thus
chapter may refer in its primary sense to the establishment of the civil
and religious polity of the Jews under Joshua and Zerubbabel; but
relates in a fuller sense, to the Messiah, and to that spiritual kingdom
of which he was to be both king and high priest. In him all these types
and figures were verified; on him all the promises are yea and amen,
[Zac 6:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#009.md).

[Zechariah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 6:1</span></span>

There came four chariots - Four monarchies or empires. This is supposed
to mean the same with the vision of the four horns, in chap. 1.

Mountains of brass - The strong barriers of God's purposes, which
restrained those powers within the times and limits appointed by
Jehovah.

[Zechariah 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 6:2</span></span>

In the first chariot were red horses - The empire of the Chaldeans,
which overthrew the empire of the Assyrians.

The second chariot black horses - The empire of the Persians founded by
Cyrus, which destroyed the empire of the Chaldeans.

[Zechariah 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 6:3</span></span>

The third chariot white horses - The empire of the Greeks, founded by
Alexander the Great, which destroyed the empire of the Persians.

The fourth chariot grisled and bay horses - That is party-coloured
horses, or with horses, some grisled and some bay. The empire of the
Romans or of the Greeks. The Greeks divided after the death of
Alexander; one part pointing out the Lagidae, who attacked and subdued
Egypt; and the other, the seleucidae, who subdued Syria under Seleucus.

[Zechariah 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 6:5</span></span>

The four spirits of the heavens - Ministers of God's wrath against the
sinful nations of the world.

[Zechariah 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 6:6</span></span>

The black horses - This refers to the second chariot; of the first the
angel makes no mention, because the empire designed by it had ceased to
exist. This had red horses, to show the cruelty of the Chaldeans towards
the Jews, and the carnage they committed in the land of Judea.

The black - Cyrus, at the head of the Persians and Medes, bringing
devastation and death among the Chaldeans, called the north in many
parts of Scripture.

The white - Alexander, who was splendid in his victories, and mild
towards all that he conquered.

The grisled - The Lagidae or Ptolemies, who founded an empire in Egypt;
of these some were good, some bad, some despotic, some moderate, some
cruel, and some mild, represented by the party-coloured horses.

[Zechariah 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 6:7</span></span>

And the bay went forth - The Seleucidae, who conquered Syria and the
upper provinces, and who wished to extend their conquests, and "sought
to go, that they might walk to and fro throughout the earth," were of
unbounded ambition, and sought universal empire; such as Antiochus the
Great. "So they walked to and fro," did extend their conquests; and
harassed many countries by their vexatious and almost continual wars.
Some think the Romans are meant, who carried their conquests hither and
thither, just as the Divine providence permitted them.

[Zechariah 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 6:8</span></span>

Have quieted my spirit in the north country - They have fulfilled my
judgments on Assyria and Chaldea. Nabopolassar and Cyrus first, against
the Assyrians and Chaldeans; and Alexander next, against the Persians.
On this vision Abp. Newcome remarks: -

The black horses seem to denote the Persian empire; which, by subduing
the Chaldeans, and being about to inflict a second heavy chastisement on
Babylon, quieted God's spirit with respect to Chaldea; a country always
spoken of as lying to the north of the Jews.

The white horses seem to be the Macedonian empire; which, like the
Persian, overcame Chaldea.

The spotted bay horses seem to be the Roman empire. This description
suits it because it was governed by kings, consuls, dictators, and
emperors. It penetrated southward to Egypt and Africa. The Roman empire
is mentioned twice, [Zac 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006.md), [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007.md), under each epithet given it, [Zac
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003.md).

[Zechariah 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 6:10</span></span>

Take of them of the captivity - The names that follow were probably
those to whom the silver and golden vessels of the temple were
intrusted; and who might have had bullion of silver and gold, for
particular purposes, about the ornaments of the temple.

The house of Josiah - Probably an artificer in silver, gold, etc.

[Zechariah 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 6:11</span></span>

Make crowns - עטרות ataroth; but seven MSS. of Kennicott's and De
Rossi's, and one ancient of my own, with the Syriac and Chaldee, have
עטרת atereth, a crown, or tiara. And as Joshua the high priest is alone
concerned here, I think one crown only is intended.

[Zechariah 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 6:12</span></span>

Behold the man whose name is The Branch! - I cannot think that
Zerubbabel is here intended; indeed, he is not so much as mentioned in
[Zac 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008.md). Joshua and his companions
are called אנשי מופת anshey mopheth, figurative or typical men; the
crowning therefore of Joshua in this place, and calling him the Branch,
was most probably in reference to that glorious person, the Messiah, of
whom he was the type or figure. The Chaldee has, "whose name is my
Messiah," or Christ.

And he shall grow up out of his place - That is, out of David's root,
tribe, and family.

And he shall build the temple of the Lord - This cannot refer to the
building of the temple then in hand, for Zerubbabel was its builder: but
to that temple, the Christian Church, that was typified by it; for
Zerubbabel is not named here, and only Joshua or Jesus (the name is the
same) is the person who is to be crowned and to build this spiritual
temple.

[Zechariah 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 6:13</span></span>

Even he shall build the temple - Joshua, not Zerubbabel.

He shall bear the glory - Have all the honor of it; for none can do this
but himself. The Messiah is still intended.

And shall sit and rule upon his throne - For the government of the
Church shall be upon his shoulder.

And he shall be a priest upon his throne - He shall, as the great high
priest, offer the only available offering and atonement; and so he shall
be both king and priest, a royal king and a royal priest; for even the
priest is here stated to sit upon his throne.

And the counsel of peace shall be between them both - Whom? Zerubbabel
and Joshua? Certainly not Zerubbabel, for he is not mentioned in all
this prediction; but, as the Messiah is intended, the counsel of peace -
the purpose to establish peace between heaven and earth, must be between
the Father and the Son.

[Zechariah 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 6:14</span></span>

And the crowns shall be - One of my MSS. has אטרות ataroth, crowns,
corrected into עטרת atereth, crown; and so the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Arabic. The Chaldee has, "And praise shall be," etc. The meaning appears
to be this, that the crown made for Joshua should be delivered to the
persons mentioned here and in [Zac
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010.md), to be laid up in the temple of
the Lord, as a memorial of this typical transaction.

[Zechariah 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 6:15</span></span>

And they that are far off shall come - The Gentiles shall come to the
Savior of the world; and build - become a part of this new temple; for
they, as living stones, shall become a holy temple, a habitation of God
through the Spirit.

Ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me - These predictions,
relative to the regal and sacerdotal offices of the Messiah, shall be so
circumstantially fulfilled, that ye, Jews, shall be obliged to
acknowledge that the Lord of hosts hath sent me with this message.

And this shall come to pass - Your own temple shall be rebuilt, and God
shall dwell among you now, if ye will diligently obey the voice of
Jehovah your God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 7](zac007.md)

</div>
