<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](hag002)  [Next](zac001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Book of the Prophet Zechariah

Zechariah, the eleventh of the twelve minor prophets, was son of
Berechiah, and grandson of Iddo. He returned from Babylon with
Zerubbabel: and began to prophesy in the second year of the reign of
Darius, son of Hystaspes, in the year of the world 3484; before Christ,
516; before the vulgar era, 520; in the eighth month of the holy year;
and two months after Haggai had begun to prophesy.

These two prophets, with united zeal, encouraged at the same time the
people to go on with the work of the temple, which had been discontinued
for some years.

The time and place of the birth of Zechariah are unknown. Some will have
him to have been born at Babylon, during the captivity; others think he
was born at Jerusalem, before the tribes of Judah and Benjamin were
carried away. Some maintain that he was a priest; but others affirm that
he was no priest. Many say he was the immediate son of Iddo; others
believe, with much more reason, that he was son of Berechiah, and
grandson of Iddo.

He has been confounded with one Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, who
lived in the time of Isaiah; and with Zechariah, the father of John the
Baptist; which opinion is plainly incongruous. Lastly, he has been
thought to be Zechariah the son of Barachiah, whom our Savior mentions,
and says he was killed between the temple and the altar; though no such
thing is anywhere said of our prophet. A tomb is shown to this day at
the foot of the Mount of Olives, which, it is pretended, belongs to the
prophet Zechariah. Dorotheus maintains that he was buried in a place
called Bethariah, one hundred and fifty furlongs from Jerusalem.

Zechariah is the longest and the most obscure of all the twelve minor
prophets. His style is interrupted, and without connection. His
prophecies concerning the Messiah are more particular and express than
those of the other prophets. Some modern critics, as Mede and Hammond,
have been of opinion that the ninth, tenth, and eleventh chapters of
this prophet were written by Jeremiah; because in Matthew, [Mat
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#009.md), [Mat
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010.md), under the name of Jeremiah, we
find quoted Zechariah; ([Zac 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012).md);
and as the aforesaid chapters make but one continued discourse, they
concluded from thence that all three belonged to Jeremiah. But it is
much more natural to suppose that, by some unlucky mistake, the name of
Jeremiah has slipped into the text of St. Matthew instead of that of
Zechariah.

The prophet Zechariah exactly foretold the siege of Babylon by Darius,
son of Hystaspes. This prince laid siege to that rebellious city at the
beginning of the fifth year of his reign, and reduced it at the end of
twenty months. The prophets Isaiah and Jeremiah had foretold this
calamity, and had admonished the Jews, that inhabited there to make
their escape when they perceived the time draw nigh. Isaiah says to
them, "Go ye forth to Babylon, flee from the Chaldeans; with a voice of
singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth;
say ye, The Lord hath redeemed his servant Jacob." And Jeremiah says,
"Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of the
Chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before the flocks." And elsewhere,
"Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul; be
not cut off in her iniquity: for this is the time of the Lord's
vengeance, He will render unto her a recompense." Lastly, Zechariah, a
little before the time of her fall, writes thus to the Jews that were
still in this city: "Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the
north, saith the Lord; for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of
heaven, saith the Lord. Deliver thyself, O Zion, that dwellest with the
daughter of Babylon. For thus saith the Lord of hosts, after the glory
hath he sent me unto the nations which spoiled you, for he that toucheth
you, toucheth the apple of his eye. For, behold, I will shake mine hand
upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants; and ye shall
know that the Lord of hosts hath sent me." It is probable that the Jews
took advantage of these admonitions, and returned from Babylon into
their country; or, at least, withdrew into a place of more security till
the city was taken. We do not hear, either from the history or the
prophecies, that they suffered any thing by this siege, or that Darius,
son of Hystaspes, bore them any grudge for the revolt of Babylon; which
seems to indicate that they had no part in it.

The Mohammedans do not distinguish between the prophet Zechariah, and
Zachariah the father of John the Baptist. Some of them make him to be
descended from David; and others, from Levi. By an anachronism that is
still more insupportable, these confound Mary, the mother of Jesus
Christ, with Mary or Miriam, the sister of Moses, which they derive even
from the Koran itself.

The author of Tarik Montekhib relates that, when Jesus Christ was born
of the virgin the prophet Zechariah could not believe that a child could
be born without a father; and that, declaring his sentiments upon this
point, the Jews entertained a suspicion of him, and obliged him to
betake himself to flight. He withdrew; and hid himself in a hollow oak,
which the Jews sawed in two.

Such is the ignorance of the Mussulmans as regards the history both of
the Old and New Testaments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 1](zac001.md)

</div>
