<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep.md)  
  [Previous](zep002)  [Next](hag001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001.md)

[Zephaniah](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zep 3:0</span></span>

The prophet reproves Jerusalem, and all her guides and rulers, for their
obstinate perseverance in impiety, notwithstanding all the warnings and
corrections which they had received from God, [Zep
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001.md). They are encouraged, however,
after they shall have been chastised for their idolatry, and cured of
it, to look for mercy and restoration, [Zep
3:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008.md); and exited to hymns of joy at
the glorious prospect, [Zep 3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014.md).
After which the prophet concludes with large promises of favor and
prosperity in the days of the Messiah, [Zep
3:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018.md). We take this extensive view
of the concluding verses of this chapter, because an apostle has
expressly assured us that in Every prophetical book of the Old Testament
Scriptures are confined predictions relative to the Gospel dispensation.
See [Act 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024.md).

[Zephaniah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 3:1</span></span>

Wo to her that is filthy - This is a denunciation of Divine judgment
against Jerusalem.

[Zephaniah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zep 3:2</span></span>

She obeyed not the voice - Of conscience, of God, and of his prophets.

She received not correction - Did not profit by his chastisements; was
uneasy and ill-tempered under her afflictions, and derived no manner of
good from these chastisements.

She trusted not in the Lord - Did not consider him as the Fountain
whence all help and salvation should come; and rather sought for support
from man and herself, than from God.

She drew not near to her God - Did not worship him; did not walk in his
ways; did not make prayer and supplication to him.

[Zephaniah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zep 3:3</span></span>

Her princes - are roaring lions - Tearing all to pieces without shadow
of law, except their own despotic power.

Her judges are evening wolves - Being a little afraid of the lion-like
princes, they practice their unjust dealings from evening to morning,
and take the day to find their rest.

They gnaw not the bones till the morrow - They devour the flesh in the
night, and gnaw the bones and extract the marrow afterwards. They use
all violence and predatory oppression, like wild beasts; they shun the
light, and turn day into night by their revellings.

[Zephaniah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 3:4</span></span>

Her prophets are light and treacherous persons - They have no
seriousness, no deep conviction of the awful nature of their office, no
concern for the immortal souls of the people. Treacherous persons - they
betray the souls of the people for the sake of worldly honor, pleasure,
and profit. Even in our own enlightened country we find prophets who
prefer hunting the hare or the fox, and pursuing the partridge and
pheasant, to visiting the sick, and going after the strayed, lost sheep
of the house of Israel. Poor souls! They know neither God nor
themselves; and if they did visit the sick, they could not speak to them
to exhortation, edification, or comfort. God never called them to his
work; therefore they know nothing of it. But O, what an account have
these pleasure-taking false prophets to render to the Shepherd of souls!

They have done violence to the law - They have forced wrong
constructions on it in order to excuse themselves, and lull the people
into spiritual slumber. So we find that it was an ancient practice for
men to wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.

[Zephaniah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zep 3:5</span></span>

The just Lord is in the midst thereof - He sees, marks down, and will
punish all these wickednesses.

Every morning doth he bring his judgment to light - The sense is, says
Bp. Newcome, "Not a day passes but we see instances of his goodness to
righteous men, and of his vengeance on the wicked."

[Zephaniah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zep 3:6</span></span>

I have cut off the nations - Syria, Israel, and those referred to, [Isa
36:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018.md), [Isa
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#020.md). - Newcome.

[Zephaniah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 3:7</span></span>

Surely thou wilt fear me - After so many displays of my sovereign power
and judgments.

But they rose early - And instead of returning to God, they practiced
every abomination. They were diligent to find out times and places for
their iniquity. This is the worst state of man.

[Zephaniah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 3:8</span></span>

Wait ye upon me - Expect the fulfilment of all my promises and
threatenings: I am God, and change not.

For all the earth - All the land of Judah.

[Zephaniah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zep 3:9</span></span>

Will I turn to the people - This promise must refer to the conversion of
the Jews under the Gospel.

That they may all call - That the whole nation may invoke God by Christ,
and serve him with one consent; not one unbeliever being found among
them.

The pure language, שפה ברורה saphah berurah, may here mean the form of
religious worship. They had been before idolaters: now God promises to
restore his pure worship among them. The word has certainly this meaning
in [Psa 81:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#006.md); where, as God is the
speaker, the words should not be rendered, "I heard a language which I
understood not," but, "I heard a religious confession, which I approved
not." See [Isa 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018.md); [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003.md); and see [Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md), where a similar promise is
found.

[Zephaniah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zep 3:10</span></span>

From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia - This may denote both Africa and the
southern Arabia. Bochart thinks that Arabia Chusaer is meant; and that
the rivers are Besor, which flows into the Mediterranean; Rhinocorura,
which flows into the Lake Sirbonis; Trajanus Amnis, which flows into the
Red Sea; and the river Corys. Calmet thinks that these rivers mean the
Nile, which by seven mouths falls into the Mediterranean. The Nile comes
from Ethiopia, properly so called; and runs through all Egypt, and falls
into the sea at that part of Arabia which the Scripture calls Cush or
Ethiopia.

My dispersed - The Jews, scattered through different parts of the world.
Shall bring mine offering. Shall acknowledge my mercy in sending them
the Messiah to bless them, by turning every one of them away from their
iniquities.

[Zephaniah 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zep 3:11</span></span>

Shalt thou not be ashamed - Thy punishment shall cease, for God shall
pardon thy sin.

For then I will take away out of the midst of thee - The wicked Jewish
priests and scribes who blasphemed Christ, and would not come under his
yoke.

Because of my holy mountain - Thou wilt no more boast in my temple, but
become meek and lowly in following him who is meek and lowly in heart,
that ye may obtain rest to your souls.

[Zephaniah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 3:12</span></span>

An afflicted and poor people - In such a state will the Jews be found
when they shall hear the universal call, and believe in Christ Jesus.
Indeed, this is the general state of the Jews in the present day; except
a Jew that are called Jews, who are very rich; and who believe just as
much in the God of Jacob, as they do in Jesus Christ.

[Zephaniah 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zep 3:13</span></span>

The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity - O what a change! And then,
how different shall they be from their present selves! Iniquity, lying,
and deceit shall not be found among them! A Jew once said to me "Tere
are shome of you Christians who are making wonderful efforts to convert
the Tshews (Jews.) Ah, dere ish none but Gott Almighty dat can convert a
Tshew." Truly I believe him. Only God can convert any man; and if there
be a peculiar difficulty to convert any soul, that difficulty must lie
in the conversion of the Jew.

[Zephaniah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 3:14</span></span>

Sing, O daughter of Zion - Here is not only a gracious prophetic promise
of their restoration from captivity, but of their conversion to God
through Christ.

[Zephaniah 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zep 3:15</span></span>

The King of Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee - They have
never had a king since the death of Zedekiah, and never shall have one
till they have the King Messiah to reign among them; and this promise
refers to that event.

[Zephaniah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zep 3:16</span></span>

Fear thou not - Thou shalt have no more captivities nor national
afflictions.

Let not thine hands be slack - This may refer, first, to the rebuilding
of the temple of God, after the return from Babylon; and, secondly, to
their diligence and zeal in the Christian Church.

[Zephaniah 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zep 3:17</span></span>

The Lord thy God - יהוה אלהיך Yehovah Eloheycha, "The self-existent and
eternal Being, who is in covenant with you;" the character of God in
reference to the Jews when standing in the nearest relation to them.

Is mighty - גבור gibbor, is the prevailing One, the all-conquering Hero.
The character which is given to Christ, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md) : "His name shall be called אל
גבור El gibbor, the prevailing Almighty God."

He will save - Deliver thee from all the power from all the guilt, and
from all the pollution of thy sins; and when thus saved "he will rejoice
over thee with joy," with peculiar gladness. "He will rest in his love,"
- he will renew his love. He will show the same love to you that he did
of old to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

He will joy over thee with singing - The conversion of the Jews will be
a subject of peculiar delight and exultation to God himself! There will
be a more than ordinary joy in heaven, when the Jews return to God
through Christ. This event cannot be at a great distance; they are as
wretched and as ungodly as they can well be. The arms of Christians are
open to receive them; and all things are now ready!

[Zephaniah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zep 3:18</span></span>

I will gather - sorrowful - This may refer to those who, during the
captivity, mourned for their former religious assemblies; and who were
reproached by their enemies, because they could not enjoy their
religious solemnities. See [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001.md) : "By the rivers of Babylon,
there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion. For there they
that carried us away captive required of us a song," etc. This very
circumstance may be the reference here.

[Zephaniah 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">zep 3:19</span></span>

I wilt unto all that afflict thee - They who have persecuted you shall
be punished for it. It shows much malignity and baseness of mind, to
afflict or reproach those who are lying under the chastising hand of
God. This was the conduct of the Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites, when
the Jews were in adversity; and how severely did the Lord punish them
for it! And he gave this as the reason for the severity of the
punishment.

The first clause here is translated thus by Abp. Newcome: "Behold I will
work with thee for thy sake at that time." The original is obscure; and
it may bear the above sense.

I wilt save her that halteth - See [Mic
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006) (note.md), where there is a parallel
place.

And gather her that was driven out - By captivity. The reference may be
to renewing the covenant with the Jews, who were considered as an
unfaithful spouse divorced by her husband. I will bring her back to my
house.

I will get them praise and fame in every land - They shall become a
great, a good, and a useful people. And as they are now a proverb of
reproach, full of base wiles and degrading selfishness, they shall lose
this character, and be totally changed; and they shall be as eminent for
excellence, as they were before for baseness in those countries where
they had sojourned.

[Zephaniah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">zep 3:20</span></span>

At that time - First, when the seventy years of the Babylonish captivity
shall terminate. "I will bring you again" to your own land; and this
restoration shall be a type of their redemption from sin and iniquity;
and at this time, and at this only, will they have a name and praise
among all the people of the earth, not only among the Jews, but the
Gentiles.

Before your eyes - Some read before Their eyes; that is, the eyes of all
people. On their conversion to Christianity, they shall become as
eminent as they ever were in the most illustrious days of their history,
Lord, hasten the conversion of Israel! Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Chapter 1](hag001.md)

</div>
