<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep)  
  [Previous](hab003)  [Next](zep002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Commentary on the Bible*, by Adam Clarke, \[1831\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

[Zephaniah](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zep 1:0</span></span>

This chapter begins with denouncing God's judgments against Judah and
Jerusalem, [Zep 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001). Idolaters, and
sinners of several other denominations, are then particularly
threatened; and their approaching visitation enlarged on, by the
enumeration of several circumstances which tend greatly to heighten its
terrors, [Zep 1:4-18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004).

[Zephaniah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zep 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah - Though this prophet has
given us so large a list of his ancestors, yet little concerning him is
known, because we know nothing certain relative to the persons of the
family whose names are here introduced. We have one chronological note
which is of more value for the correct understanding of his prophecy
than the other could have been, how circumstantially soever it had been
delivered; viz., that he prophesied in the days of Josiah, son of Amon,
king of Judah; and from the description which he gives of the disorders
which prevailed in Judea in his time, it is evident that he must have
prophesied before the reformation made by Josiah, which was in the
eighteenth year of his reign. And as he predicts the destruction of
Nineveh, [Zep 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#013), which, as Calmet
remarks, could not have taken place before the sixteenth of Josiah,
allowing with Berosus twenty-one years for the reign of Nabopolassar
over the Chaldeans; we must, therefore, place this prophecy about the
beginning of the reign of Josiah, or from b.c. 640 to b.c. 609. But see
the chronological notes.

[Zephaniah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zep 1:2</span></span>

I will utterly consume all things - All being now ripe for destruction,
I will shortly bring a universal scourge upon the land. He speaks
particularly of the idolaters.

[Zephaniah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zep 1:3</span></span>

I will consume man and beast - By war, and by pestilence. Even the
waters shall he infected, and the fish destroyed; the air become
contaminated, and the fowls die.

[Zephaniah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zep 1:4</span></span>

I will cut off the remnant of Baal - I think he refers here, partly at
least, to the reformation which Josiah was to bring about. See the
account, [Kg2 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005) (note).

The Chemarims - The black-robed priests of different idols. See the note
on [Kg2 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006). These were put down by
Josiah.

[Zephaniah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zep 1:5</span></span>

The host of heaven - Sun, moon, planets, and stars. This worship was one
of the most ancient and the most common of all species of idolatry; and
it had a greater semblance of reason to recommend it. See [Kg2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006), [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012); [Jer
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013); [Jer
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#029).

That swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham - Associating the name
of an idol with that of the Most High. For Malcham, see on [Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015) (note), and [Amo
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#026) (note).

[Zephaniah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zep 1:6</span></span>

Them that are turned back - Who have forsaken the true God, and become
idolaters.

Nor inquired for him - Have not desired to know his will.

[Zephaniah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zep 1:7</span></span>

Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lords God - הס has, the same as
hush, hist, among us. Remonstrances are now useless. You had time to
acquaint yourselves with God; you would not: you cry now in vain;
destruction is at the door.

The Lord hath prepared a sacrifice - A slaughter of the people.

He hath bid his guests - The Babylonians, to whom he has given a
commission to destroy you. In all festivals sacrifices,

1\. The victims were offered to God, and their blood poured out before
the altar.

2\. The people who were invited feasted upon the sacrifice. See on [Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006) (note).

[Zephaniah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zep 1:8</span></span>

I will punish the princes, and the king's children - After the death of
Josiah the kingdom of Judah saw no prosperity, and every reign
terminated miserably; until at last King Zedekiah and the king's
children were cruelly massacred at Riblah, when Nebuchadnezzar had taken
Jerusalem.

Strange apparel - I really think this refers more to their embracing
idolatrous customs and heathen usages, than to their changing their
dress. They acquired new habits, as we would say; customs, that they
used as they did their clothing - at all times, and in every thing.

[Zephaniah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zep 1:9</span></span>

That leap on the threshold - Or, that leap over the threshold. It is
most probable that the Philistines are here meant. After the time that
Dagon fell before the ark, and his hands were broken off on the
threshold of his temple, his worshippers would no more set a foot upon
the threshold, but stepped or leaped over it, when they entered into his
temple. The Chaldee understands this of the Philistines, without giving
this reason for it. Some understand it of haughtiness and pride: others
think that leaping on the threshold refers to the customs of the Arabs,
who used to ride into people's houses and take away whatever they could
carry; and that this is the reason why, in several parts of the East,
they have their doors made very low, to prevent those depredators from
entering. In this manner, we learn the Persians have frequently
oppressed the poor Armenians, going on horseback into their houses, and
taking whatever they thought proper. Mr. Harmer understands it in this
way.

[Zephaniah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zep 1:10</span></span>

A cry from the fish-gate - This gate, which is mentioned [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003), was opposite to Joppa; and
perhaps the way in which the news came of the irruption of the Chaldean
army, the great crashing from the hills.

The second - Or second city, may here mean a part of Jerusalem,
mentioned [Kg2 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014); [Ch2
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#022).

[Zephaniah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zep 1:11</span></span>

Maktesh - Calmet says this signifies a mortar, or a rock in form of a
mortar, and was the name of a quarter of Jerusalem where they hulled
rice, corn, etc., according to St. Jerome. Some think the city of
Jerusalem is meant, where the inhabitants should be beat and pounded to
death as grain is pounded in a mortar.

Newcome translates it, the lower city, and considers it the valley in
Jerusalem, which divided the upper from the lower city.

They that bear silver - The merchants, moneychangers, usurers, rich men.

[Zephaniah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zep 1:12</span></span>

I will search Jerusalem with candles - I will make a universal and
thorough search.

That are settled on their lees - Those who are careless, satisfied with
the goods of this life; who trust in their riches, and are completely
irreligious; who, while they acknowledge that there is a God, think,
like the Aristotelians, that he is so supremely happy in the
contemplation of his own excellences, that he feels it beneath his
dignity to concern himself with the affairs of mortals.

[Zephaniah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zep 1:13</span></span>

Their goods (in which they trust) shall become a booty - To the
Chaldeans. They shall have no profit of all their labors. The houses
they have built they shall not inhabit; of the wine of the vineyards
they have planted, they shall not drink. See [Amo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#011), where we find the same evils
threatened.

[Zephaniah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zep 1:14</span></span>

The great day of the Lord is near - It commenced with the death of the
good king Josiah, who was slain by Pharaoh-necho at Megiddo, and
continued to the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar.

[Zephaniah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zep 1:15</span></span>

That day is a day of wrath - See [Isa
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#005) (note); [Jer
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#007) (note); [Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002) (note), [Joe
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011) (note); [Amo
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018) (note); [Zep
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018) (note), and the notes there. From
the fourteenth to the sixteenth verse inclusive there is a most
beautiful amplification of the disasters that were coming on Jerusalem;
the invasion, incursion, attack, carnage, confusion, horrible din
occasioned by the sound of the trumpet, the cries of the people, and the
shrieks and groans of the dying, are pointed out with great force and
mighty effect.

[Zephaniah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zep 1:17</span></span>

They shall walk like blind men - Be in the most perplexing doubt and
uncertainty; and while in this state, have their blood poured out by the
sword of their enemies, and their flesh trodden under foot.

[Zephaniah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zep 1:18</span></span>

Their silver nor their gold - In which they trusted, and from which they
expected happiness; these shall not profit them in this awful day. And
God will bring this about speedily; and a speedy riddance - a universal
desolation, shall in a short time take place in every part of the land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zephaniah Chapter 2](zep002)

</div>
