[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100266)  [Next](2100268) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p1"></span>With the desire to learn what
subjection to Christ means after putting forward and rejecting various
ideas of subjection, he runs through the Apostle’s words; and so puts an
end to the blasphemous opinions of the heretics on this matter. The
subjection, which is shown to be future, cannot concern the Godhead,
since there has always been the greatest harmony of wills between the
Father and the Son. Also to that same Son in His Godhead all things have
indeed been made subject; but they are said to be not yet subject to Him
in this sense, because all men do not obey His commands. But after that
they have been made subject, then shall Christ also be made subject in
them, and the Father’s work be perfected.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p2"></span>153. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p2.1"></span>But</span> if the one name and right of
God belong to both the Father and the Son, since the Son of God is also
true God, and a King eternal, the Son of God is not made subject in His
Godhead. Let us then, Emperor Augustus, think how we ought to regard His
subjection.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p3"></span>154. How is the Son of God made
subject? As the creature to vanity? But it is blasphemous to have any
such idea of the Substance of the Godhead.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p4"></span>155. Or as every creature is to the
Son of God, for it is rightly written: “Thou hast put all things in
subjection under His feet”? <span id="fr_2721"></span>[2722](#fn_2721)
But Christ is not made subject to Himself.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p6"></span>156. Or as a woman to a man, as we
read: “Let the wives be subject to their husbands;” <span
id="fr_2722"></span>[2723](#fn_2722) and again: “Let the woman learn in
silence in all subjection”? <span id="fr_2723"></span>[2724](#fn_2723)
But it is impious to compare a man to the Father, or a woman to the Son
of God.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p9"></span>157. Or as Peter said: “Submit
yourselves to every human creature”? <span
id="fr_2724"></span>[2725](#fn_2724) But Christ was certainly not so
subject.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p11"></span>158. Or as Paul wrote: “Submitting
yourselves mutually to God and the Father in the fear of Christ”? <span
id="fr_2725"></span>[2726](#fn_2725) But Christ was not subject either
in His own fear, nor in the fear of another Christ. For Christ is but
one. But note the force of these words, that we are subject to the
Father, whilst we also fear Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p13"></span>159. How, then, do we understand His
subjection? Shall we review the whole chapter which the Apostle wrote,
so as to give no appearance of having falsely withheld anything, or of
having weakened its force with intention to deceive? “If in this life
only,” he says, “we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable. But if Christ is risen from the dead, He is the first-fruits
of them that sleep.” <span id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726) Ye see
how he discusses the question of Christ’s Resurrection.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p15"></span>160. “For since by one man,” he
says, “came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For as
in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But each one
in his own order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are
Christ’s, who have believed in His coming. Then cometh the end, when He
shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father, when He
shall have put down all rule and authority and power. For He must reign
until He hath put all enemies under His feet. The last enemy that shall
be destroyed is death; for He hath put all things under His <span
id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-Page_304"></span>feet. But when He saith, all things
are put under Him, it is manifest that He is excepted Which did put all
things under Him. But when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then
shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him, that put all things
under Him, that God may be all in all.” <span
id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727) Thus also the same Apostle said to
the Hebrews: “But now we see not yet all things put under Him.” <span
id="fr_2728"></span>[2729](#fn_2728) We have heard the whole of the
Apostle’s discourse.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p18"></span>161. How, then, do we speak of His
subjection? The Sabellians and Marcionites say that this subjection of
Christ to God the Father will be in such wise that the Son will be
re-absorbed into the Father. If, then, the subjection of the Word means
that God the Word is to be absorbed into the Father; then whatsoever is
made subject to the Father and the Son will be absorbed into the Father
and the Son, that God may be all and in all His creatures. But it is
foolish to say so. There is therefore no subjection through
re-absorption. For there are other things which are made subject, those,
that is to say, which are created, and there is Another, to Whom that
subjection is made. Let the expounders of a cruel re-absorption keep
silence.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p19"></span>162. Would that they too were
silent, who, as they cannot prove that the Word of God and Wisdom of God
can be re-absorbed, attribute the weakness of subjection to His Godhead,
saying that it is written: “But when all things shall be subdued unto
Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him.” <span
id="fr_2729"></span>[2730](#fn_2729)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p21"></span>163. We see, then, that the
Scripture states that He is not yet made subject, but that this is to
come: Therefore now the Son is not made subject to God the Father. In
what, then, do ye say that the Son will be made subject? If in His
Godhead, He is not disobedient, for He is not at variance with the
Father; nor is He made subject, for He is not a servant, but the only
Son of His own proper Father. Lastly, when He created heaven, and formed
the earth, He exercised both power and love. There is therefore no
subjection as that of a servant in the Godhead of Christ. But if there
is no subjection then the will is free.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p22"></span>164. But if they think of this as
the subjection of the Son, namely, that the Father makes all things in
union with His will, let them learn that this is really a proof of
inseparable power. For the unity of Their will is one that began not in
time, but ever existed. But where there is a constant unity of will,
there can be no weakness of temporal subjection. For if He were made
subject through His nature, He would always remain in subjection; but
since He is said to be made subject in time, that subjection must be
part of an assumed office and not of an everlasting weakness: especially
as the eternal Power of God cannot change His state for a time, neither
can the right of ruling fall to the Father in time. For if the Son ever
will be changed in such wise as to be made subject in His Godhead, then
also must God the Father, if ever He shall gain more power, and have the
Son in subjection to Himself in His Godhead, be considered now in the
meantime inferior according to your explanation.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p23"></span>165. But what fault has the Son been
guilty of, that we should believe that He could hereafter be made
subject in His Godhead? Has he as man seized for Himself the right to
sit at His Father’s side, or has He claimed for Himself the prerogative
of His Father’s throne, against His Father’s will? But He Himself says:
“For I do always those things that please Him.” <span
id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730) Therefore if the Son pleases the
Father in all things, why should He be made subject, Who was not made
subject before?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p25"></span>166. Let us see then that there be
not a subjection of the Godhead, but rather of us in the fear of Christ,
a truth so full of grace, and so full of mystery. Wherefore, again, let
us weigh the Apostle’s words: “But when all things shall be subdued unto
Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that put all
things under Him: that God may be all in all.” What then dost thou say?
Are not all things now subject unto Him? Are not the choirs of the
saints made subject? Are not the angels, who ministered to Him when on
the earth? <span id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731) Are not the
archangels who were sent to Mary to foretell the coming of the Lord? Are
not all the heavenly hosts? Are not the cherubim and seraphim, are not
thrones and dominions and powers which worship and praise Him?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p27"></span>167. How, then, will they be brought
into subjection? In the way that the Lord Himself has said. “Take My
yoke upon you.” <span id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732) It is not the
fierce that bear the yoke, but the humble and the gentle. This clearly
is no base subjection for men, but a glorious one: “that in the Name of
Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven and things beneath; and
that every tongue <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-Page_305"></span>should confess that Jesus is Lord in
the glory of God the Father.” <span id="fr_2733"></span>[2734](#fn_2733)
But for this reason all things were not made subject before, for they
had not yet received the wisdom of God, not yet did they wear the easy
yoke of the Word on the neck as it were of their mind. “But as many as
received Him,” as it is written, “to them gave He power to become the
sons of God.” <span id="fr_2734"></span>[2735](#fn_2734)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p31"></span>168. Will any one say that Christ is
now made subject, because many have believed? Certainly not. For
Christ’s subjection lies not in a few but in all. For just as I do not
seem to be brought into subjection, if the flesh in me as yet lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, <span
id="fr_2735"></span>[2736](#fn_2735) although I am in part subdued; so
because the whole Church is the one body of Christ, we divide Christ as
long as the human race disagrees. Therefore Christ is not yet made
subject, for His members are not yet brought into subjection. But when
we have become, not many members, but one spirit, then He also will
become subject, in order that through His subjection “God may be all and
in all.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p33"></span>169. But as Christ is not yet made
subject, so is the work of God not yet perfected; for the Son of God
said: “My meat is to do the will of My Father that sent Me, and to
finish His work.” <span id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736) What manner
of doubt is there that the subjection of the Son in me is still in the
future, in whom the work of the Father is unfinished, because I myself
am not yet perfect? I, who make the work of God to be unfinished, do I
make the Son of God to be in subjection? But that is not a matter of
wrong, it is a matter of grace. For in so far as we are made subject, it
is to our profit, not to that of the Godhead, that we are made subject
to the law, that we are made subject to grace. For formerly, as the
Apostle himself has said, the wisdom of the flesh was at enmity with
God, for “it was not made subject to the law,” <span
id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737) but now it is made subject through
the Passion of Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2721"></span>[303:2722](2100267.htm#fr_2721) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p5"></span> [Ps. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2722"></span>[303:2723](2100267.htm#fr_2722) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p7"></span> [Eph. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2723"></span>[303:2724](2100267.htm#fr_2723) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p8"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2724"></span>[303:2725](2100267.htm#fr_2724) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p10"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2725"></span>[303:2726](2100267.htm#fr_2725) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p12"></span> [Eph. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[303:2727](2100267.htm#fr_2726) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p14"></span> [1 Cor.
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[304:2728](2100267.htm#fr_2727) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
21-28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2728"></span>[304:2729](2100267.htm#fr_2728) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p17"></span> [Heb. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2729"></span>[304:2730](2100267.htm#fr_2729) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p20"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[304:2731](2100267.htm#fr_2730) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p24"></span> S. [John viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[304:2732](2100267.htm#fr_2731) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p26"></span> S. [Matt. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[304:2733](2100267.htm#fr_2732) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p28"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2733"></span>[305:2734](2100267.htm#fr_2733) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p29"></span> [Phil. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2734"></span>[305:2735](2100267.htm#fr_2734) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p30"></span> S. [John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2735"></span>[305:2736](2100267.htm#fr_2735) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p32"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[305:2737](2100267.htm#fr_2736) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p34"></span> S. [John iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[305:2738](2100267.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p35"></span> [Rom. viii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xiv-p35.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. He continues the discussion of the difficulty he has
entered upon, and teaches that Christ is not subject but only according
to the flesh. Christ, however, whilst in subjection in the Flesh, still
gave proofs of His Godhead. He combats the idea that Christ is made
subject in This. The humanity indeed, which He adopted, has been so far
made subject in us, as ours has been raised in that very humanity of
His. Lastly, we are taught, when that same subjection of Christ will
take place.](2100268)
