[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100190)  [Next](2100192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p1"></span>The likeness of the Son to the Father
being proved, it is not hard to prove the Son’s eternity, though,
indeed, this may be established on the authority of the Prophet Isaiah
and St. John the Evangelist, by which authority the heretical leaders
are shown to be refuted.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p2"></span>54. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>It</span> is plain, therefore, that the
Son is not unlike the Father, and so we may confess the more readily
that He is also eternal, seeing that He Who is like the Eternal must
needs be eternal. But if we say that the Father is eternal, and yet deny
this of the Son, we say that the Son is unlike the Father, for the
temporal differeth from the eternal. The Prophet proclaims Him eternal,
and the Apostle proclaims Him eternal; the Testaments, Old and New
alike, are full of witness to the Son’s eternity.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p3"></span>55. Let us take them, then, in their
order. In the Old Testament—to cite one out of a multitude of
testimonies—it is written: “Before Me hath there been no other God, and
after Me shall there be none.” <span
id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774) I will not comment on this place,
but ask thee straight: “Who speaks these words,—the Father or the Son?”
Whichever of the two thou sayest, thou wilt find thyself convinced, or,
if a believer, instructed. Who, then, speaks these words, the Father or
the Son? If it is the Son, He says, “Before Me hath there been no other
God;” if the Father, He says, “After Me shall there be none.” The One
hath none before Him, the Other none that comes after; as the Father is
known in the Son, so also is the Son known in the Father, for whensoever
you speak of the Father, you speak also by implication of His Son,
seeing that none is his own father; and when you name the Son, you do
also acknowledge His Father, inasmuch as none can be his own son. And so
neither can the Son exist without the Father, nor the Father without the
Son. <span id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775) The Father, therefore,
is eternal, and the Son also eternal.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p6"></span>56. “In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the
beginning with God.” <span id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776) “Was,”
mark you, “with God.” “Was”—see, we have “was” four times over. Where
did the blasphemer find it written that He “was not.” Again, John, in
another passage—in his Epistle—speaketh of “That which was in the
beginning.” <span id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777) The extension of
the “was” is infinite. Conceive any length of time you will, yet still
the Son “was.” <span id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778)

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p18"></span><span id="page_210">p. 210</span>
<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-Page_210"></span>57. Now in this short passage
our fisherman hath barred the way of all heresy. For that which was “in
the beginning” is not comprehended in time, is not preceded by any
beginning. Let Arius, therefore, hold his peace. <span
id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779) Moreover, that which was “with God”
is not confounded and mingled with Him, but is distinguished by the
perfection unblemished which it hath as the Word abiding with God; and
so let Sabellius keep silence. <span
id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780) And “the Word was God.” This Word,
therefore, consisteth not in uttered speech, but in the designation of
celestial excellence, so that Photinus’ teaching is refuted.
Furthermore, by the fact that in the beginning He was with God is proven
the indivisible unity of eternal Godhead in Father and Son, to the shame
and confusion of Eunomius. <span id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781)
Lastly, seeing that all things are said to have been made by Him, He is
plainly shown to be author of the Old and of the New Testament alike; so
that the Manichæan can find no ground for his assaults. <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782) Thus hath the good fisherman caught
them all in one net, to make them powerless to deceive, albeit
unprofitable fish to take.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[209:1775](2100191.htm#fr_1774) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p4"></span> [Is. xliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[209:1776](2100191.htm#fr_1775) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p5"></span> This holds good also of human
fatherhood and sonship. The terms of a relation involve each the
existence of the other—no father, no son, and equally, no son, no
father.

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[209:1777](2100191.htm#fr_1776) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p7"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p7.1"></span>
f. St. Ambrose notices especially the quadruple “was” as unmistakably
signifying the Son’s eternity. We may also notice the climax “The Word
was in the beginning.…was with God.…was *God.*”

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[209:1778](2100191.htm#fr_1777) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p8"></span> [1 John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[209:1779](2100191.htm#fr_1778) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p9"></span> Hurter cites similar passages from
the Fathers of the Church, proving the Son’s pre-existence and eternity.
“What is the force of those words ‘In the beginning’? Centuries are
o’erleaped, ages are swallowed up. Take any beginning you will, yet you
cannot include it in time, for that, whence time is reckoned, already
*was.*”—*Hilary.*

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p10"></span>“Although the word ‘was’ contains the
notion of time past, frequently with a beginning, here it must be
understood without the thought of a beginning, inasmuch as the text runs
‘was in the beginning.’”—*Victorinus.*

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p11"></span>If we render the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p11.1"></span>ἐν ἀρχῇ</span> and
the Latin *in principio* by “*at* the beginning,” in place of the phrase
used in the A.V. “in the beginning,” we shall perhaps better apprehend
its full force and understand these Patristic interpretations.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p12"></span>Other passages cited by Hurter are:

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p13"></span>“Thought cannot escape the dominion
of the word ‘was,’ nor can the imagination pass beyond the ‘beginning,’
for however far back you press in thought, you find no point where the
‘was’ ceases to hold sway, and however diligently you set yourself to
see what is beyond the Son, you will not any the more be able to get to
aught above the beginning.”—*Basil.*

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p14"></span>“For this which was, without any
beginning of existence, was truly at the beginning, for if it had begun
to be, it would not have been ‘at the beginning,’ whereas that in which
absolute existence without beginning is essential, is truly spoken of as
existing ‘at the beginning.’ And so the Evangelist in saying ‘In the
beginning was the Word’ said much the same as if he had said ‘The Word
was in eternity.’”—*Fulgentius.*

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p15"></span>“If the Word <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p15.1"></span>was</span>, the Word was not made: if the
Word was *made,* He was not” \[absolutely existent\]. “But since He
‘*was*’ He was not made: for whatsoever already is and subsists and so
is ‘in the beginning’ cannot be said to become or to have been
made.”—*Cyril.*

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p16"></span>“Nothing before a beginning, so the
beginning be one really and truly, for of a beginning there can in no
way be any beginning, and if anything else before it is supposed or
arises, it ceases to be a true beginning.…

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p17"></span>“If the Word was ‘in the beginning,’
what mind, I would ask, can prevail against the power of that verb
‘was’? When, indeed, will that verb find its limit, and there, as it
were, come to a halt, seeing that it even eludes the pursuit of thought
and outstrips the fleetness of the mind.”—*Cyril.*

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[210:1780](2100191.htm#fr_1779) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p19"></span> The Arian teaching concerning the
Son was—<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p19.1"></span>ἦν ποτε
ὅτε οὐκ ἦ</span> “There was a time when He was not.” This, St. Ambrose
says, is irreconcilable with St. John’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p19.2"></span>ἐν ἀρχῆ ἦν ὁ λόγος</span>. “The Word was
‘*in*’ or ‘*at* the beginning.’”

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[210:1781](2100191.htm#fr_1780) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p20"></span> Sabellianism reduced the distinction
of three Persons in the Godhead to a distinction of several aspects of
the same Person. They did not “divide the substance,” but they
“confounded the Persons.”

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[210:1782](2100191.htm#fr_1781) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p21"></span> *Non in prolatione sermonis hoc
Verbum est.* That is to say, the Divine Word or Logos was not such in
the sense of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p21.1"></span>λόγος προφορικός</span>—*i.e.* uttered
spoken word, and so a creature, but rather in the sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p21.2"></span>λόγος
ἐνδιάθετος</span>—the inherent eternal object of the Divine
Consciousness.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p22"></span>Cf. Eunomius (v. s. § 44), was a
leading Arian teacher. The argument levelled against him here would also
have been fitly directed against Arius himself.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[210:1783](2100191.htm#fr_1782) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p23"></span> The heresy of Manes or Mani made its
first appearance in Persia, in the reign of Shapur I. (240–272 <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iv.iii.ix-p23.1"></span>a.d.</span>). According
to the Persian historian Mirkhond, Mani was a member of an ancient
priestly house which had preserved the holy fire and the religion of
Zoroaster during the dark age of Parthian domination. He attracted the
notice of Shapur by pretensions to visions and prophetic powers, and
sought to establish himself as another Daniel at the Persian Court. When
the king, however, discovered Mani’s hostility to the established
Zoroastrianism and the Magian hierarchy, the prophet was obliged to
flee. Northern India appears to have been Mani’s refuge for a season,
and thence, after some years of retirement, he reappeared, with an
illustrated edition of his doctrines, composed and executed, as he said,
by divine hands. Shapur was now dead and his successor Hormuz (272–274)
was favourably disposed to Mani. But Hormuz only reigned two years, and
was succeeded by a king who was a sworn foe to the new doctrine. Mani
was challenged to a public disputation by the Magi. The king presided,
so that Mani doubtless knew from the first what the issue would be. He
was flayed alive, but he left numerous converts, and his death, which
cast a certain halo of martyrdom around him, and their sufferings in
persecution, really proved—as in the case of Christianity—conducive to
the spread of Manichæan doctrine. The fundamental principle of Mani’s
system was Dualism—the opposition of mind and matter, and the hypothesis
of two co-eternal co-existent powers of good and of evil. In opposition
to the Divine Essence, the Good Principle, was placed uncreated Evil,
and thus the problem of sin and evil was solved. The purposes of
creation and redemption were, in the Manichæan view, entirely
self-seeking on the part of the Deity. The world was created by God, not
out of free love, but out of the wish to protect Himself against evil,
embodied in matter, which in its essence is chaotic. Redemption was the
rescue of particles of the ethereal Light, buried amidst the gross
darkness of matter, and yet leavening and informing it. Christ was
identified with the Divine Principle and the sufferings of His members,
the particles of divine Light buried in matter, were the Crucifixion,
thus represented as an age-long agony. Jesus Christ was “crucified in
the whole world.” Mani adopted the story of Eden, but he represented the
eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge not as the cause of Man’s
fall, but as the first step in redemption, for Jehovah, the God of the
Old Testament, was not the true God, but the evil Demon, from whose
tyranny man had to be rescued. In order to attain salvation, the body,
material and therefore essentially evil, must be mortified and starved.
Man really fell when Eve tempted him to indulge fleshly lust, not when
he ate the forbidden fruit. The stricter sort of the Manichæans
practised a severe asceticism, abstaining from flesh meat and marriage.
They would not even grind corn or make bread, for in grain there was
life—*i.e.* an emanation of the Divine Light—though they would *eat*
bread, quieting their conscience, however, by saying before they took
it, “It was not I who reaped or ground the corn to make this bread.” At
the end of time they held the world was to be destroyed by fire, but
matter being, on the Manichæan hypothesis, eternal, the proper inference
appears to be that the conflict of Light and Chaotic Darkness would
recommence, and proceed *usque ad infinitum.* The Manichæan system was a
strange eclectic farrago, embodying, in chimerical monstrosity, features
of Zoroastrianism, Judaism (in so far as the story of Eden was taken
over), Gnosticism (appearing in the theory that Jehovah was the Demon
and that the eating of forbidden fruit did not cause the Fall),
Christianity, and Pantheism (the last, doubtless, an importation from
Hindostan). The disciples of the school made their way into the Roman
Empire, and we find them, 150 years after the death of Mani, opposed by
Augustine of Hippo, who indeed had at one time actually numbered himself
amongst them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. St. Ambrose questions the heretics and exhibits their
answer, which is, that the Son existed, indeed, before all time, yet was
not co-eternal with the Father, whereat the Saint shows that they
represent the Godhead as changeable, and further, that each Person must
be believed to be eternal.](2100192)
