[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100167)  [Next](2100169) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p1"></span>The Father is holy, and likewise the
Son and the Spirit, and so They are honoured in the same Trisagion: nor
can we speak more worthily of God than by calling Him Holy; whence it is
clear that we must not derogate from the dignity of the Holy Spirit. In
Him is all which pertains to God, since in baptism He is named with the
Father and the Son, and the Father has given to Him to be greater than
all, nor can any one deprive Him of this. And so from the very passage
of St. John which heretics used against His dignity, the equality of the
Trinity and the Unity of the Godhead is established. Lastly, after
explaining how the Son receives from the Father, St. Ambrose shows how
various heresies are refuted by the passage cited.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>109. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p2.1"></span>So</span>, then, the Father is holy, the
Son is holy, and the Spirit is holy, but they are not three
Holies; <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376) for there is one Holy
<span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-Page_151"></span>God, one Lord. For the true holiness
is one, as the true Godhead is one, as that true holiness belonging to
the Divine Nature is one.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p4"></span>110. So everything which we esteem
holy proclaims that Sole Holiness. Cherubim and Seraphim with unwearied
voices praise Him and say: “Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord God of
Sabaoth.” <span id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377) They say it, not
once, lest you should believe that there is but one; not twice, lest you
should exclude the Spirit; they say not holies \[in the plural\], lest
you should imagine that there is plurality, but they repeat thrice and
say the same word, that even in a hymn you may understand the
distinction of Persons in the Trinity, and the oneness of the Godhead
and while they say this they proclaim God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p6"></span>111. We too find nothing of more
worth, whereby we are able to proclaim God, than the calling Him holy.
Everything is too low for God, too low for the Lord. And therefore
consider from this fact also whether one ought at all to derogate from
the Holy Spirit, whose Name is the praise of God. For thus is the Father
praised, thus is the Son also praised, in the same manner as the Spirit
also is named and praised. The Seraphim utter praise, the whole company
of the blessed utter praise, inasmuch as they call God holy, the Son
holy, the Spirit holy.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p7"></span>112. How, then, does He not possess
all that pertains to God, Who is named by priests in baptism with the
Father and the Son, and is invoked in the oblations, is proclaimed by
the Seraphim in heaven with the Father and the Son, dwells in the Saints
with the Father and the Son, is poured upon the just, is given as the
source of inspiration to the prophets? And for this reason in the divine
Scripture all is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p7.1"></span>θεόπνευστος</span>, because God inspires
what the Spirit has spoken.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p8"></span>113. Or if they are unwilling to allow
that the Holy Spirit has all things which pertain to God, and can do all
things, let them say what He has not, and what He cannot do. For like as
the Son has all things, and the Father grudges not to give all things to
the Son according to His nature, having given to Him that which is
greater than all, as the Scripture bears witness, saying: “That which My
Father hath given unto Me is greater than all.” <span
id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378) So too the Spirit has of Christ
that which is greater than all, because righteousness knows not
grudging.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p10"></span>114. So, then, if we attend
diligently, we comprehend here also the oneness of the Divine Power. He
says: “That which My Father hath given unto Me is greater than all, and
no one is able to snatch them out of My Father’s hand. I and the Father
are One.” <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379) For if we rightly
showed above that the Holy Spirit is the Hand of the Father, the same is
certainly the Hand of the Father which is the Hand of the Son, since the
Same is the Spirit of the Father Who is the Spirit of the Son. Therefore
whosoever of us receives eternal life in this Name of the Trinity, as he
is not torn from the Father; so he is not torn from the Son, so too he
is not torn from the Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p12"></span>115. Again, from the very fact that
the Father is said to have given to the Son, and the Spirit to have
received from the Son, as it is written: “He shall glorify Me, for He
shall take of Mine, and shall declare it unto you” <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380) (which He seems to have said rather
of the office of distributing, than of the prerogative of Divine Power,
for those whom the Son redeemed the Spirit also, Who was to sanctify
them, received), from those very words, I say, from which they construct
their sophistry, the Unity of the Godhead is perceived, not the need of
a gift.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p14"></span>116. The Father gave by begetting,
not by adoption; He gave as it were that which was contained in the very
prerogative of the Divine Nature, not what was lacking as it were by
favour of His bounty. And so because the Son acquires persons to Himself
as the Father does; so gives life as does the Father, He expressed His
equality with the Father in the Unity of Power, saying: “I and the
Father are One.” For when He says, “I and the Father,” equality is
revealed; when He says, “are One,” Unity is asserted. Equality excludes
confusion; Unity excludes separation. Equality distinguishes between the
Father and the Son; Unity does not separate the Father and the Son.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p15"></span>117. Therefore, when He says, “I and
the Father,” He rejects the Sabellian, for He says that He is one, the
Father another; He rejects the Photinian, for He joins Himself with God
the Father. With the former words He rejects those, for He said: “I and
the Father;” with the latter words He rejects the Arians, for He says:
“are One.” Yet in both the former and the latter words He refutes the
heretical violence (1) of the Sabellians, for He said: “We are One
\[Substance\],” not “We are One\[Person\].” And (2) of the Arians, for
He said: “I and the Father,” not “the Father and I.” Which <span
id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-Page_152"></span>was
certainly not a sign of rudeness, but of dutifulness and foreknowledge,
that we might not think wrongly from the order of the words. For unity
knows no order, equality knows no gradation; nor can it be laid to the
Son of God that the Teacher Himself of dutifulness should offend against
dutifulness by rudeness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[150:1377](2100168.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p3"></span> This is, of course, to be understood
as in the Athanasian Creed. The attributes of eternity, omnipotence,
etc., are ascribed to each of the Three Persons, and we are then told
that there are not three Eternals, etc. Each Person of the Holy Trinity
possesses each attribute, but the attributes are all one and cannot be
divided any more than the Godhead. Each Person is holy, but there are
not, so to say, three separate Holinesses.

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[151:1378](2100168.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p5"></span> [Isa. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[151:1379](2100168.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p9"></span> S. [John x.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[151:1380](2100168.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p11"></span> S. [John
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[151:1381](2100168.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p13"></span> S. [John xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xvi-p13.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. St. Ambrose shows by instances that the places in
which those words were spoken help to the understanding of the words of
the Lord; he shows that Christ uttered the passage quoted from St. John
in Solomon's porch, by which is signified the mind of a wise man, for he
says that Christ would not have uttered this saying in the heart of a
foolish or contentious man. He goes on to say that Christ is stoned by
those who believe not these words, and as the keys of heaven were given
to Peter for his confession of them, so Iscariot, because he believed
not the same, perished evilly. He takes this opportunity to inveigh
against the Jews who bought the Son of God and sold Joseph. He explains
the price paid for each mystically; and having in the same manner
expounded the murmuring of the traitor concerning Magdalene's ointment,
he adds that Christ is bought in one way by heretics in another way by
Catholics, and that those in vain take to themselves the name of
Christians who sever the Spirit from the Fath](2100169)
