[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100150)  [Next](2100152.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIII.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p1"></span>Prophecy was not only from the Father
and the Son but also from the Spirit; the authority and operation of the
latter on the apostles is signified to be the same as Theirs; and so we
are to understand that there is unity in the three points of authority,
rule, and bounty; yet need no disadvantage be feared from that
participation, since such does not arise in human friendship. Lastly, it
is established that this is the inheritance of the apostolic faith from
the fact that the apostles are described as having obeyed the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p2"></span>143. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p2.1"></span>Take</span>, O sacred Emperor, another
strong instance in this question, and one known to you: “In many ways
and in divers manners, God spake to the fathers in the prophets.” <span
id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209.md) And the Wisdom of God said: “I will
send prophets and apostles.” <span id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210.md)
And “To one is given,” as it is written, “through the Spirit, the word
of wisdom; to another, the word of knowledge, according to the same
Spirit; to another faith, in the same Spirit; to another, the gift of
healings, in the one Spirit; to another, the working of miracles; to
another, prophecy.” <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211.md)
Therefore, according to the Apostle, prophecy is not only through the
Father and the Son, but also through the Holy Spirit, and therefore the
office is one, and the grace one. So you find that the Spirit also is
the author of prophecies.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p6"></span>144. The apostles also said: “It
seemed good to the Holy Spirit and to us.” <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212.md) And when they say, “It seemed
good,” they point out not only the Worker of the grace, but also the
Author of the carrying out of that which was commanded. For as we read
of God: “It pleased God;” so, too, when it is said that, “It seemed good
to the Holy Spirit,” one who is master of his own power is portrayed.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p8"></span>145. And how should He not be a
master Who speaks what He wills, and commands what He wills, as the
Father commands and the Son commands? For as Paul heard the voice saying
to him, “I am Jesus, Whom thou persecutest,” <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213.md) so, too, the Spirit forbade Paul
and Silas to go into Bithynia. And as the Father spake through the
prophets, so, too, Agabus says concerning the Spirit: “Thus saith the
Holy Spirit, Thus shall the Jews in Jerusalem bind the man, whose is
this girdle.” <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214.md) And as Wisdom
sent the apostles, saying, “Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel,” <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215.md) so, too, the Holy
Spirit says: “Separate Me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them.” <span id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216.md) And so
being sent forth by the Holy Spirit, as the Scripture points out farther
on, they were distinguished in nothing from the other apostles, as
though they were sent in one way by God the Father, in another way by
Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p13"></span>146. Lastly, Paul having been sent
by the Spirit, was both a vessel of election on <span id="page_134">p.
134</span> <span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-Page_134"></span>Christ’s part, and
himself relates that God wrought in him, saying: “For He that wrought
for Peter unto the apostleship of the circumcision, wrought for me also
unto the Gentiles.” <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217.md) Since,
then, the Same wrought in Paul Who wrought in Peter, it is certainly
evident that, since the Spirit wrought in Paul, the Holy Spirit wrought
also in Peter. But Peter himself testifies that God the Father wrought
in him, as it is stated in the Acts of the Apostles that Peter rose up
and said to them: “Men and brethren, ye know that a good while ago God
made choice amongst us that the Gentiles should hear the word of the
Gospel from my mouth.” See, then, in Peter God wrought the grace of
preaching. And who would dare to deny the operation of Christ in him,
since he was certainly elected and chosen by Christ, when the Lord said:
“Feed My lambs.” <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p16"></span>147. The operation, then, of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit is one, unless perchance you, who
deny the oneness of the same operation upon the Apostle, think this;
that the Father and the Spirit wrought in Peter, in whom the Son had
wrought, as if the operation of the Son by no means sufficed for him to
the attainment of the grace. And so the strength of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit being as it were joined and brought
together, the work was manifold, lest the operation of Christ alone
should be too weak to establish Peter.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p17"></span>148. And not only in Peter is there
found to be one operation of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
but also in all the apostles the unity of the divine operation, and a
certain authority over the dispensations of heaven. For the divine
operation works by the power of a command, not in the execution of a
ministry; for God, when He works, does not fashion anything by toil or
art, but “He spake and they were made.” <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219.md) He said, “Let there be light, and
there was light,” <span id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md) for the
effecting of the work is comprised in the commandment of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p20"></span>149. We can, then, easily find, if
we will consider, that this royal power is by the witness of the
Scriptures attributed to the Holy Spirit; and it will be made clear that
all the apostles were not only disciples of Christ, but also ministers
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. As also the teacher of the
Gentiles tells us, when he says: “God hath set some in the Church, first
apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers; then miracles, the
gift of healings, helps, governments, divers kinds of tongues.” <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p22"></span>150. See, God set apostles, and set
prophets and teachers, gave the gift of healings, which you find above
to be given by the Holy Spirit; gave divers kinds of tongues. But yet
all are not apostles, all are not prophets, all are not teachers. Not
all, says he, have the gift of healings, nor do all, says he, speak with
tongues. <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md) For the whole of the
divine gifts cannot exist in each several man; each, according to his
capacity, receives that which he either desires or deserves. But the
power of the Trinity, which is lavish of all graces, is not like this
weakness.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p24"></span>151. Lastly, God set apostles. Those
whom God set in the Church, Christ chose and ordained to be apostles,
and sent them into the world, saying: “Go ye into all the world, and
preach the Gospel to the whole creation. He that shall believe and be
baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth not shall be damned. And
these signs shall follow them that believe. In My Name shall they cast
out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up
serpents, and if they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them, they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.” <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223.md) You see the Father and Christ also
set teachers in the Churches; and as the Father gives the gift of
healings, so, too, does the Son give; as the Father gives the gift of
tongues, so, too, has the Son also granted it.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p26"></span>152. In like manner we have heard
also above concerning the Holy Spirit, that He too grants the same kinds
of graces. For it is said: “To one is given through the Spirit the gift
of healings, to another divers kinds of tongues, to another
prophecy.” <span id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224.md) So, then, the
Spirit gives the same gifts as the Father, and the Son also gives them.
Let us now learn more expressly what we have touched upon above, that
the Holy Spirit entrusts the same office as the Father and the Son, and
appoints the same persons; since Paul said: “Take heed to yourselves,
and to all the flock in the which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers
to rule the Church of God.” <span id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p29"></span>153. There is, then, unity of
authority, unity of appointment, unity of giving. For if you separate
appointment and power, what cause was there \[for maintaining\] that
those whom Christ appointed as apostles, God the Father <span
id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-Page_135"></span>appointed, and the Holy Spirit
appointed? unless, perhaps, as if sharing a possession or a right, They,
like men, were afraid of legal prejudice, and therefore the operation
was divided, and the authority distributed.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p30"></span>154. These things are narrow and
paltry, even between men, who for the most part, although they do not
agree in action, yet agree in will. So that a certain person being asked
what a friend is, answered, “A second self.” If, then, a man so defined
a friend as to say, he was a second self, that is to say, through a
oneness of love and good-will, how much more ought we to esteem the
oneness of Majesty, in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, when by
the same operation and divine power, either the unity, or certainly that
which is more, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p30.1"></span>ταυτότης</span>, as it is called in
Greek, is expressed, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p30.2"></span>ταύτο</span> signifies “the same,” so
that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit have the same; so that to
have the same will and the same power does not arise from the affection
of the will, but inheres in the substance of the Trinity.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p31"></span>155. This is the inheritance of
apostolic faith and devotion, which one may observe also in the Acts of
the Apostles. Therefore Paul and Barnabas obeyed the commands of the
Holy Spirit. And all the apostles obeyed, and forthwith ordained those
whom the Spirit had ordered to be separated: “Separate Me,” said He,
“Barnabas and Saul.” <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226.md) Do you
see the authority of Him Who commands? Consider the merit of those who
obey.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p33"></span>156. Paul believed, and because he
believed he cast off the zeal of a persecutor, and gained a crown of
righteousness. He believed who used to make havoc of the Churches; but
being converted to the faith, he preached in the Spirit that which the
Spirit commanded. <span id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227.md) The Spirit
anointed His champion, and having shaken off the dust of unbelief,
presented him as an insuperable conqueror of the unbelievers to various
assemblies of the ungodly, and trained him by many sufferings for the
prize of his high calling in Christ Jesus.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p35"></span>157. Barnabas also believed, and
obeyed because he believed. Therefore, being chosen by the authority of
the Holy Spirit, Which came on him abundantly, as a special sign of his
merits, he was not unworthy of so great a fellowship. For one grace
shone in these whom one Spirit had chosen.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p36"></span>158. Nor was Paul inferior to Peter,
though the latter was the foundation of the Church, and the former a
wise builder knowing how to make firm the footsteps of the nations who
believed; Paul was not, I say, unworthy of the fellowship of the
apostles, but is easily comparable with the first, and second to none.
For he who knows not that he is inferior makes himself equal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[133:1210](2100151.htm#fr_1209.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p3"></span> [Heb. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[133:1211](2100151.htm#fr_1210.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p4"></span> S. [Luke xi.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#049.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[133:1212](2100151.htm#fr_1211.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p5"></span> [1 Cor.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[133:1213](2100151.htm#fr_1212.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p7"></span> [Acts xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[133:1214](2100151.htm#fr_1213.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p9"></span> [Acts ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[133:1215](2100151.htm#fr_1214.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p10"></span> [Acts xxi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[133:1216](2100151.htm#fr_1215.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p11"></span> S. [Mark xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[133:1217](2100151.htm#fr_1216.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p12"></span> [Acts xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[134:1218](2100151.htm#fr_1217.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p14"></span> [Gal. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[134:1219](2100151.htm#fr_1218.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p15"></span> S. [John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[134:1220](2100151.htm#fr_1219.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p18"></span> [Psa.
33.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[134:1221](2100151.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p19"></span> [Gen. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[134:1222](2100151.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p21"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[134:1223](2100151.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p23"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[134:1224](2100151.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p25"></span> S. [Mark xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p25.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[134:1225](2100151.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p27"></span> [1 Cor.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[134:1226](2100151.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p28"></span> [Acts xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[135:1227](2100151.htm#fr_1226.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p32"></span> [Acts xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[135:1228](2100151.htm#fr_1227.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p34"></span> [Acts ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xiv-p34.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III.](2100152.md)
