[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100321)  [Next](2100323.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p1"></span>This treatise has a favourable
beginning, since it is the birthday of the holy Virgin Agnes, of whose
name, modesty, and martyrdom St. Ambrose speaks in commendation, but
more especially of her age, seeing that she, being but twelve years old,
was superior to terrors, promises, tortures, and death itself, with a
courage wholly worthy of a man.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p2"></span>5. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>And</span> my task begins favourably, that
since to-day is the birthday of a virgin, I have to speak of virgins,
and the treatise has its beginning from this discourse. It is the
birthday of a martyr, let us offer the victim. It is the birthday of St.
Agnes, let men admire, let children take courage, let the married be
astounded, let the unmarried take an example. But what can I say worthy
of her whose very name was not devoid of bright praise? In devotion
beyond her age, in virtue above nature, she seems to me to have borne
not so much a human name, as a token of martyrdom, whereby she showed
what she was to be.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p3"></span>6. But I have that which may assist
me. The name of virgin is a title of modesty. I will call upon the
martyr, I will proclaim the virgin. That panegyric is long enough which
needs no elaboration, but is within our grasp. Let then labour cease,
eloquence be silent. One word is praise enough. This word old men and
young and boys chant. No one is more praiseworthy than he who can be
praised by all. There are as many heralds as there are men, who when
they speak proclaim the martyr.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p4"></span>7. She is said to have suffered
martyrdom when twelve years old. The more hateful was the cruelty, which
spared not so tender an age, the greater in truth was the power of faith
which found evidence even in that age. Was there room for a wound in
that small body? And she who had no room for the blow of the steel had
that wherewith to conquer the steel. But maidens of that age are unable
to bear even the angry looks of parents, and are wont to cry at the
pricks of a needle as though they were wounds. She was fearless under
the cruel hands of the executioners, she was unmoved by the heavy weight
of the creaking chains, offering her whole body to the sword of the
raging soldier, as yet ignorant of death, but ready for it. Or if she
were unwillingly hurried to the altars, she was ready to stretch forth
her hands to Christ at the sacrificial fires, and at the sacrilegious
altars themselves, to make the sign of the Lord the Conqueror, <span
id="fr_3170"></span>[3171](#fn_3170.md) or again to place her neck and both
her hands in the iron bands, but no band could enclose such slender
limbs.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p6"></span>8. A new kind of martyrdom! Not yet of
fit age for punishment but already ripe for victory, difficult to
contend with but easy to be crowned, she filled the office of teaching
valour while having the disadvantage of youth. She would not as a bride
so hasten to the couch, as being a virgin she joyfully went to the place
of punishment with hurrying step, her head not adorned with plaited
hair, but with Christ. All wept, she alone was without a tear. All
wondered that she was so readily prodigal of her life, which she had not
yet enjoyed, and now gave up as though she had gone through it. Every
one was astounded that there was now one to bear witness to the Godhead,
who as yet could not, because of her age, dispose of herself. And she
brought it to pass that she should be believed concerning God, whose
evidence concerning man would not be accepted. For that which is beyond
nature is from the Author of nature.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p7"></span>9. What threats the executioner used
to make her fear him, what allurements to persuade her, how many desired
that she would come to them in marriage! But she answered: “It would be
an injury to my spouse to look on any one as likely to please me. He who
chose me first for Himself shall receive me. Why are you delaying,
executioner? Let this body perish which can be loved by eyes which I
would not.” She stood, she prayed, she bent down her neck. You could see
the executioner tremble, as though he himself had been condemned, and
his right hand shake, his face grow pale, as he feared the peril of
another, while the maiden feared not for her own. You have then in one
victim <span id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-Page_365"></span>a twofold martyrdom, of modesty and of
religion. She both remained a virgin and she obtained martyrdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3170"></span>[364:3171](2100322.htm#fr_3170.md) <span
id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii.ii-p5"></span> *i.e.* raise her arms in the form of
a cross.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Virginity is praised on many grounds, but chiefly
because it brought down the Word from heaven, and hence its pursuit,
which existed in but few under the old covenant, has spread to countless
numbers.](2100323.md)
