[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100107)  [Next](2100109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p1"></span>How virtuous and useful was that which
Elisha did. This is compared with that oft-recounted act of the Greeks.
John gave up his life for virtue’s sake, and Susanna for the same reason
exposed herself to the danger of death.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p2"></span>86. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>What</span> did Elisha follow but virtue,
when he brought the army of Syria who had come to take him as captive
into Samaria, after having covered their eyes with blindness? Then he
said: “O Lord, open their eyes that they may see.” <span
id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690) And they saw. But when the king of
Israel wished to slay those that had entered and asked the prophet to
give him leave to do so, he answered that they whose captivity was not
brought about by strength of hand or weapons of war must not be slain,
but that rather he should help them by supplying food. Then they were
refreshed with plenty of food. And after that those Syrian robbers
thought they must never again return to the land of Israel.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p4"></span>87. How much nobler was this than that
which the Greeks once did! <span id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691) For
when two nations strove one with the other to gain glory and supreme
power, and one of them had the opportunity to burn the ships of the
other secretly, they thought it a shameful thing to do so, and preferred
to gain a less advantage honourably than a greater one in shameful wise.
They, indeed, could not act thus without disgrace to themselves, and
entrap by this plot those who had banded together for the sake of ending
the Persian war. Though they could deny it in word, yet they could never
but blush at the thought of it. Elisha, however, wished to save, not
destroy, those who were deceived indeed, though not by some foul act,
and had been struck blind by the power of the Lord. For it was seemly to
spare an enemy, and to grant his life to an adversary when indeed he
could have taken it, had he not spared it.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p6"></span>88. It is plain, then, that whatever is
<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-Page_82"></span>seemly is always useful. For holy Judith
by seemly disregard for her own safety put an end to the dangers of the
siege, and by her own virtue won what was useful to all in common. And
Elisha gained more renown by pardoning than he would have done by
slaying, and preserved those enemies whom he had taken for greater
usefulness.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p7"></span>89. And what else did John have in mind
but what is virtuous, so that he could not endure a wicked union even in
the king’s case, saying: “It is not lawful for thee to have her to
wife.” <span id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692) He could have been
silent, had he not thought it unseemly for himself not to speak the
truth for fear of death, or to make the prophetic office yield to the
king, or to indulge in flattery. He knew well that he would die as he
was against the king, but he preferred virtue to safety. Yet what is
more expedient than the suffering which brought glory to the saint.

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p9"></span>90. Holy Susanna, too, when threatened
with the fear of false witness, seeing herself hard pressed on one side
by danger, on the other by disgrace, preferred to avoid disgrace by a
virtuous death rather than to endure and live a shameful life in the
desire to save herself. <span id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693) So while
she fixed her mind on virtue, she also preserved her life. But if she
had preferred what seemed to her to be useful to preserve life, she
would never have gained such great renown, nay, perhaps—and that would
have been not only useless but even dangerous—she might even not have
escaped the penalty for her crime. We note, therefore, that whatsoever
is shameful cannot be useful, nor, again, can that which is virtuous be
useless. For usefulness is ever the double of virtue, and virtue of
usefulness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_690"></span>[81:691](2100108.htm#fr_690) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p3"></span> [2 Kings
6.20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[81:692](2100108.htm#fr_691) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p5"></span> Cic. *de Off.* III. 11, § 49.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[82:693](2100108.htm#fr_692) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p8"></span> S. [Matt. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[82:694](2100108.htm#fr_693) <span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p10"></span> Sus. v. 23<span
id="iv.i.iv.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. After mentioning a noble action of the Romans, the
writer shows from the deeds of Moses that he had the greatest regard for
what is virtuous.](2100109)
