[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100055)  [Next](2100057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLIV.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p1"></span>Every one ought to apply himself to
the duties suited to his character. Many, however, are hindered by
following their fathers’ pursuits. Clerics act in a different way.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p2"></span>224. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p2.1"></span>Each</span> one knows his own powers.
Therefore let each one apply himself to that which he has chosen as
suitable to himself. But he must first consider what will be the
consequences. He may know his good points, but he must know his faults
also. He must also be a fair judge of himself, so as to aim at what is
good and avoid what is bad.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p3"></span>225. One is more fitted for the post
of reader, another does better for the singing, a third is more
solicitous for exorcising those possessed with an evil spirit, another,
again, is held to be more suited to have the charge of the sacred
things. All these things a priest should look at. He should give each
one that particular duty for which he is best fitted. For whither each
one’s bent of mind leads him, or whatever duty befits him, that position
or duty is filled with greater grace.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p4"></span>226. But as this is a difficult matter
in every state of life, so in our case it is most difficult. For each
one is wont to follow his parent’s choice in life. <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316.md) Thus those whose fathers were in the
army generally enter the army too. And others do the same with regard to
the different professions.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p6"></span>227. In the clerical office, however,
nothing is more rare than to find a man to follow his father’s
footsteps, <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317.md) either because the
difficulties of the work hold him back, or continence in the uncertain
days of youth is too difficult to hold to, or the life seems to be too
quiet for the activity of youth. So they turn to those pursuits which
are thought to be more showy. Most, indeed, prefer the present to the
future. They are fighting for the present, we for the future. Wherefore
it follows that the greater the cause in which we are engaged, the more
must our attention be devoted to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[36:317](2100056.htm#fr_316.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p5"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 31, § 114.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[36:318](2100056.htm#fr_317.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xliv-p7"></span> It has been supposed that St. Ambrose
in this passage by “father” means “spiritual father,” in whose hands the
teaching and guidance of the young was put. But there is no reason why
the word should not be taken in its ordinary sense. If so, however, the
father must have been in one of the inferior orders only, or else his
children must have been born before he was admitted to the priesthood.
For elsewhere (I. 258), as here, St. Ambrose clearly shows that absolute
continence is required of priests, after entering on their sacred
office.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLV. On what is noble and virtuous, and what the
difference between them is, as stated both in the profane and sacred
writers.](2100057.md)
