[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100099)  [Next](2100101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p1"></span>We ought not to allow the idea of profit
to get hold of us. What excuses they make who get their gains by selling
corn, and what answer ought to be made to them. In connection with this
certain parables from the Gospels and some of the sayings of Solomon are
set before our eyes.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p2"></span>37. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>Let</span> not, therefore, expediency get
the better of virtue, but virtue of expediency. By expediency here I
mean what is accounted so by people generally. Let love of money be
destroyed, let lust die. The holy man says that he has never been
engaged in business. <span id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640) For to get
an increase in price is a sign not of simplicity but of cunning.
Elsewhere it says: “He that seeketh a high price for his corn is cursed
among the people.” <span id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641)

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p5"></span>38. Plain and definite is the statement,
leaving no room for debate, such as a disputatious kind of speaking is
wont to give, when one maintains that agriculture is considered
praiseworthy by all; that the fruits of the earth are easily grown; that
the more a man has sown, the greater will be his meed of praise;
further, that the richer returns of his active labours are not gained by
fraud, and that carelessness and disregard for an uncultivated soil are
wont to be blamed.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p6"></span>39. I have ploughed, he says, carefully.
I have sown freely. I have tilled actively. I have gathered good
increase. I have stored it anxiously, saved it faithfully, and guarded
it with care. Now in a time of famine I <span id="page_74">p. 74</span>
<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-Page_74"></span>sell it, and come to the help of
the hungry. I sell my own corn, not another’s. And for no more than
others, nay, even at a less price. What fraud is there here, when many
would come to great danger if they had nothing to buy? Is industry to be
made a crime? Or diligence to be blamed? Or foresight to be abused?
Perhaps he may even say: Joseph collected corn in a time of abundance,
and sold it when it was dear. Is any one forced to buy it at too dear a
price? Is force employed against the buyer? The opportunity to buy is
afforded to all, injury is inflicted on none.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p7"></span>40. When this has been said, and one
man’s ideas have carried him so far, another rises and says: Agriculture
is good indeed, for it supplies fruits for all, and by simple industry
adds to the richness of the earth without any cheating or fraud. If
there is any error, the loss is the greater, for the better a man sows,
the better he will reap. If he has sown the pure grain of wheat, he
gathers a purer and cleaner harvest. The fruitful earth returns what she
has received in manifold measure. A good field returns its produce with
interest.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p8"></span>41. Thou must expect payment for thy
labour from the crops of the fruitful land, and must hope for a just
return from the fruitfulness of the rich earth. Why dost thou use the
industry of nature and make a cheat of it? Why dost thou grudge for the
use of men what is grown for all? Why lessen the abundance for the
people? Why make want thy aim? Why make the poor long for a barren
season? For when they do not feel the benefits of a fruitful season,
because thou art putting up the price, and art storing up the corn, they
would far rather that nothing should be produced, than that thou
shouldst do business at the expense of other people’s hunger. Thou
makest much of the want of corn, the small supply of food. Thou groanest
over the rich crops of the soil; thou mournest the general plenty, and
bewailest the garners full of corn; thou art on the lookout to see when
the crop is poor and the harvest fails. Thou rejoicest that a curse has
smiled upon thy wishes, so that none should have their produce. Then
thou rejoicest that thy harvest has come. Then thou collectest wealth
from the misery of all, and callest this industry and diligence, when it
is but cunning shrewdness and an adroit trick of the trade. Thou callest
it a remedy, when it is but a wicked contrivance. Shall I call this
robbery or only gain? These opportunities are seized as though seasons
for plunder, wherein, like some cruel waylayer, thou mayest fall upon
the stomachs of men. The price rises higher as though by the mere
addition of interest, but the danger to life is increased too. For then
the interest of the stored-up crops grows higher. As a usurer thou
hidest up thy corn, as a seller thou puttest it up for auction. Why dost
thou wish evil to all, because the famine will grow worse, as though no
corn should be left, as though a more unfruitful year should follow? Thy
gain is the public loss.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p9"></span>42. Holy Joseph opened the garners to
all; he did not shut them up. He did not try to get the full price of
the year’s produce, but assigned it for a yearly payment. He took
nothing for himself, but, so far as famine could be checked for the
future, he made his arrangements with careful foresight.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p10"></span>43. Thou hast read how the Lord Jesus
in the Gospel speaks of that corn-dealer who was looking out for a high
price, whose possessions brought him in rich fruits, but who, as though
still in need, said: “What shall I do? I have no room where to bestow my
goods. I will pull down my barns and build greater,” <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642) though he could not know whether in
the following night his soul would not be demanded of him. He knew not
what to do, he seemed to be in doubt, just as though he were in want of
food. His barns could not take in the year’s supply, and yet he thought
he was in need.

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p12"></span>44. Rightly, therefore, Solomon says:
“He that withholdeth corn shall leave it for the nations,” <span
id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643) not for his heirs, for the gains of
avarice have nothing to do with the rights of succession. That which is
not rightfully got together is scattered as though by a wind by
outsiders that seize it. And he added: “He who graspeth at the year’s
produce is cursed among the people, but blessing shall be his that
imparteth it.” Thou seest, then, what is said of him who distributes the
corn, but not of him that seeks for a high price. True expediency does
not therefore exist where virtue loses more than expediency gains.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_640"></span>[73:641](2100100.htm#fr_640) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p3"></span> [Ps. lxxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#015)<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>
\[LXX.\]. “Sanctus *in negotiationem* introisse se negat,” says St.
Ambrose, from [Ps. lxxi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.iv.vi-p3.2"></span>. According to the Septuagint, “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p3.3"></span>οὐκ ἔγνων
πραγματείας</span>” which in the old Latin versions became “*quoniam non
cognovi negotiationes*” (the Vulgate has “*literaturam*” for
“*negotiationes*”).

<span id="fn_641"></span>[73:642](2100100.htm#fr_641) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vi-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p4"></span> [Prov. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[74:643](2100100.htm#fr_642) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p11"></span> S. [Luke xii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[74:644](2100100.htm#fr_643) <span
id="iv.i.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p13"></span> [Prov. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.iv.vi-p13.1"></span>.
St. Ambrose cites the same verse each time, but the first time according
to LXX. The second time he varies the commencement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Strangers must never be expelled the city in a time
of famine. In this matter the noble advice of a Christian sage is
adduced, in contrast to which the shameful deed committed at Rome is
given. By comparing the two it is shown that the former is combined with
what is virtuous and useful, but the latter with neither.](2100101)
