[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100253)  [Next](2100255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p0.1"></span>Prologue.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p1"></span>Who is a faithful and wise servant? His
reward is pointed out in the case of Peter, as also in the case of Paul.
Ambrose, being anxious to follow Paul’s guidance, wished this book to be
added to the others, for it could not be included in the preceding one.
The subject for discussion is then stated, and the reason for such a
discussion given. He must needs be pardoned, for usury is to be demanded
from every servant for the money which has been entrusted to him. Their
faithfulness is the usury desired in his own case. He will be happy if
he may hope for a reward; but he does not look so much for the
recompense of the saints, as for exemption from punishment. He urges all
to seek to merit this.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p2"></span>1. “<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p2.1"></span>Who</span>, then, is a faithful and wise
servant, whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them
meat in due season? Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he
cometh shall find so doing.” <span id="fr_2503"></span>[2504](#fn_2503)
Not worthless is this servant: some great one ought he to be. Let us
think who he may be.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p4"></span>2. It is Peter, chosen by the Lord
Himself to feed His flock, who merits thrice to hear the words: “Feed My
little lambs; feed My lambs; feed My sheep.” <span
id="fr_2504"></span>[2505](#fn_2504) And so, by feeding well the flock
of Christ with the food of faith, he effaced the sin of his former fall.
For this reason is he thrice admonished to feed the flock; thrice is he
asked whether he loves the Lord, in order that he may thrice confess
Him, Whom he had thrice denied before His Crucifixion. <span
id="fr_2505"></span>[2506](#fn_2505)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p7"></span>3. Blessed also is that servant who can
say: “I have fed you with milk and not with meat; for hitherto ye were
not able to bear it.” <span id="fr_2506"></span>[2507](#fn_2506) For he
knew how to feed them. Who of us can do this? Who of us can truly say:
“To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak”? <span
id="fr_2507"></span>[2508](#fn_2507)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p10"></span>4. Yet he, being so great a man, and
chosen by Christ for the care of His flock, so as to strengthen the weak
and to heal the sick,—he, I say, rejects forthwith after one
admonition <span id="fr_2508"></span>[2509](#fn_2508) a heretic from the
fold entrusted to him, for fear that the taint of one erring sheep might
infect the whole flock with a spreading sore. He further bids that
foolish questions and contentions be avoided. <span
id="fr_2509"></span>[2510](#fn_2509)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p13"></span>5. How, then, shall we act, being but
ignorant dwellers set amongst these fresh tares in the old-standing
harvest field? <span id="fr_2510"></span>[2511](#fn_2510) If <span
id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span id="iv.iv.vii.i-Page_285"></span>we
are silent, we shall seem to be giving way; and if we contend against
them, there is the fear that we too shall be held to be carnal. For it
is written of matters of this sort, which beget strife: “The servant of
the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all, apt to teach, patient,
with moderation instructing those that oppose themselves.” <span
id="fr_2511"></span>[2512](#fn_2511) And in another place: “If any man
is contentious, we have no such custom, neither the Church of
God.” <span id="fr_2512"></span>[2513](#fn_2512) For this reason it was
our intention to write somewhat, in order that our writings might
without any din answer the impiety of heretics on our behalf.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p17"></span>6. And so we prepare to commence this
our Fifth Book, O Emperor Augustus. For it was but right that the Fourth
Book should end with our discussion on the Vine, lest otherwise we
should seem to have overloaded that book with a tumultuous mass of
subjects, rather than to have filled it with the fruit of the spiritual
vineyard. On the other hand, it was not seemly that the gathering of the
vintage of the faith should be left unfinished, whilst there was still
all abundance of such great matters for discussion.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p18"></span>7. In the Fifth Book, therefore, we
speak of the indivisible Godhead of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost (omitting, however, a full discussion on the Holy Ghost), being
urged by the teaching of the Gospel to let out on interest to human
minds the five talents <span id="fr_2513"></span>[2514](#fn_2513) of the
faith entrusted to these five books being as it were the principal; lest
perhaps when the Lord comes, and finds His money hidden in the earth, He
may say to me: “Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knewest that I
reap where I do not sow; and gather where I have not strawed; thou
oughtest therefore to have put My money to the exchangers, that at My
coming I might have received Mine Own,” <span
id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514) or as it stands in another book:
“And I,” it says, “at My coming might have received it with
usury.” <span id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p22"></span>8. I pray those to pardon me, whom the
boldness of such a lengthy address displeases. The thought of my office
compels me to entrust to others what I have received. “We are stewards
of the heavenly mysteries.” <span id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516)
We are ministers, but not all alike. “But,” it says, “even as the Lord
gave to every man, I have planted; Apollos watered; but God gave the
increase.” <span id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517) Let each one then
strive that be may be able to receive a reward according to his labour.
“For we are labourers together with God,” as the Apostle said; “we are
God’s husbandry, God’s building.” <span
id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518) Blessed therefore is he who sees
such usury on his principal; blessed too is he who beholds the fruit of
his work; blessed again is he “who builds upon the foundation of faith,
gold, silver, precious stones.” <span
id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p27"></span>9. Ye who hear or read these words are
all things to us. Ye are the usury of the money-lender,—the usury on
speech, not on money; ye are the return given to the husbandman; ye are
the gold, the silver, the precious stones of the builder. In your merits
lie the chief results of the labours of the priest; in your souls shines
forth the fruit of a bishop’s work; in your progress glitters the gold
of the Lord; the silver is increased if ye hold fast the divine words.
“The words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in the fire;
proved on the earth, purified seven times.” <span
id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520) Ye therefore will make the lender
rich, the husbandman to abound in produce; ye will prove the
master-builder to be skilful. I do not speak boastfully; for I do not
desire so much my own advantage as yours.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p29"></span>10. Oh that I might safely say of you
at that time: “Lord, Thou gavest me five talents, behold I have gained
five other talents;” <span id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521) and that
I might show the precious talents of your virtues! “For we have a
treasure in earthen vessels.” <span id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522)
These are the talents which the Lord bids us spiritually to trade with,
or the two coins of the New and the Old Testament, which that Samaritan
in the Gospel left for the man robbed by the thieves, for the purpose of
getting his wounds healed. <span id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p33"></span>11. Neither do I, my brethren, with
greedy desires, long for this, so that I may be set over many things;
the recompense I get from the fact of your advance is enough for me. Oh
that I may not be found unworthy of that which I have received! Let
those things which are too great for me be assigned to better men. I
demand them not! Yet mayest Thou say, O Lord: “I will give unto this
last, even as unto thee.” <span id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524) Let
the man that deserves it receive authority over ten cities. <span
id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p36"></span>12. Let him be such an one as was
Moses, who wrote the Ten Words of the Law. Let him be as Joshua, the son
of Nun, who subdued five kings, and brought the Gibeonites into
subjection, that he might be the figure of a Man of his own name Who was
<span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-Page_286"></span>to come, by Whose power all fleshly
lust should be overcome, and the Gentiles should be converted, so that
they might follow the faith of Jesus Christ rather than their former
pursuits and desires. Let him be as David, whom the young maidens came
to meet with songs, saying: “Saul hath triumphed over thousands, David
over ten thousands.” <span id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p38"></span>13. It is enough for me, if I am not
thrust out into the outer darkness, as he was, who hid the talent
entrusted to him in the earth so to speak, of his own flesh. This the
ruler of the synagogue did, and the other rulers of the Jews; for they
employed <span id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527) , <span
id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528) the words of the Lord, which had
been entrusted to them, on the ground as it were of their bodies; and,
delighting in the pleasures of the flesh, sunk the heavenly trust as
though into the pit of an overweening heart.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p41"></span>14. Let us then not keep the Lord’s
money buried and hidden in the flesh; nor let us hide our one talent in
a napkin; <span id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529) but like good
money-changers let us ever weigh it out with labour of mind and body,
with an even and ready will, that the word may be near, even in thy
mouth and in thy heart. <span id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p44"></span>15. This is the word of the Lord, this
is the precious talent, whereby thou art redeemed. This money must often
be seen on the tables of souls, in order that by constant trading the
sound of the good coins may be able to go forth into every land, by the
means of which eternal life is purchased. “This is eternal life,” which
Thou, Almighty Father, givest freely, that we may know “Thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ Whom Thou hast sent.” <span
id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2503"></span>[284:2504](2100254.htm#fr_2503) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p3"></span> S. [Matt.
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045),
[46](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#046)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2504"></span>[284:2505](2100254.htm#fr_2504) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p5"></span> S. [John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p5.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_2505"></span>[284:2506](2100254.htm#fr_2505) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p6"></span> S. [Matt. xxvi.
70](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#070)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p6.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_2506"></span>[284:2507](2100254.htm#fr_2506) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p8"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2507"></span>[284:2508](2100254.htm#fr_2507) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p9"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#022)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2508"></span>[284:2509](2100254.htm#fr_2508) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p11"></span> [Tit. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2509"></span>[284:2510](2100254.htm#fr_2509) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p12"></span> [Tit. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2510"></span>[284:2511](2100254.htm#fr_2510) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p14"></span> S. [Matt. xiii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2511"></span>[285:2512](2100254.htm#fr_2511) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p15"></span> [2 Tim.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2512"></span>[285:2513](2100254.htm#fr_2512) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2513"></span>[285:2514](2100254.htm#fr_2513) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p19"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[285:2515](2100254.htm#fr_2514) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p20"></span> S. [Matt.
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[285:2516](2100254.htm#fr_2515) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p21"></span> S. [Luke xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[285:2517](2100254.htm#fr_2516) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p23"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[285:2518](2100254.htm#fr_2517) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p24"></span> [1 Cor.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[285:2519](2100254.htm#fr_2518) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p25"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[285:2520](2100254.htm#fr_2519) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p26"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[285:2521](2100254.htm#fr_2520) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p28"></span> [Ps. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[285:2522](2100254.htm#fr_2521) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p30"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[285:2523](2100254.htm#fr_2522) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p31"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[285:2524](2100254.htm#fr_2523) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p32"></span> S. [Luke x.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#035)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[285:2525](2100254.htm#fr_2524) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p34"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[285:2526](2100254.htm#fr_2525) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p35"></span> S. [Luke xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[286:2527](2100254.htm#fr_2526) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p37"></span> [1 Sam. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[286:2528](2100254.htm#fr_2527) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p39"></span> S. [Matt. xxiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p39.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[286:2529](2100254.htm#fr_2528) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p40"></span> *i.e.,* either ‘used to their own
earthly advantage’ or ‘explained in a carnal earthly sense.’

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[286:2530](2100254.htm#fr_2529) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p42"></span> S. [Luke xix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[286:2531](2100254.htm#fr_2530) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p43"></span> [Deut. xxx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[286:2532](2100254.htm#fr_2531) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p45"></span> S. [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vii.i-p45.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. How impious the Arians are, in attacking that on which
human happiness depends. John ever unites the Son with the Father,
especially where he says: “That they may know Thee, the only true God,
etc.” In that place, then, we must understand the words “true God” also
of the Son; for it cannot be denied that He is God, and it cannot be
said He is a false god, and least of all that He is God by appellation
only. This last point being proved from the Apostle's words, we rightly
confess that Christ is true God.](2100255)
