[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100367)  [Next](2100369.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii-p0.1"></span>The Memorial of Symmachus, Prefect of the City.

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span>Symmachus addresses his memorial in the name
of the Senate, nominally to the three Emperors, Valentinian, Theodosius,
and Arcadius, though really to the first of these alone, who was sole
Emperor of the West. The memorial sets forth a request that the old
religion should be restored, and the Altar of Victory again erected in
the Senate House, that the ancient customs might be observed. The
example of the late emperors should be followed in what they maintained,
not in what they did away. The treasury would suffer no loss, whilst it
is unjust that the Vestal Virgins and priests should be deprived of
ancient legacies, a sacrilege which the gods punished by a famine. The
memorial is drawn up with consummate skill, both in what is brought
forward and in what is left unsaid.

<span id="v.iii-p2"></span>1. As soon as the most honourable Senate,
always devoted to you, knew that crimes were made amenable to law, and
that the reputation of late times was being purified by pious princes,
it, following the example of a more favourable time, gave utterance to
its long suppressed grief, and bade me be once again the delegate to
utter its complaints. <span id="fr_3416"></span>[3417](#fn_3416.md) But
through wicked men audience was refused me by the divine <span
id="fr_3417"></span>[3418](#fn_3417.md) Emperor, otherwise justice would
not have been wanting, my lords and emperors, of great renown,
Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius, victorious and triumphant, ever
august.

<span id="v.iii-p5"></span>2. In the exercise, therefore, of a twofold
office, as your Prefect I attend to public business, and as delegate I
recommend to your notice the charge laid on me by the citizens. Here is
no disagreement of wills, for men have now ceased to believe that they
excel in courtly zeal, if they disagree. To be loved, to be reverenced,
to be esteemed is more than imperial sway. Who could endure that private
disagreement should injure the state? Rightly does the Senate censure
those who have preferred their own power to the reputation of the
prince.

<span id="v.iii-p6"></span>3. But it is our task to watch on behalf of
your Graces. For to what is it more suitable that we defend the
institutions of our ancestors, and the rights and destiny of our
country, than to the glory of these times, which is all the greater when
you understand that you may not do anything contrary to the custom of
your ancestors? We demand then the restoration of that condition of
religious affairs which was so long advantageous to the state. Let the
rulers of each sect and of each opinion be counted up; a late one <span
id="fr_3418"></span>[3419](#fn_3418.md) practised the ceremonies of his
ancestors, a later <span id="fr_3419"></span>[3420](#fn_3419.md) did not
put them away. If the religion of old times does not make a precedent,
let the connivance of the last <span
id="fr_3420"></span>[3421](#fn_3420.md) do so.

<span id="v.iii-p10"></span>4. Who is so friendly with the barbarians as
not to require an Altar of Victory? We will be careful henceforth, and
avoid a show of such things. But at least let that honour be paid to the
name <span id="fr_3421"></span>[3422](#fn_3421.md) which is refused to the
goddess—your fame, which will last for ever, owes much and will owe
still more to victory. Let those be averse to this power, whom it has
never benefited. Do you refuse to desert a patronage which is friendly
to your triumphs? That power is wished for by all, let no one deny that
what he acknowledges is to be desired should also be venerated.

<span id="v.iii-p12"></span><span id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_415"></span>5. But even if the avoidance of such an
omen <span id="fr_3422"></span>[3423](#fn_3422.md) were not sufficient, it
would at least have been seemly to abstain from injuring the ornaments
of the Senate House. Allow us, we beseech you, as old men to leave to
posterity what we received as boys. The love of custom is great. Justly
did the act of the divine Constantius last but for a short time. All
precedents ought to be avoided by you, which you know were soon
abolished. We are anxious for the permanence of your glory and your
name, that the time to come may find nothing which needs correction.

<span id="v.iii-p14"></span>6. Where shall we swear to obey your laws
and commands? by what religious sanction shall the false mind be
terrified, so as not to lie in bearing witness? All things are indeed
filled with God, and no place is safe for the perjured, but to be urged
in the very presence of religious forms has great power in producing a
fear of sinning. That altar preserves the concord of all, that altar
appeals to the good faith of each, and nothing gives more authority to
our decrees than that the whole of our order issues every decree as it
were under the sanction of an oath. So that a place will be opened to
perjury, and this will be determined by my illustrious Princes, whose
honour is defended by a public oath.

<span id="v.iii-p15"></span>7. But the divine Constantius is said to
have done the same. Let us rather imitate the other actions of that
Prince, who would have undertaken nothing of the kind, if any one else
had committed such an error before him. For the fall of the earlier sets
his successor right, and amendment results from the censure of a
previous example. It was pardonable for your Grace’s ancestor in so
novel a matter to fail in guarding against blame. Can the same excuse
avail us if we imitate what we know to have been disapproved?

<span id="v.iii-p16"></span>8. Will your Majesties listen to other
actions of this same Prince, which you may more worthily imitate? He
diminished none of the privileges of the sacred virgins, he filled the
priestly offices with nobles, he did not refuse the cost of the Roman
ceremonies, and following the rejoicing Senate through all the streets
of the eternal city, he contentedly beheld the shrines with unmoved
countenance, he read the names of the gods inscribed on the pediments,
he enquired about the origin of the temples, and expressed admiration
for their builders. Although he himself followed another religion, he
maintained its own for the empire, for everyone has his own customs,
everyone his own rites. The divine Mind has distributed different
guardians and different cults to different cities. As souls are
separately given to infants as they are born, so to peoples the genius
of their destiny. Here comes in the proof from advantage, which most of
all vouches to man for the gods. For, since our reason is wholly
clouded, whence does the knowledge of the gods more rightly come to us,
than from the memory and evidence of prosperity? Now if a long period
gives authority to religious customs, we ought to keep faith with so
many centuries, and to follow our ancestors, as they happily followed
theirs.

<span id="v.iii-p17"></span>9. Let us now suppose that Rome is present
and addresses you in these words: “Excellent princes, fathers of your
country, respect my years to which pious rites have brought me. Let me
use the ancestral ceremonies, for I do not repent of them. Let me live
after my own fashion, for I am free. This worship subdued the world to
my laws, these sacred rites repelled Hannibal from the walls, and the
Senones from the capitol. Have I been reserved for this, that in my old
age I should be blamed? I will consider what it is thought should be set
in order, but tardy and discreditable is the reformation of old age.”

<span id="v.iii-p18"></span>10. We ask, then, for peace for the gods of
our fathers and of our country. It is just that all worship should be
considered as one. We look on the same stars, the sky is common, the
same world surrounds us. What difference does it make by what pains each
seeks the truth? We cannot attain to so great a secret by one road; but
this discussion is rather for persons at ease, we offer now prayers, not
conflict.

<span id="v.iii-p19"></span>11. With what advantage to your treasury are
the prerogatives of the Vestal Virgins diminished? Is that refused under
the most bountiful emperors which the most parsimonious have granted?
Their sole honour consists in that, so to call it, wage of chastity. As
fillets are the ornament of their heads, so is their distinction drawn
from their leisure to attend to the offices of sacrifice. They seek for
in a measure the empty name of immunity, since by their poverty they are
exempt from payment. And so they who diminish anything of their
substance increase their praise, inasmuch as virginity dedicated to the
public good increases in merit when it is without reward.

<span id="v.iii-p20"></span><span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_416"></span>12. Let such gains as these be far from the
purity of your treasury. Let the revenue of good princes be increased
not by the losses of priests, but by the spoils of enemies. Does any
gain compensate for the odium? And because no charge of avarice falls
upon your characters, they are the more wretched whose ancient revenues
are diminished. For under emperors who abstain from what belongs to
others, and resist avarice, that which does not move the desire of him
who takes it, is taken solely to injure the loser.

<span id="v.iii-p21"></span>13. The treasury also retains lands
bequeathed to virgins and ministers by the will of dying persons. I
entreat you, priests of justice, let the lost right of succession be
restored to the sacred persons and places of your city. Let men dictate
their wills without anxiety, and know that what has been written will be
undisturbed under princes who are not avaricious. Let the happiness in
this point of all men give pleasure to you, for precedents in this
matter have begun to trouble the dying. Does not then the religion of
Rome appertain to Roman law? What name shall be given to the taking away
of property which no law nor accident has made to fail. Freedmen take
legacies, slaves are not denied the just privilege of making wills; only
noble virgins and the ministers of sacred rites are excluded from
property sought by inheritance. What does it profit the public safety to
dedicate the body to chastity, and to support the duration of the empire
with heavenly guardianship, to attach the friendly powers to your arms
and to your eagles, to take upon oneself vows efficacious for all, and
not to have common rights with all? So, then, slavery is a better
condition, which is a service rendered to men. We injure the State,
whose interest it never is to be ungrateful.

<span id="v.iii-p22"></span>14. And let no one think that I am defending
the cause of religion only, for from deeds of this kind have arisen all
the misfortunes of the Roman race. The law of our ancestors honoured the
Vestal Virgins and the ministers of the gods with a moderate maintenance
and just privileges. This grant remained unassailed till the time of the
degenerate money-changers, who turned the fund for the support of sacred
chastity into hire for common porters. A general famine followed upon
this, and a poor harvest disappointed the hopes of all the provinces.
This was not the fault of the earth, we impute no evil influence to the
stars. Mildew did not injure the crops, nor wild oats destroy the corn;
the year failed through the sacrilege, for it was necessary that what
was refused to religion should be denied to all.

<span id="v.iii-p23"></span>15. Certainly, if there be any instance of
this evil, let us impute such a famine to the power of the season. A
deadly wind has been the cause of this barrenness, life is sustained by
trees and shrubs, and the need of the country folk has betaken itself
once more to the oaks of Dodona. <span
id="fr_3423"></span>[3424](#fn_3423.md) What similar evil did the provinces
suffer, so long as the public charge sustained the ministers of
religion? When were the oaks shaken for the use of men, when were the
roots of plants torn up, when did fertility on all sides forsake the
various lands, when supplies were in common for the people and for the
sacred virgins? For the support of the priests was a blessing to the
produce of the earth, and was rather an insurance than a bounty. Is
there any doubt that what was given was for the benefit of all, seeing
that the want of all has made this plain?

<span id="v.iii-p25"></span>16. But some one will say that public
support is only refused to the cost of foreign religions. Far be it from
good princes to suppose that what has been given to certain persons from
the common property can be in the power of the treasury. For as the
State consists of individuals, that which goes out from it becomes again
the property of individuals. You rule over all; but you preserve his own
for each individual; and justice has more weight with you than arbitrary
will. Take counsel with your own liberality whether that which you have
conferred on others ought to be considered public property. Sums once
given to the honour of the city cease to be the property of those who
have given them, and that which at the commencement was a gift, by
custom and time becomes a debt. Any one is therefore endeavouring to
impress upon your minds a vain fear, who asserts that you share the
responsibility of the givers unless you incur the odium of withdrawing
the gifts.

<span id="v.iii-p26"></span>17. May the unseen guardians of all sects be
favourable to your Graces, and may they especially, who in old time
assisted your ancestors, defend you and be worshipped by us. We ask for
that state of religious matters which preserved the empire for the
divine parent <span id="fr_3424"></span>[3425](#fn_3424.md) of your
Highnesses, and <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="v.iii-Page_417"></span>furnished that blessed prince with lawful
heirs. That venerable father beholds from the starry height the tears of
the priests, and considers himself censured by the violation of that
custom which he willingly observed.

<span id="v.iii-p28"></span>18. Amend also for your divine brother that
which he did by the counsel of others, cover over the deed which he knew
not to be displeasing to the Senate. For it is allowed that that
legation was denied access to him, lest public opinion should reach him.
It is for the credit of former times, that you should not hesitate to
abolish that which is proved not to have been the doing of the prince.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3416"></span>[414:3417](2100368.htm#fr_3416.md) <span
id="v.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p3"></span> This is the legation to Gratian referred to
in § 10 of the preceding letter; Symmachus fared ill, being ordered from
the imperial presence, and forbidden to come within a hundred miles of
Rome.

<span id="fn_3417"></span>[414:3418](2100368.htm#fr_3417.md) <span
id="v.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p4"></span> *i e.* deceased.

<span id="fn_3418"></span>[414:3419](2100368.htm#fr_3418.md) <span
id="v.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p7"></span> Julian.

<span id="fn_3419"></span>[414:3420](2100368.htm#fr_3419.md) <span
id="v.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p8"></span> Valentinian I.

<span id="fn_3420"></span>[414:3421](2100368.htm#fr_3420.md) <span
id="v.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p9"></span> Valentinian and Valens.

<span id="fn_3421"></span>[414:3422](2100368.htm#fr_3421.md) <span
id="v.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p11"></span> The play upon the words *nomen* (name) and
*numen* (divinity) cannot be reproduced in English.

<span id="fn_3422"></span>[415:3423](2100368.htm#fr_3422.md) <span
id="v.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p13"></span> The evil omen resulting from destroying the
image and altar of Victory.

<span id="fn_3423"></span>[416:3424](2100368.htm#fr_3423.md) <span
id="v.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p24"></span> *i.e.* to acorns for food.

<span id="fn_3424"></span>[416:3425](2100368.htm#fr_3424.md) <span
id="v.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p27"></span> Valentinian I., who, as Symmachus said
above, did not destroy idol worship, though he did not practise it, so
that St. Ambrose says in his funeral oration on Valentinian II.: “*Quod
patri defuerat adjunxit; quod frater constituit, custodivit.*”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XVIII: To Valentinian, in Reply to Symmachus.](2100369.md)
