[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100356)  [Next](2100358.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.ix"></span>

### <span id="iv.viii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p1"></span>Though many other widows came near to
Judith in virtue, St. Ambrose proposes to speak of Deborah only. What a
pattern of virtue she must have been for widows, who was chosen to
govern and defend men. It was no small glory to her that when her son
was over the host he refused to go forth to battle unless she would go
also. So that she led the army and foretold the result. In this story
the conflicts and triumphs of the Church, and her spiritual weapons, are
set forth, and every excuse of weakness is taken from women.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p2"></span>43. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>And</span> in order that it may not seem as
if only one widow had fulfilled this inimitable work, it seems in no way
doubtful that there were many others of equal or almost equal virtue,
for good seed corn usually bears many ears filled with grains. Doubt
not, then, that that ancient seed-time was fruitful in the characters of
many women. But as it would be tedious to include all, consider some,
and especially Deborah, <span id="fr_3351"></span>[3352](#fn_3351.md) whose
virtue Scripture records for us.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p4"></span>44. For she showed not only that widows
have no need of the help of a man, inasmuch as she, not at all
restrained by the weakness of her sex, undertook to perform the duties
of a man, and did even more than she had undertaken. And, at last, when
the Jews were being ruled under the leadership of the judges, because
they could not govern them with manly justice, or defend them with manly
strength, and so wars broke out on all sides, they chose Deborah, <span
id="fr_3352"></span>[3353](#fn_3352.md) by whose judgment they might be
ruled. And so one widow both ruled many thousands of men in peace, and
defended them from the enemy. There were many judges in Israel, but no
woman before was a judge, as after Joshua there were many judges but
none was a prophet. And I think that her judgeship has been narrated,
and her deeds de<span id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span
id="iv.viii.ix-Page_399"></span>scribed, that women should not be
restrained from deeds of valour by the weakness of their sex. A widow,
she governs the people; a widow, she leads armies; a widow, she chooses
generals; a widow, she determines wars and orders triumphs. So, then, it
is not nature which is answerable for the fault or which is liable to
weakness. It is not sex, but valour which makes strong.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p6"></span>45. And in time of peace there is no
complaint, and no fault is found in this woman whereas most of the
judges were causes of no small sins to the people. But when the
Canaanites, a people fierce in battle and rich in troops, successively
joined them, showed a horrible disposition against the people of the
Jews, this widow, before all others, made all the preparations for war.
And to show that the needs of the household were not dependent on the
public resources, but rather that public duties were guided by the
discipline of home life, she brings forth from her home her son as
leader of the army, that we may acknowledge that a widow can train a
warrior; whom, as a mother, she taught, and, as judge, placed in
command, as, being herself brave, she trained him, and, as a prophetess,
sent to certain victory.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p7"></span>46. And lastly, her son Barak shows the
chief part of the victory was in the hands of a woman when he said: “If
thou wilt not go with me I will not go, for I know not the day on which
the Lord sendeth His angel with me.” <span
id="fr_3353"></span>[3354](#fn_3353.md) How great, then, was the might of
that woman to whom the leader of the army says, “If thou wilt not go I
will not go.” How great, I say, the fortitude of the widow who keeps not
back her son from dangers through motherly affection, but rather with
the zeal of a mother exhorts her son to go forth to victory, while
saying that the decisive point of that victory is in the hand of a
woman!

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p9"></span>47. So, then, Deborah foretold the event
of the battle. Barak, as he was bidden, led forth the army; Jael carried
off the triumph, for the prophecy of Deborah fought for her, who in a
mystery revealed to us the rising of the Church from among the Gentiles,
for whom should be found a triumph over Sisera, that is, over the powers
opposed to her. For us, then, the oracles of the prophets fought, for us
those judgments and arms of the prophets won the victory. And for this
reason it was not the people of the Jews but Jael who gained the victory
over the enemy. Unhappy, then, was that people which could not follow up
by the virtue of faith the enemy, whom it had put to flight. And so by
their fault salvation came to the Gentiles, by their sluggishness the
victory was reserved for us.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p10"></span>48. Jael then destroyed Sisera, whom
however the band of Jewish veterans had put to flight under their
brilliant <span id="fr_3354"></span>[3355](#fn_3354.md) leader, for this is
the interpretation of the name Barak; for often, as we read, the sayings
and merits of the prophets procured heavenly aid for the fathers. But
even at that time was victory being prepared over spiritual wickedness
for those to whom it is said in the Gospel: “Come, ye blessed of My
Father, take possession of the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world.” <span id="fr_3355"></span>[3356](#fn_3355.md) So
the commencement of the victory was from the Fathers, its conclusion is
in the Church.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p13"></span>49. But the Church does not overcome
the powers of the enemy with weapons of this world, but with spiritual
arms, “which are mighty through God to the destruction of strongholds
and the high places of spiritual wickedness.” <span
id="fr_3356"></span>[3357](#fn_3356.md) And Sisera’s thirst was quenched
with a bowl of milk, because he was overcome by wisdom, for what is
healthful for us as food is deadly and weakening to the power of the
enemy. The weapons of the Church are faith, the weapons of the Church
are prayer, which overcomes the enemy.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p15"></span>50. And so according to this history a
woman, that the minds of women might be stirred up, became a judge, a
woman set all in order, a woman prophesied, a woman triumphed, and
joining in the battle array taught men to war under a woman’s lead. But
in a mystery it is the battle of faith and the victory of the Church.

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p16"></span>51. You, then, who are women have no
excuse because of your nature. You who are widows have no excuse because
of the weakness of your sex, nor can you attribute your changeableness
to the loss of the support of a husband. Every one has sufficient
protection if courage is not wanting to the soul. And the very advance
of age is a common defence of chastity for widows; and grief for the
husband who is lost, regular work, the care of the house, anxiety for
children, frequently ward off wantonness hurtful to the soul; while the
very mourning attire, the funeral solemnities, the constant weeping, and
grief impressed on the sad brow in deep wrinkles, restrains wanton <span
id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span id="iv.viii.ix-Page_400"></span>eyes,
checks lust, turns away forward looks. The sorrow of regretful affection
is a good guardian of chastity, guilt cannot find an entrance if
vigilance be not wanting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3351"></span>[398:3352](2100357.htm#fr_3351.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p3"></span> [Jud. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.viii.ix-p3.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_3352"></span>[398:3353](2100357.htm#fr_3352.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p5"></span> St. Jerome agrees with St. Ambrose in
believing that Deborah literally was a judge, as indeed seems conclusive
from the Scriptural account, but doubts whether she was a widow and
mother of Barak, and is probably right in the latter case. Whether
Lapidoth, however, was still alive is not so clear. St. Jerome, *Ep. ad
Furiam,* § 17.

<span id="fn_3353"></span>[399:3354](2100357.htm#fr_3353.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p8"></span> [Jud. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.viii.ix-p8.1"></span>
\[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_3354"></span>[399:3355](2100357.htm#fr_3354.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p11"></span> The word Barak signifies lightning. It
is probably the same as the Punic Barca, the surname of Hamilcar, father
of Hannibal, or possibly was a family name.

<span id="fn_3355"></span>[399:3356](2100357.htm#fr_3355.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p12"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)<span id="iv.viii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3356"></span>[399:3357](2100357.htm#fr_3356.md) <span
id="iv.viii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.ix-p14"></span> [2 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.viii.ix-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. To an objection that the state of widowhood might
indeed be endurable if circumstances were pleasant, St. Ambrose replies
that pleasant surroundings are more dangerous than even trouble; and
goes to show by examples taken from holy Scripture, that widows may find
much happiness in their children and their sons-in-law. They should have
recourse to the Apostles, who are able to help us, and should entreat
for the intercessions of angels and martyrs. He touches then on certain
complaints respecting loneliness, and care of property, and ends by
pointing out the unseemliness of a widow marrying who has daughters
either married already or of marriageable age.](2100358.md)
