[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100069)  [Next](2100071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p1"></span>What is useful is the same as what is
virtuous; nothing is more useful than love, which is gained by
gentleness, courtesy, kindness, justice, and the other virtues, as we
are given to understand from the histories of Moses and David. Lastly,
confidence springs from love, and again love from confidence.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p2"></span>28. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>There</span> is therefore not only a close
intercourse between what is virtuous and what is useful, but the same
thing is both useful and virtuous. Therefore He Who willed to open the
kingdom of heaven to all sought not what was useful to Himself, but what
was useful for all. Thus we must have a certain order and proceed step
by step from habitual or common acts to those which are more excellent,
so as to show by many examples the advancement of what is useful.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p3"></span>29. And first we may know there is
nothing so useful as to be loved, <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423.md) nothing so useless as not to be loved;
for to be hated in my opinion is simply fatal and altogether deadly. We
speak of this, then, in order that we may take care to give cause for a
good estimate and opinion to be formed of us, and may try to get a place
in others’ affections through our calmness of mind and kindness of soul.
For goodness is agreeable and pleasing to all, and there is nothing that
so easily reaches human feelings. And if that is assisted by gentleness
of character and willingness, as well as by moderation in giving orders
and courtesy of speech, by honour in word, by a ready interchange of
conversation and by the grace of modesty, it is incredible how much all
this tends to an increase of love. <span
id="fr_424"></span>[425](#fn_424.md)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p6"></span>30. We read, not only in the case of
private individuals but even of kings, what is the effect of ready and
willing courtesy, and what harm pride and great swelling words have
done, so far as to make even kingdoms to totter and powers to be
destroyed. If any one gains the people’s favour by advice or service, by
fulfilling the duties of his ministry or office, or if he encounters
danger for the sake of the whole nation, there is no doubt but that such
love will be shown him by the people that they all will put his safety
and welfare before their own.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p7"></span>31. What reproaches Moses had to bear
from his people! But when the Lord would have avenged him on those who
reviled him, he often used to offer himself for the people that he might
save them from the divine anger. <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425.md)
With what gentle words used he to address the people, even after he was
wronged! He comforted them in their labours, consoled them by his
prophetic declarations of the future, and encouraged them by his works.
And though he often spoke with God, yet he was wont to address men
gently and pleasantly. Worthily was he considered to stand above all
men. For they could not even look on his face, <span
id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426.md) and refused to believe that his
sepulchre was found. <span id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427.md) He had
captivated the minds of all the people to such an extent; that they
loved him even more for his gentleness than they admired him for his
deeds.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p11"></span>32. There is David too who followed
his steps, who was chosen from among all to rule the people. How gentle
and kindly he was, humble in spirit too, how diligent and ready to show
affection. Before he came to the throne he offered himself in the stead
of <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-Page_49"></span>all. <span
id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428.md) As king he showed himself an equal to
all in warfare, and shared in their labours. He was brave in battle,
gentle in ruling, patient under abuse, and more ready to bear than to
return wrongs. So dear was he to all, that though a youth, he was chosen
even against his will to rule over them, and was made to undertake the
duty though he withstood it. When old he was asked by his people not to
engage in battle, because they all preferred to incur danger for his
sake rather than that he should undergo it for theirs.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p13"></span>33. He had bound the people to
himself freely in doing his duty; first, when he during the division
among the people preferred to live like an exile at Hebron <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429.md) rather than to reign at Jerusalem;
next, when he showed that he loved valour even in an enemy. He had also
thought that justice should be shown to those who had borne arms against
himself the same as to his own men. Again, he admired Abner, the bravest
champion of the opposing side, whilst he was their leader and was yet
waging war. Nor did he despise him when suing for peace, but honoured
him by a banquet. <span id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430.md) When killed by
treachery, he mourned and wept for him. He followed him and honoured his
obsequies, and evinced his good faith in desiring vengeance for the
murder; for he handed on that duty to his son in the charge that he gave
him, <span id="fr_431"></span>[432](#fn_431.md) being anxious rather that
the death of an innocent man should not be left unavenged, than that any
one should mourn for his own.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p17"></span>34. It is no small thing, especially
in the case of a king, so to perform humble duties as to make oneself
like the very lowest. It is noble not to seek for food at another’s risk
and to refuse a drink of water, to confess a sin, and to offer oneself
to death for one’s people. This latter David did, so that the divine
anger might be turned against himself, when he offered himself to the
destroying angel and said: “Lo I have sinned: I the shepherd have done
wickedly, but this flock, what hath it done? Let Thy hand be against
me.” <span id="fr_432"></span>[433](#fn_432.md)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p19"></span>35. What further should I say? He
opened not his mouth to those planning deceit, and, as though hearing
not, he thought no word should be returned, nor did be answer their
reproaches. When he was evil spoken of, he prayed, when he was cursed,
he blessed. He walked in simplicity of heart, and fled from the proud.
He was a follower of those unspotted from the world, one who mixed ashes
with his food when bewailing his sins, and mingled his drink with
weeping. <span id="fr_433"></span>[434](#fn_433.md) Worthily, then, was he
called for by all the people. All the tribes of Israel came to him
saying: “Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh. Also yesterday and the
day before when Saul lived, and reigned, thou wast he that leddest out
and broughtest in Israel. And the Lord said to thee, Thou shalt feed My
people!” <span id="fr_434"></span>[435](#fn_434.md) And why should I say
more about him of whom the word of the Lord has gone forth to say: “I
have found David according to My heart”? <span
id="fr_435"></span>[436](#fn_435.md) Who ever walked in holiness of heart
and in justice as he did, so as to fulfil the will of God; for whose
sake pardon was granted to his children when they sinned, and their
rights were preserved to his heirs? <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436.md)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p24"></span>36. Who would not have loved him,
when they saw how dear he was to his friends? For as he truly loved his
friends, so he thought that he was loved as much in return by his own
friends. Nay, parents put him even before their own children, and
children loved him more than their parents. Wherefore Saul was very
angry and strove to strike Jonathan his son with a spear because he
thought that David’s friendship held a higher place in his esteem than
either filial piety or a father’s authority. <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p26"></span>37. It gives a very great impetus to
mutual love if one shows love in return to those who love us and proves
that one does not love them less than oneself is loved, especially if
one shows it by the proofs that a faithful friendship gives. What is so
likely to win favour as gratitude? What more natural than to love one
who loves us? What so implanted and so impressed on men’s feelings as
the wish to let another, by whom we want to be loved, know that we love
him? Well does the wise man say: “Lose thy money for thy brother and thy
friend.” <span id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md) And again: “I will not
be ashamed to defend a friend, neither will I hide myself from
him.” <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md) If, indeed, the words in
Ecclesiasticus testify that the medicine of life and immortality is in a
friend; <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) yet none has ever
doubted that it is in love that our best defence lies. As the Apostle
says: “It beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things,
endureth all things; love never faileth.” <span
id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md)

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p31"></span>38. Thus David failed not, for he was
<span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-Page_50"></span>dear to all, and wished to be loved
rather than feared by his subjects. Fear keeps the watch of temporal
protection, but knows not how to keep guard permanently. <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md) And so where fear has departed,
boldness often creeps in; for fear does not force confidence but
affection calls it forth.

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p33"></span>39. Love, then, is the first thing to
give us a recommendation. It is a good thing therefore to have our
witness in the love of many. <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md)
Then arises confidence, so that even strangers are not afraid to trust
themselves to thy kindness, when they see thee so dear to many. So
likewise one goes through confidence to love, so that he who has shown
good faith to one or two has an influence as it were on the minds of
all, and wins the good-will of all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_423"></span>[48:424](2100070.htm#fr_423.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p4"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 7.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[48:425](2100070.htm#fr_424.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p5"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 14.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[48:426](2100070.htm#fr_425.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p8"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[48:427](2100070.htm#fr_426.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p9"></span> [Ex. xxxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[48:428](2100070.htm#fr_427.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p10"></span> [Deut. xxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[49:429](2100070.htm#fr_428.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p12"></span> [1 Sam.
17.32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[49:430](2100070.htm#fr_429.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p14"></span> [2 Sam.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[49:431](2100070.htm#fr_430.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p15"></span> [2 Sam.
3.20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[49:432](2100070.htm#fr_431.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p16"></span> [1 Kings
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_432"></span>[49:433](2100070.htm#fr_432.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p18"></span> [2 Sam.
24.17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[49:434](2100070.htm#fr_433.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p20"></span> [Psa.
102.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_434"></span>[49:435](2100070.htm#fr_434.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p21"></span> [2 Sam.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[49:436](2100070.htm#fr_435.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p22"></span> [Psa.
89.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[49:437](2100070.htm#fr_436.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p23"></span> [1 Kings
11.34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[49:438](2100070.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p25"></span> [1 Sam.
20.34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[49:439](2100070.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p27"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
29.10](../../../bib/apo/sir029.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[49:440](2100070.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p28"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
22.31](../../../bib/apo/sir022.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[49:441](2100070.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p29"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
6.16](../../../bib/apo/sir006.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[49:442](2100070.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p30"></span> [1 Cor.
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[50:443](2100070.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p32"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 7, § 23.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[50:444](2100070.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.vii-p34"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 8, § 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Nothing has greater effect in gaining good-will
than giving advice; but none can trust it unless it rests on justice and
prudence. How conspicuous these two virtues were in Solomon is shown by
his well-known judgment.](2100071.md)
