[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100261)  [Next](2100263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p1"></span>Christ, so far as He is true Son of
God, has no Lord, but only so far as He is Man; as is shown by His words
in which He addressed at one time the Father, at another the Lord. How
many heresies are silenced by one verse of Scripture! We must
distinguish between the things that belong to Christ as Son of God or as
Son of David. For under the latter title only must we ascribe it to Him
that He was a servant. Lastly, he points out that many passages cannot
be taken except as referring to the Incarnation.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p2"></span>99. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p2.1"></span>Wherefore</span> also it is plain how He
calls Him Lord, Whom He knew as Father. For He says: “I confess to Thee,
Father, Lord of heaven and earth.” <span
id="fr_2632"></span>[2633](#fn_2632) First Wisdom spoke of His own
Father, and then proclaimed Him Lord of creation. For this reason the
Lord shows in His Gospel that no lordship is exercised where there is a
true offspring, saying: “What think ye of Christ? Whose Son is He? They
say unto Him, The son of David. Jesus saith to them, How then doth David
in spirit call Him Lord, saying: The Lord said unto my Lord: Sit Thou on
My right hand”? Then he added: “If David in spirit then call Him Lord,
how is He his son? And no man was able to answer Him a word.” <span
id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p5"></span>100. With what care did the Lord
provide for the faith in this witness because of the Arians! For He did
not say: “The spirit calls Him Lord,” but that “David spake in spirit;”
in order that men might believe that as He is his, that is, David’s son
according to the flesh, so also He is his Lord and God according to His
Godhead. Thou seest, then, that there is a distinction between the <span
id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-Page_297"></span>titles that are used of relationship
and of lordship.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p6"></span>101. And rightly did the Lord speak of
His own Father, but of the Lord of heaven and earth; so that thou, when
thou readest of the Father and the Lord, mayest understand it is the
Father of the Son, and the Lord of Creation. In the one title rests the
claim of nature, in the other the authority to rule. For taking on
Himself the form of a servant, He calls Him Lord, because He has
submitted to service; being equal to Him in the form of God, but being a
servant in the form of His body: for service is the due of the flesh,
but lordship is the due of the Godhead. Wherefore also the Apostle says:
“The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory,” <span
id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634) that is, terming Him God of the
adoption of humanity but the Father of glory. Did God have two Sons,
Christ and Glory? Certainly not. Therefore if there is one Son of God,
even Christ, Christ is Glory. Why dost thou strive to belittle Him who
is the glory of the Father?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p8"></span>102. If then the Son is glory, and the
Father is glory (for the Father of glory cannot be anything else than
glory), there is no separation of glories, but glory is one. Thus glory
is referred to its own proper nature, but lordship to the service of the
body that was assumed. For if the flesh is subject to the soul of a just
man as it is written: “I chastise my body and bring it into
subjection;” <span id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635) how much more is
it subject to the Godhead, of Which it is said: “For all things serve
Thee”? <span id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p11"></span>103. By one question the Lord has
shut out both Sabellians and Photinians and Arians. For when He said
that the Lord spoke to the Lord, Sabellius is set aside, who will have
it that the same Person is both Father and Son. Photinus is set aside,
who thinks of Him merely as man; for none could be Lord of David the
King, but He Who is God, for it is written: “Thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.” <span
id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637) Would the prophet who ruled under
the Law act contrary to the Law? Arius is set aside, who hears that the
Son sits on the right hand of the Father; so that if he argues from
human ways, he refutes himself, and makes the poison of his blasphemous
arguments to flow back upon himself. For in interpreting the inequality
of the Father and the Son by the analogy of human habits (wandering from
the truth in either case), he puts Him first Whom he makes little of,
confessing Him to be the First, Whom he hears to be at the right hand.
The Manichæan also is set aside, for he does not deny that He is the Son
of David according to the flesh, Who, at the cry of the blind men,
“Jesus, Thou Son of David, have mercy on us,” <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638) was pleased at their faith and
stood and healed them. But He does deny that this refers to His
eternity, if He is called Son of David alone by those who are false.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p14"></span>104. For “Son of God” is against
Ebion, <span id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639) “Son of David,” is
against the Manichees; <span id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640) “Son
of God” is against Photinus, <span id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641)
“Son of David” is against Marcion; <span
id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642) “Son of God” is against Paul of
Samosata, <span id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643) “Son of David” is
against Valentinus; <span id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644) “Son of
God” is against Arius and Sabellius, the inheritors of heathen errors.
“Lord of David” is against the Jews, who beholding the Son of God in the
flesh, in impious madness believed Him to be only man.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p21"></span>105. But in the faith of the Church
one and the same is both Son of God the Father and Son of David. For the
mystery of the Incarnation of God is the salvation of the whole of
creation, according to that which is written: “That without God He
should taste death for every man;” <span
id="fr_2645"></span>[2646](#fn_2645) that is, that every creature might
be redeemed without any suffering at the price of the blood of the
Lord’s Divinity, as it stands elsewhere: “Every creature shall be
delivered from the bondage of corruption.” <span
id="fr_2646"></span>[2647](#fn_2646)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p24"></span>106. It is one thing to be named Son
according to the divine Substance, it is another thing to be so called
according to the adoption of human flesh. For, according to the divine
Generation, the Son is equal to God the Father; and, according to the
adoption of a body, He is a servant to God the Father. “For,” it says,
“He took upon Him the form of a servant.” <span
id="fr_2647"></span>[2648](#fn_2647) The Son is, however, one and the
same. On the other hand, according to His glory, He is Lord to the holy
patriarch David, but his Son in the line of actual descent, not
abandoning aught of His own, but acquiring for Himself the rights that
go with the adoption into our race.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p26"></span>107. Not only does He undergo service
in the character of man by reason of His descent from David, but also by
reason of His name, as it is written: “I have found David My
Servant;” <span id="fr_2648"></span>[2649](#fn_2648) and elsewhere:
“Behold I <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-Page_298"></span>will send unto you My Servant, the
Orient is His name.” <span id="fr_2649"></span>[2650](#fn_2649) And the
Son Himself says: “Thus saith the Lord, that formed Me from the womb to
be His servant, and said unto Me: It is a great thing for Thee to be
called My Servant. Behold I have set Thee up for a witness to My people,
and a light to the Gentiles, that Thou mayest be for salvation unto the
ends of the earth.” <span id="fr_2650"></span>[2651](#fn_2650) To whom
is this said, if not to Christ? Who being in the form of God, emptied
Himself and took upon Him the form of a servant. <span
id="fr_2651"></span>[2652](#fn_2651) But what can be in the form of God,
except that which exists in the fulness of the Godhead?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p31"></span>108. Learn, then, what this means:
“He took upon Him the form of a servant.” It means that He took upon Him
all the perfections of humanity in their completeness, and obedience in
its completeness. And so it says in the thirtieth Psalm: “Thou hast set
my feet in a large room. I am made a reproach above all mine enemies.
Make Thy face to shine upon Thy servant.” <span
id="fr_2652"></span>[2653](#fn_2652) “Servant” means the Man in whom He
was sanctified; it means the Man in whom He was anointed; it means the
Man in whom He was made under the law, made of the Virgin; and, to put
it briefly, it means the Man in whose person He has a mother, as it is
written: “O Lord, I am Thy Servant, I am Thy Servant, and the Son of Thy
hand-maid;” <span id="fr_2653"></span>[2654](#fn_2653) and again: “I am
cast down and sore humbled.” <span id="fr_2654"></span>[2655](#fn_2654)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p35"></span>109. Who is sore humbled, but Christ,
Who came to free all through His obedience? “For as by one man’s
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous.” <span id="fr_2655"></span>[2656](#fn_2655) Who
received the cup of salvation? Christ the High Priest, or David who
never held the priesthood, nor endured suffering? Who offered the
sacrifice of Thanksgiving? <span id="fr_2656"></span>[2657](#fn_2656)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p38"></span>110. But that is insufficient; take
again: “Preserve My soul, for I am holy.” <span
id="fr_2657"></span>[2658](#fn_2657) Did David say this of himself? Nay,
He says it, Who also says: “Thou wilt not leave My soul in hell, neither
wilt Thou suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption.” <span
id="fr_2658"></span>[2659](#fn_2658) The Same then says both of these.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p41"></span>111. He has added further: “Save Thy
Servant;” <span id="fr_2659"></span>[2660](#fn_2659) and, further on:
“Give Thy strength to Thy servant, and to the Son of Thy
handmaid;” <span id="fr_2660"></span>[2661](#fn_2660) and, elsewhere,
that is, in Ezekiel: “And I will set up one Shepherd over them, and He
shall rule them, even My Servant David. He shall feed them, and He shall
be their Shepherd. And I the Lord will be their God, and My Servant
David a prince among them.” <span id="fr_2661"></span>[2662](#fn_2661)
Now David the Son of Jesse was already dead. Therefore he speaks of
Christ, Who for our sakes was made the Son of a handmaiden in the form
of man; for according to His divine Generation He has no Mother, but a
Father only: nor is He the fruit of earthly desire, but the eternal
Power of God.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p45"></span>112. And so, also, when we read that
the Lord said: “My time is not yet full come;” <span
id="fr_2662"></span>[2663](#fn_2662) and: “Yet a little while I am with
you;” and: “I go unto Him that sent Me;” <span
id="fr_2663"></span>[2664](#fn_2663) and: “Now is the Son of Man
glorified;” <span id="fr_2664"></span>[2665](#fn_2664) we ought to refer
all this to the sacrament of the Incarnation. But when we read: “And God
is glorified in Him, and God hath glorified Him;” <span
id="fr_2665"></span>[2666](#fn_2665) what doubt is there here, where the
Son is glorified by the Father, and the Father is glorified by the Son?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p50"></span>113. Next, to make clear the faith of
the Unity, and the Union of the Trinity, He also said that He would be
glorified by the Spirit, as it stands: “He shall receive of Mine, and
shall glorify Me.” <span id="fr_2666"></span>[2667](#fn_2666) Therefore
the Holy Spirit also glorifies the Son of God. How, then, did He say:
“If I glorify Myself, My glory is nothing.” <span
id="fr_2667"></span>[2668](#fn_2667) Is then the glory of the Son
nothing? It is blasphemy to say so, unless we apply these words to His
flesh; for the Son spoke in the character of man, for by comparison with
the Godhead, there is no glory of the flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p53"></span>114. Let them cease from their wicked
objections which are but thrown back upon their own falseness. For they
say, it is written: “Now is the Son of Man glorified.” I do not deny
that it is written: “The Son of Man is glorified.” But let them see what
follows: “And God is glorified in Him.” I can plead some excuse for the
Son of Man, but He has none for His Father; for the Father took not
flesh upon Himself. I can plead an excuse, but do not use it. He has
none, and is falsely attacked. I can either understand it in its plain
sense, or I can apply to the flesh what concerns the flesh. A devout
mind distinguishes between the things which are spoken after the flesh
or after the Godhead. An impious mind turns aside to the dishonour of
the Godhead, all that is said with regard to the littleness of the
flesh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2632"></span>[296:2633](2100262.htm#fr_2632) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p3"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[296:2634](2100262.htm#fr_2633) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xxii.
42-46](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[297:2635](2100262.htm#fr_2634) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p7"></span> [2 Cor. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[297:2636](2100262.htm#fr_2635) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p9"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[297:2637](2100262.htm#fr_2636) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p10"></span> [Ps. cxix.
91](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#091)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[297:2638](2100262.htm#fr_2637) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p12"></span> [Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[297:2639](2100262.htm#fr_2638) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p13"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[297:2640](2100262.htm#fr_2639) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p15"></span> Ebion recognized our Lord absolutely
as man and no more.

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[297:2641](2100262.htm#fr_2640) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p16"></span> I. 57 *sc.*

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[297:2642](2100262.htm#fr_2641) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p17"></span> I. 6 *sc.*

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[297:2643](2100262.htm#fr_2642) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p18"></span> II. 44.

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[297:2644](2100262.htm#fr_2643) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p19"></span> His error was much the same as that
of Ebion, except that he asserted that the Word descended from heaven
and dwelt in Jesus.

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[297:2645](2100262.htm#fr_2644) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p20"></span> II. 44.

<span id="fn_2645"></span>[297:2646](2100262.htm#fr_2645) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p22"></span> [Heb. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2646"></span>[297:2647](2100262.htm#fr_2646) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p23"></span> [Rom. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2647"></span>[297:2648](2100262.htm#fr_2647) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p25"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2648"></span>[297:2649](2100262.htm#fr_2648) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p27"></span> [Ps. lxxxix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2649"></span>[298:2650](2100262.htm#fr_2649) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p28"></span> [Zech. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2650"></span>[298:2651](2100262.htm#fr_2650) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p29"></span> [Isa.
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2651"></span>[298:2652](2100262.htm#fr_2651) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p30"></span> [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2652"></span>[298:2653](2100262.htm#fr_2652) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p32"></span> [Ps.
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2653"></span>[298:2654](2100262.htm#fr_2653) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p33"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2654"></span>[298:2655](2100262.htm#fr_2654) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p34"></span> [Ps. xxxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2655"></span>[298:2656](2100262.htm#fr_2655) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p36"></span> [Rom. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2656"></span>[298:2657](2100262.htm#fr_2656) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p37"></span> [Ps.
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2657"></span>[298:2658](2100262.htm#fr_2657) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p39"></span> [Ps. lxxxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2658"></span>[298:2659](2100262.htm#fr_2658) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p40"></span> [Ps. xvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2659"></span>[298:2660](2100262.htm#fr_2659) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p42"></span> [Ps. lxxxvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2660"></span>[298:2661](2100262.htm#fr_2660) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p43"></span> [Ps. lxxxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2661"></span>[298:2662](2100262.htm#fr_2661) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p44"></span> [Ezek.
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2662"></span>[298:2663](2100262.htm#fr_2662) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p46"></span> S. [John vii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2663"></span>[298:2664](2100262.htm#fr_2663) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p47"></span> S. [John vii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2664"></span>[298:2665](2100262.htm#fr_2664) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p48"></span> S. [John xiii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2665"></span>[298:2666](2100262.htm#fr_2665) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p49"></span> S. [John xiii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2666"></span>[298:2667](2100262.htm#fr_2666) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p51"></span> S. [John xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2667"></span>[298:2668](2100262.htm#fr_2667) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p52"></span> S. [John viii.
54](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#054)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.ix-p52.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The saint meets those who in Jewish wise object to
the order of the words: “In the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost,” with the retort that the Son also is often placed
before the Father; though he first points out that an answer to this
objection has been already given by him.](2100263)
