[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100177)  [Next](2100179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span> <span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_174"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Book II.

#### <span id="iv.iii.iii-p0.2"></span>*On the Belief in the Resurrection.*

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span>1. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>In</span> the former book I indulged my
longing to some extent, lest too sharp remedies applied to a burning
wound might rather increase than assuage the pain. And as at the same
time I often addressed my brother, and had him before my eyes, it was
not out of place to let natural feelings have a little play, since they
are somewhat satisfied by tears, soothed by weeping, and numbed by a
shock. For the outward expression of affection is of a soft and tender
nature, it loves nothing extravagant, nothing stern, nothing hard; and
patience is proved by enduring rather than by resisting.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>2. So, since the death-day might well,
lately, by the sad spectacle draw aside the mind of a brother, because
it occupied him wholly, now, inasmuch as on the seventh day, the symbol
of the future rest, we return to the grave, it is profitable to turn our
thoughts somewhat from my brother to a general exhortation addressed to
all, and to give our attention to this; so as neither to cling to my
brother with all our minds, lest our feelings overcome us, nor
forgetting such devotion and desert, to turn wholly away from him; and
in truth we should but increase the suffering of our intense grief, if
his death were again the subject of to-day’s address.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>3. Wherefore we propose, dearest
brethren, to console ourselves with the common course of nature, and not
to think anything hard which awaits all. And therefore we deem that
death is not to be mourned over; firstly, because it is common and due
to all; next, because it frees us from the miseries of this life and,
lastly, because when in the likeness of sleep we are at rest from the
toils of this world, a more lively vigour is shed upon us. What grief is
there which the grace of the Resurrection does not console? What sorrow
is not excluded by the belief that nothing perishes in death? nay,
indeed, that by the hastening of death it comes to pass that much is
preserved from perishing. So it will happen, dearest brethren, that in
our general exhortation we shall turn our affections to my brother, and
shall not seem to have wandered too far from him, if through hope of the
Resurrection and the sweetness of future glory even in our discourse he
should live again for us.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>4. Let us then begin at this point, that
we show that the departure of our loved ones should not be mourned by
us. For what is more absurd than to deplore as though it were a special
misfortune, what one knows is appointed unto all? This were to lift up
the mind above the condition of men, not to accept the common law, to
reject the fellowship of nature, to be puffed up in a fleshly mind, and
not to recognize the measure of the flesh itself. What is more absurd
than not to recognize what one is, to pretend to be what one is not? Or
what can be a sign of less forethought than to be unable to bear, when
it has happened, what one knew was going to happen? Nature herself calls
us back, and draws us aside from sorrow of this sort by a kind of
consolation of her own. For what so deep mourning is there, or so bitter
grief, in which the mind is not at times relieved? For human nature has
this peculiarity, that although men may be in sad circumstances, yet if
only they be men, they sometimes turn their thoughts a little away from
sadness.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>5. It is said, indeed, that there have
been certain tribes who mourned at the birth of human beings, and kept
festival at their deaths, and this not without reason, for they thought
that those who had entered upon this ocean of life should be mourned
over, but that they who had escaped from the waves and storms of this
world should be accompanied by rejoicing not without good reason. And we
too forget the birthdays of the departed, and commemorate with festal
solemnity the day on which they died. <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>6. Therefore, in accordance with nature,
excessive grief must not be yielded to, lest we should seem either to
claim for ourselves either an exceptional superiority of nature, or to
reject the common lot. For death is alike to all, without difference for
the poor, without exception for the rich. And so <span id="page_175">p.
175</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_175"></span>although through the
sin of one alone, yet it passed upon all; <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[1487](#fn_1486.md) that we may not refuse to
acknowledge Him to be also the Author of death, Whom we do not refuse to
acknowledge as the Author of our race; and that, as through one death is
ours, so should be also the resurrection; and that we should not refuse
the misery, that we may attain to the gift. For, as we read, Christ “is
come to save that which was lost,” <span
id="fr_1487"></span>[1488](#fn_1487.md) and “to be Lord both of the dead
and living.” <span id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488.md) In Adam I fell,
in Adam I was cast out of Paradise, in Adam I died; how shall the Lord
call me back, except He find me in Adam; guilty as I was in him, so now
justified in Christ. <span id="fr_1489"></span>[1490](#fn_1489.md) If,
then, death be the debt of all, we must be able to endure the payment.
But this topic must be reserved for later treatment.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span>7. It is now our purpose to demonstrate
that death ought not to cause too heavy grief, because nature itself
rejects this. And so they say that there was a law among the Lycians,
commanding that men who gave way to grief should be clothed in female
apparel, inasmuch as they judged mourning to be soft and effeminate in a
man. And it is inconsistent that those who ought to offer their breast
to death for the faith, for religion, for their country, for righteous
judgment, and the endeavour after virtue, should grieve too bitterly for
that in the case of others which, if a fitting cause required, they
would seek for themselves. For how can one help shrinking from that in
ourselves which one mourns with too little patience when it has happened
to others? Put aside your grief, if you can; if you cannot, keep it to
yourself.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span>8. Is, then, all sorrow to be kept
within or repressed? Why should not reason rather than time lighten
one’s sadness? Shall not wisdom better assuage that which the passage of
time will obliterate? Further, it seems to me that it is a want of due
feeling with regard to the memory of those whose loss we mourn, when we
prefer to forget them rather than that our sorrow should be lessened by
consolation; and to shrink from the recollection of them, rather than
remember them with thankfulness; that we fear the calling to mind of
those whose image in our hearts ought to be a delight; that we are
rather distrustful than hopeful regarding the acceptance of the
departed, and think of those we loved rather as liable to punishment
than as heirs of immortality.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span>9. But you may say: We have lost those
whom we used to love. Is not this the common lot of ourselves and the
earth and elements, that we cannot keep for ever what has been entrusted
to us for a time? The earth groans under the plough, is lashed by rains,
struck by tempests, bound by cold, burnt by the sun, that it may bring
forth its yearly fruits; and when it has clothed itself with a variety
of flowers, it is stripped and spoiled of its own adornment. How many
plunderers it has! And it does not complain of the loss of its fruits,
to which it gave birth that it might lose them, nor thereafter does it
refuse to produce what it remembers will be taken from it.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span>10. The heavens themselves do not
always shine with the globes of twinkling stars, wherewith as with
coronets they are adorned. They are not always growing bright with the
dawn of light, or ruddy with the rays of the sun; but in constant
succession that most pleasing appearance of the world grows dark with
the damp chill of night. What is more grateful than the light? what more
pleasant than the sun? each of which daily comes to an end; yet we do
not take it ill that these have passed away from us, because we expect
them to return. Thou art taught in these things what patience thou
oughtest to manifest with regard to those who belong to thee. If things
above pass away from thee, and cause no grief, why should the passing
away of man be mourned?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span>11. Let, then, grief be patient, let
there be that moderation in adversity which is required in prosperity.
If it be not seemly to rejoice immoderately, is it seemly so to mourn?
For want of moderation in grief or fear of death is no small evil. How
many has it driven to the halter, in how many hands has it placed the
sword, that they might by that very means demonstrate their madness in
not enduring death, and yet seeking it; in adopting that as a remedy
which they flee from as an evil. And because they were unable to endure
and to suffer what is in agreement with their nature, they fall into
that which is contrary to their desire, being separated for ever from
those whom they desired to follow. But this is not common, since nature
herself restrains although madness drives men on.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span>12. But it is common with women to make
public wailing, as though they feared that their misery might not be
known. They affect soiled clothing, as though the feeling of sorrow
consisted therein; they moisten their unkempt hair with filth; and <span
id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_176"></span>lastly, which is done habitually in many
places, with their clothing torn and their dress rent in two, they
prostitute their modesty in nakedness, as if they were ready to
sacrifice that modesty because they have lost that which was its reward.
And so wanton eyes are excited, and lust after those naked limbs, which
were they not made bare they would not desire. Would that those filthy
garments covered the mind rather than the bodily form. Lasciviousness of
mind is often hidden under sad clothing, and the unseemly rudeness of
dress is used as a covering to hide the secrets of wanton spirits.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span>13. She mourns for her husband with
sufficient devotion who preserves her modesty and does not give up her
constancy. The best duties to discharge to the departed are that they
live in our memories and continue in our affection. She has not lost her
husband who manifests her chastity, nor is she widowed as regards her
union who has not changed her husband’s name. Nor hast thou lost the
heir when thou assistest the joint-heir, but in exchange for a successor
in perishable things thou hast a sharer in things eternal. Thou hast one
to represent thine heir, pay to the poor what was due to the heir, that
there may remain one to survive, not only the old age of father or
mother, but thine own life. Thou leavest thy successor all the more, if
his share conduce not to luxury in things present, but to the purchasing
of things to come.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>14. But we long for those whom we have
lost. For two things specially pain us: either the longing for those we
have lost, which I experience in my own case; or that we think them
deprived of the sweetness of life, and snatched away from the fruits of
their toil. For there is a tender movement of love, which suddenly
kindles the affection, so as to have the effect rather of soothing than
of hindering the pain; inasmuch as it seems a dutiful thing to long for
what one has lost, and so under an appearance of virtue weakness
increases.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span>15. But why dost thou think that she
who has sent her beloved to foreign parts, and because of military
service, or of undertaking some office, or has discovered that for the
purpose of commerce he has crossed the sea, ought to be more patient
than thou who art left, not because of some chance decision or desire of
money, but by the law of nature? But, you say, the hope of regaining him
is shut out. As though the return of any one were certain! And
oftentimes doubt wearies the mind more where the fear of danger is
strong; and it is more burdensome to fear lest something should happen
than to bear what one already knows has happened. For the one increases
the amount of fear, the other looks forward to the end of its grief.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span>16. But masters have the right to
transfer their slaves whithersoever they determine. Has not God this
right? It is not granted to us to look for their return, but it is
granted us to follow those gone before. And certainly the usual
shortness of life seems neither to have deprived them of much who have
gone before, nor to delay very long him who remains.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span>17. But if one cannot mitigate one’s
grief, does it not seem unbecoming to wish that because of our longing
the whole course of things should be upset? The longings of lovers are
certainly more intense, and yet they are tempered by regard to what is
necessary; and though they grieve at being forsaken they are not wont to
mourn, rather being deserted they blush at loving too hastily. And so
patience in regret is all the more manifested.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>18. But what shall I say of those who
think that the departed are deprived of the sweetness of life? There can
be no real sweetness in the midst of the bitternesses and pains of this
life, which are caused either by the infirmity of the body itself, or by
the discomfort of things happening from without. For we are always
anxious and in suspense as to our wishes for happier circumstances; we
waver in uncertainty, our hope setting before us doubtful things for
certain, inconvenient for satisfactory, things that will fail for what
is firm, and we have neither any strength in our will nor certainty in
our wishes. But if anything happens against our wish, we think we are
lost, and are rather broken down by pain at adversity than cheered by
the enjoyment of prosperity. What good, then, are they deprived of who
are rather freed from troubles?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>19. Good health, I doubt not, is more
beneficial to us than bad health is hurtful. Riches bring more delights
than poverty annoyance, the satisfaction in children’s love is greater
than the sorrow at their loss, and youth is more pleasant than old age
is sad. How often is the attainment of one’s wishes a weariness, and
what one has longed for a regret; so that one grieves at having obtained
what one was not afraid of obtaining. But what fatherland, what
pleasures, can compensate for exile and the bitterness of other
penalties? For even when we have <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_177"></span>these, the pleasure is weakened either
by the disinclination to use or by the fear of losing them.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span>20. But suppose that some one remains
unharmed, free from grief, in uninterrupted enjoyment of the pleasures
of the whole course of man’s life, what comfort can the soul attain to,
enclosed in the bonds of a body of such a kind, and restrained by the
narrow limits of the limbs? If our flesh shrinks from prison, if it
abhors everything which denies it the power of roaming about; when it
seems, indeed, to be always going forth, with its little powers of
hearing or seeing what is beyond itself, how much more does our soul
desire to escape from that prison-house of the body, which, being free
with movement like the air, goes whither we know not, and comes whence
we know not.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26"></span>21. We know, however, that it survives
the body, and that being set free from the bars of the body, it sees
with clear gaze those things which before, dwelling in the body, it
could not see. And we are able to judge of this by the instance of those
who have visions of things absent and even heavenly in sleep (whose
minds, when the body is as it were buried in sleep, rise to higher
things and relate them to the body). So, then, if death frees us from
the miseries of this world, it is certainly no evil, inasmuch as it
restores liberty and excludes suffering.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27"></span>22. At this point the right place
occurs for arguing that death is not an evil, because it is the refuge
from all miseries and all evils, a safe harbour of security, and a haven
of rest. For what adversity is there which we do not experience in this
life? What storms and tempests do we not suffer? by what discomforts are
we not harassed? whose merits are spared?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p28"></span>23. The holy patriarch Israel fled from
his country, was exiled from his father, relatives, and home, <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490.md) he mourned over the shame of his
daughter <span id="fr_1491"></span>[1492](#fn_1491.md) and the death of his
son, he endured famine, when dead he lost his own grave, for he
entreated that his bones should be translated, <span
id="fr_1492"></span>[1493](#fn_1492.md) lest even in death he should find
rest.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p32"></span>24. Holy Joseph experienced the hatred
of his brethren, <span id="fr_1493"></span>[1494](#fn_1493.md) the guile of
those who envied him, the service of slavery, the mastership of
merchantmen, the wantonness of his mistress, the ignorance of her
husband, and the misery of prison. <span
id="fr_1494"></span>[1495](#fn_1494.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p35"></span>25. Holy David lost two sons; the one
incestuous, <span id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495.md) the other a
parricide. <span id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496.md) To have had them
was a disgrace, to have lost them a grief. And he lost a third, the
infant whom he loved. Him he wept for while still alive, but did not
long for when dead. For so we read, that, while the child was sick,
David entreated the Lord for him, and fasted and lay in sackcloth, and
when the elders came near to raise him from the earth, he would neither
rise nor eat. But when he heard that the child was dead, he changed his
clothes, worshipped God, and took food. When this seemed strange to his
servants, he answered that he had rightly fasted and wept while the
child was alive, because he justly thought that God might have mercy,
and it could not be doubted that He could preserve the life of one alive
Who could give life to the departed, but now, when death had taken
place, why should he fast, for he could not now bring back him that was
dead, and recall him who was lifeless. “I,” said he, “shall go to him,
but he shall not return to me.” <span
id="fr_1497"></span>[1498](#fn_1497.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p39"></span>26. O greatest consolation for him who
mourns! O true judgment of a wise man! O wonderful wisdom of one who is
a bond-man! that none should take it ill that anything adverse has
happened to him, or complain that he is afflicted contrary to his
deserts. For who art thou who beforehand proclaimest thy deserts? Why
desirest thou to anticipate Him Who takes cognizance of all? Why dost
thou snatch away the verdict from Him Who is going to judge? This is
permitted not even to the saints, nor has it ever been done by the
saints with impunity. David confesses that he was scourged for this in
his psalm: “Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world,
they have obtained riches. Therefore I have cleansed my heart in vain,
and washed my hands among the innocent; and I was scourged all the day
long, and my accusation <span id="fr_1498"></span>[1499](#fn_1498.md) came
every morning.” <span id="fr_1499"></span>[1500](#fn_1499.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p42"></span>27. Peter also, though full of faith
and devotion, yet because, not yet conscious of our common weakness, he
had presumptuously said to the Lord, “I will lay down my life for Thy
sake,” <span id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500.md) fell into the trial of
his presumption before the cock crowed thrice. <span
id="fr_1501"></span>[1502](#fn_1501.md) Although, indeed, that trial was a
lesson for our salvation, that we might learn not to think little of the
weakness of the <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_178"></span>flesh, lest through thus thinking little
of it we should be tempted. If Peter was tempted, who can presume? who
can maintain that he cannot be tempted? And without doubt for our sakes
was Peter tempted, so that, the proving of the temptation did not take
place in a stronger than he, <span id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502.md)
but that in him we should learn how, resisting in temptations, although
tried even by care for our lives, we might yet overcome the sting of the
temptation with tears of patience.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p46"></span>28. But that same David, that the
difference of his actions may not perhaps disturb those who cling to the
words of Scripture; that same David, I say, who had not wept for the
innocent infant, wept for the parricide when dead. For at the last, when
he was wailing and mourning, he said, “O my son Absalom, my son Absalom!
Who will grant me to die for thee!” <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503.md) But not only is Absalom the
parricide wept over, Amnon is wept over; not only is the incestuous wept
over, but is even avenged; the one by the scorn of the kingdom, the
other by the exile of his brothers. The wicked is wept over, not the
innocent. What is the cause? What is the reason? There is no little
deliberation with the prudent and confirmation of results with the wise;
for there is great consistency of prudence in so great a difference of
actions, but the belief is one. He wept for those who were dead, but did
not think that he ought to weep for the dead infant, for he thought that
they were lost to him, but hoped that the latter would rise again.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p48"></span>29. But concerning the Resurrection
more will be said later on; let us now return to our immediate subject.
We have set forth that even holy men have without any consideration for
their merits, suffered many and heavy things in this world, together
with toil and misery. So David, entering into himself, says: “Remember;
Lord, that we are dust; as for man, his days are but as grass;” <span
id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504.md) and in another place: “Man is like
to vanity, his days pass away as a shadow.” <span
id="fr_1505"></span>[1506](#fn_1505.md) For what is more wretched than we,
who are sent into this life as it were plundered and naked, with frail
bodies, deceitful hearts, weak minds, anxious in respect of cares,
slothful as to labour, prone to pleasures.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p51"></span>30. Not to be born is then by far the
best, according to Solomon’s sentence. For they also who have seemed to
themselves to excel most in philosophy have followed him. For he, before
these philosophers in time, but later than many of our writers, spoke
thus in Ecclesiastes: “And I praised all the departed, which are already
dead, more than the living, who are yet alive. And better than both they
is he who hath not yet been born, and who hath not seen this evil work
which hath been done under the sun. And I saw all travail, and all the
good of this labour, that for this a man is envied of his neighbour.
And, indeed, this is vanity and vexation of spirit.” <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p53"></span>31. And who said this but he who asked
for and obtained wisdom, to know how the world was made, and the power
of the elements, the course of the year, and the dispositions of stars,
to be acquainted with the natures of living creatures, the furies of
wild beasts, and the violence of winds, and to understand the thoughts
of man! <span id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507.md) How, then, should
mortal matters be hidden from him, from whom heavenly things were not
hidden? He who penetrated the thoughts of the woman who was claiming the
child of another, who by the inspiration of divine grace knew the
natures of living creatures which he did not share; could he err or say
what was untrue with regard to the circumstances of that nature, which
he found in his own personal experience?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p55"></span>32. But Solomon was not the only person
who felt this, though he alone gave expression to it. He had read the
words of holy Job: “Let the day perish wherein I was born.” <span
id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508.md) Job had recognized that to be born
is the beginning of all woes, and therefore wished that the day on which
he was born might perish, so that the origin of all troubles might be
removed, and wished that the day of his birth might perish that he might
receive the day of resurrection. For Solomon had heard his father’s
saying: “Lord, make me to know mine end, and the number of my days, that
I may know what is lacking unto me.” <span
id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509.md) For David knew that what is perfect
cannot be grasped here, and therefore hastened on to those things which
are to come. For now we know in part, and understand in part, but then
it will be possible for that which is perfect to be grasped, when not
the shadow but the reality of the Divine Majesty and eternity shall
begin to shine so as to be gazed upon by us with unveiled face. <span
id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p59"></span><span id="page_179">p. 179</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_179"></span>33. But no one would hasten to the end,
except he were fleeing from the discomfort of this life. And so David
also explained why he hastened to the end, when he said: “Behold Thou
hast made my days old, and my being is as nothing before Thee, surely
all things are vanity, even every man that liveth.” <span
id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511.md) Why, then, do we hesitate to flee
from vanity? Or why does it please us to be troubled to no purpose in
this world, to lay up treasures, and not know for what heir we are
gathering them? Let us pray that troubles be removed from us, that we be
taken out of this foolish world, that we may be free from our daily
pilgrimage, and return to that country and our natural home. For on this
earth we are strangers and foreigners; we have to return thither whence
we have come down, we must strive and pray not perfunctorily but
earnestly to be delivered from the guile and wickedness of men full of
words. And he who knew the remedy groaned that his sojourn was
prolonged, and that he must dwell with the unjust and sinners. <span
id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512.md) What shall I do, who both am sinful
and know not the remedy?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p62"></span>34. Jeremiah also bewails his birth in
these words: “Woe is me, my mother! Why hast thou borne me a man of
contention in all the earth? I have not benefited others, nor has any
one benefited me, my strength hath failed.” <span
id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513.md) If, then, holy men shrink from life
whose life, though profitable to us, is esteemed unprofitable to
themselves; what ought we to do who am not able to profit others, and
who feel that it, like money borrowed at interest, grows more heavily
weighted every day with an increasing mass of sins?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p64"></span>35. “I die daily,” <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514.md) says the Apostle. Better certainly
is this saying than theirs who said that meditation on death was true
philosophy, for they praised the study, he exercised the practice of
death. And they acted for themselves only, but Paul, himself perfect,
died not for his own weakness but for ours. But what is meditation on
death but a kind of separation of body and soul, for death itself is
defined as nothing else than the separation of body and soul? But this
is in accordance with common opinion.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p66"></span>36. But according to the Scriptures we
have been taught that death is threefold. <span
id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515.md) One death is when we die to sin,
but live to God. Blessed, then, is that death which, escaping from sin,
and devoted to God, separates us from what is mortal and consecrates us
to Him Who is immortal. Another death is the departure from this life,
as the patriarch Abraham died, and the patriarch David, and were buried
with their fathers; when the soul is set free from the bonds of the
body. The third death is that of which it is said: “Leave the dead to
bury their own dead.” <span id="fr_1516"></span>[1517](#fn_1516.md) In that
death not only the flesh but also the soul dies, for “the soul that
sinneth, it shall die.” <span id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517.md) For
it dies to the Lord, through the weakness not of nature but of guilt.
But this death is not the discharge from this life, but a fall through
error.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p70"></span>37. Spiritual death, then, is one
thing, natural death another, a third the death of punishment. But that
which is natural is not also penal, for the Lord did not inflict death
as a penalty, but as a remedy. And to Adam when he sinned, one thing was
appointed as a penalty, another for a remedy, when it was said: “Because
thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the
tree of which I had commanded thee that of it alone thou shouldst not
eat, cursed is the ground in thy labor; in sorrow shalt thou eat its
fruit all the days of thy life. Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth
to thee, and thou shalt eat the herb of the field. In the sweat of thy
face shalt thou eat thy bread, till thou return to the earth from which
thou wast taken.” <span id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p72"></span>38. Here you have the days of rest from
penalties, for they contain the punishment decreed against the thorns of
this life, the cares of the world, and the pleasures of riches which
shut out the Word. Death is given for a remedy, because it is the end of
evils. For God said not, “Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of
the woman thou shalt return to the earth,” for this would have been a
penal sentence, as this one is, “The earth under curse shall bring forth
thorns and thistles to thee;” but He said: “In sweat shalt thou eat thy
bread until thou return to the earth.” You see that death is rather the
goal of our penalties, by which an end is put to the course of this
life.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p73"></span>39. So, then, death is not only not an
evil, but is even a good thing. So that it is sought as a good, as it is
written: “Men shall seek death and shall not find it.” <span
id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519.md) They will seek it who shall say to
the mountains: “Fall on us, and to the hills, Cover us.” <span
id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520.md) That soul, too, shall seek it which
has sinned. That rich man lying in hell shall seek it, <span
id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_180"></span>who
wishes that his tongue should be cooled with the finger of
Lazarus. <span id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p77"></span>40. We see, then, that this death is a
gain and life a penalty, so that Paul says: “To me to live is Christ and
to die is gain.” <span id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522.md) What is
Christ but the death of the body, the breath of life? And so let us die
with Him, that we may live with Him. Let there then be in us as it were
a daily practice and inclination to dying, that by this separation from
bodily desires, of which we have spoken, our soul may learn to withdraw
itself, and, as it were placed on high, when earthly lusts cannot
approach and attach it to themselves, may take upon herself the likeness
of death, that she incur not the penalty of death. For the law of the
flesh wars against the law of the mind, and makes it over to the law of
error, as the Apostle has made known to us, saying: “For I see a law of
the flesh in my members warring against the law of my mind, and bringing
me into captivity in the law of sin.” <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523.md) We are all attached, we all feel
this; but we are not all delivered. And so a miserable man am I, unless
I seek the remedy.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p80"></span>41. But what remedy? “Who shall deliver
me out of the body of this death? Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ
our Lord.” <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524.md) We have a
physician, let us use the remedy. Our remedy is the grace of Christ, and
the body of death is our body. Let us therefore be as strangers to our
body, lest we be strangers to Christ. Though we are in the body, let us
not follow the things which are of the body, let us not reject the
rightful claims of nature, but desire before all the gifts of grace:
“For to be dissolved and to be with Christ is far better; yet to abide
in the flesh is more needful for your sakes.” <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p83"></span>42. But this need is not the case of
all, Lord Jesus; it is not so with me, who am profitable to none; for to
me death is a gain, that I may sin no more. To die is gain to me, who,
in the very treatise in which I comfort others, am incited as it were by
an intense impulse to the longing for my lost brother, since it suffers
me not to forget him. Now I love him more, and long for him more
intensely. I long for him when I speak, I long for him when I read again
what I have written, and I think that I am more impelled to write this,
that I may not ever be without the recollection of him. And in this I am
not acting contrary to Scripture, but I am of the same mind with
Scripture, that I may grieve with more patience, and long with greater
intensity.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p84"></span>43. Thou hast caused me, my brother,
not to fear death, and I only would that my life might die with thine!
This Balaam wished for as the greatest good for himself, when, inspired
by the spirit of prophecy, he said: “Let my soul die in the souls of the
righteous, and let my seed be like the seed of them.” <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526.md) And in truth he wished this
according to the spirit of prophecy, for as he saw the rising of Christ,
so also he saw His triumph, he saw His death, but saw also in Him the
everlasting resurrection of men, and therefore feared not to die as he
was to rise again. Let not then my soul die in sin, nor admit sin into
itself, but let it die in the soul of the righteous, that it may receive
his righteousness. Then, too, he who dies in Christ is made a partaker
of His grace in the Font.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p86"></span>44. Death is not, then, an object of
dread, nor bitter to those in need, nor too bitter to the rich, nor
unkind to the old, nor a mark of cowardice to the brave, nor everlasting
to the faithful nor unexpected to the wise. For how many have
consecrated their life by the renown of their death alone, how many have
been ashamed to live, and have found death a gain! We have read how
often by the death of one great nations have been delivered; the armies
of the enemy have been put to flight by the death of the general, who
had been unable to conquer them when alive.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p87"></span>45. By the death of martyrs religion
has been defended, faith increased, the Church strengthened; the dead
have conquered, the persecutors have been overcome. And so we celebrate
the death of those of whose lives we are ignorant. So, too, David
rejoiced in prophecy at the departure of his own soul, saying: “Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.” <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527.md) He esteemed death better than life.
The death itself of the martyrs is the prize of their life. And again,
by the death of those at variance hatred is put an end to.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p89"></span>46. Why should more be said? By the
death of One the world was redeemed. For Christ, had He willed, need not
have died, but He neither thought that death should be shunned as though
there were any cowardice in it, nor could He have saved us better than
by dying. And so His death is the life of all. We are signed with the
sign <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528.md) <span id="page_181">p.
181</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_181"></span>of His death, we show
forth His death when we pray; when we offer the Sacrifice we declare His
death, for His death is victory, His death is our mystery, His death is
the yearly recurring solemnity of the world. What now should we say
concerning His death, since we prove by this Divine Example that death
alone found immortality, and that death itself redeemed itself. Death,
then, is not to be mourned over, for it is the cause of salvation for
all; death is not to be shunned, for the Son of God did not think it
unworthy of Him, and did not shun it. The order of nature is not to be
loosed, for what is common to all cannot admit of exception in
individuals.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p91"></span>47. And, indeed, death was no part of
man’s nature, but became natural; for God did not institute death at
first, but gave it as a remedy. Let us then take heed that it do not
seem to be the opposite. For if death is a good, why is it written that
“God made not death, <span id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529.md) but by
the malice of men death entered into the world”? For of a truth death
was no necessary part of the divine operation, since for those who were
placed in paradise a continual succession of all good things streamed
forth; but because of transgression the life of man, condemned to
lengthened labour, began to be wretched with intolerable groaning; so
that it was fitting that an end should be set to the evils, and that
death should restore what life had lost. For immortality, unless grace
breathed upon it, would be rather a burden than an advantage.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p93"></span>48. And if one consider accurately, it
is not the death of our being, but of evil, for being continues, it is
evil that perishes. That which has been rises again; would that as it is
now free from sinning, so it were without former guilt! But this very
thing is a proof that it is not the death of being, that we shall be the
same persons as we were. And so we shall either pay the penalty of our
sins, or attain to the reward of our good deeds. For the same being will
rise again, now more honourable for having paid the tax of death. And
then “the dead who are in Christ shall rise first; then, too, we who are
alive,” it is said, “shall together with them be caught up in the clouds
into the air to meet the Lord, and so we shall always be with the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530.md) They first, but those
that are alive second. They with Jesus, those that are alive through
Jesus. To them life will be sweeter after rest, and though the living
will have a delightful gain, yet they will be without experience of the
remedy.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p95"></span>49. There is, then, nothing for us to
fear in death, nothing for us to mourn, whether life which was received
from nature be rendered up to her again, or whether it be sacrificed to
some duty which claims it, and this will be either an act of religion or
the exercise of some virtue. And no one ever wished to remain as at
present. This has been supposed to have been promised to John, but it is
not the truth. We hold fast to the words, and deduce the meaning from
them. He himself in his own writing <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531.md) denies that there was a promise
that he should not die, that no one from that instance might yield to an
empty hope. But if to wish for this would be an extravagant hope, how
much more extravagant were it to grieve without rule for what has
happened according to rule!

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p97"></span>50. The heathen mostly console
themselves with the thought, either of the common misery, or of the law
of nature, or of the immortality of the soul. And would that their
utterances were consistent, and that they did not transmit the wretched
soul into a number of ludicrous monstrosities and figures! But what
ought we to do, whose reward is the resurrection, though many, not being
able to deny the greatness of this gift, refuse to believe in it? And
for this reason will we maintain it, not by one casual argument only,
but by as many as we are able.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p98"></span>51. All things, indeed, are believed to
be, either because of experience, or on grounds of reason, or from
similar instances, or because it is fitting that they be, and each of
these supports our belief. Experience teaches us that we are moved;
reason, that which moves us must be considered the property of another
power; similar instances show that the field has borne crops, and
therefore we expect that it will continue to bear them. Fitness, because
even where we do not think that there will be results, yet we believe
that it is by no means fitting to give up the works of virtue.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p99"></span>52. Each, then, is supported by each.
But belief in the resurrection is inferred most clearly on three
grounds, in which all are included. These are reason, analogy from
universal example, and the evidence of what has happened, since many
have risen. Reason is clear. For since the whole course of our life
consists in the union of body and soul, and the resurrection brings with
it <span id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_182"></span>either the reward of good works, or the
punishment of wicked ones, it is necessary that the body, whose actions
are weighed, rise again. For how shall the soul be summoned to judgment
without the body, when account has to be rendered of the companionship
of itself and the body?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p100"></span>53. Rising again is the lot of all,
but there is a difficulty in believing this, because it is not due to
our deserts, but is the gift of God. The first argument for the
resurrection is the course of the world, and the condition of all
things, the series of generations, the changes in the way of succession,
the setting and rising of constellations, the ending of day and night,
and their daily succession coming as it were again to life. And no other
reason can exist for the fertile temperament of this earth, but that the
divine order restores by the dews of night as much of that moisture from
which all earthly things are produced, as the heat of the sun dries up
by day. Why should I speak of the fruits of the earth? Do they not seem
to die when they fall, to rise again when they grow green once more?
That which is sown rises again, that which is dead rises again, and they
are formed once more into the same classes and kinds as before. The
earth first gave back these fruits, in these first our nature found the
pattern of the resurrection.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p101"></span>54. Why doubt that body shall rise
again from body? Grain is sown, grain comes up again: fruit is sown,
fruit comes up again; but the grain is clothed with blossom and husk.
“And this mortal must put on immortality, and this corruptible must put
on incorruption.” <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532.md) The blossom
of the resurrection is immortality, the blossom of the resurrection is
incorruption. For what is more fruitful than perpetual rest? what
supplied with richer store than everlasting security? Here is that
abundant fruit, by whose increase man’s nature shoots forth more
abundantly after death.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p103"></span>55. But you wonder how what has
yielded to putrefaction can again become solid, how scattered particles
can come together, those that are consumed be made good: you do not
wonder how seeds broken up under the moist pressure of the earth grow
green. For certainly they too, rotting under contact with the earth, are
broken up, and when the fertilising moisture of the soil gives life to
the dead and hidden seeds, and, by the vital warmth, as it were breathes
out a kind of soul of the green herb. Then by little and little nature
raises from the ground the tender stalk of the growing ear, and as a
careful mother folds it in certain sheaths, lest the sharp ice should
hurt it as it grows, and to protect it from too great heat of the sun;
and lest after this the rain should break down the fruit itself escaping
as it were from its first cradle and just grown up, or lest the wind
should scatter it, or small birds destroy it, she usually hedges it
around with a fence of bristling awn.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p104"></span>56. Why should one, then, be surprised
if the earth give back those bodies of men which it has received, seeing
that it gives life to, raises, clothes, protects, and defends whatsoever
bodies of seeds it has received? Cease then to doubt that the
trustworthy earth, which restores multiplied as it were by usury the
seeds committed to it, will also restore the entrusted deposit of the
race of man. And why should I speak of the kinds of trees, which spring
up from seed sown, and with revivified fruitfulness bear again their
opening fruits, and repeat the old shape and likeness, and certain trees
being renewed continue through many generations, and in their endurance
overpass the very centuries? We see the grape rot, and the vine come up
again: a graft is inserted and the tree is born again. Is there this
divine foresight for restoring trees, and no care for men? And He Who
has not suffered to perish that which He gave for man’s use, shall He
suffer man to perish, whom he made after His own image?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p105"></span>57. But it appears incredible to you
that the dead rise again? “Thou foolish one, that which thou thyself
sowest, does it not first die that it may be quickened?” <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533.md) Sow any dry seed you please, it is
raised up. But, you answer, it has the life-juice in itself. And our
body has its blood, has its own moisture. This is the life-juice of our
body. So that I think that the objection is exploded which some allege
that a dry twig does not revive, and then endeavour to argue from this
to the prejudice of the flesh. For the flesh is not dry, since all flesh
is of clay, clay comes from moisture—moisture from the earth. Then,
again, many growing plants, though always fresh, spring from dry and
sandy soil, since the earth itself supplies sufficient moisture for
itself. Does the earth then, which continually restores all things, fail
with regard to man? From what has been said it is clear that we must not
doubt that it is rather in accordance with than contrary to nature; for
it is natural that all <span id="page_183">p. 183</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_183"></span>things living should rise again, but
contrary to nature that they should perish.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p107"></span>58. We come now to a point which much
troubles the heathen, how it can be that the earth should restore those
whom the sea has swallowed up, wild beasts have torn to pieces or have
devoured. So, then, at last we necessarily come to the conclusion that
the doubt is not as to belief in resurrection in general, but as to a
part. For, granted that the bodies of those torn in pieces do not rise
again, the others do so, and the resurrection is not disproved, but a
certain class is an exception. Yet I wonder why they think there is any
doubt even concerning these, as though not all things which are of the
earth return to the earth, and crumble again into earth. And the sea
itself for the most part casts up on neighbouring shores whatever human
bodies it has swallowed. And if this were not so, I suppose we are to
believe that it would not be difficult for God to join together what was
dispersed, to unite what was scattered; God, Whom the universe obeys, to
Whom the dumb elements submit and nature serves; as though it were not a
greater wonder to give life to clay than to join it together.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p108"></span>59. That bird in the country of
Arabia, which is called the Phoenix, restored by the renovating juices
of its flesh, after being dead comes to life again: shall we believe
that men alone are not raised up again? Yet we know this by common
report and the authority of writings, <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534.md) namely, that the bird referred to
has a fixed period of life of five hundred years, and when by some
warning of nature it knows that the end of its life is at hand, it
furnishes for itself a casket of frankincense and myrrh and other
perfumes, and its work and the time being together ended, it enters the
casket and dies. Then from its juices a worm comes forth, and grows by
degrees into the fashion of the same bird, and its former habits are
restored, and borne up by the oarage of its wings it commences once more
the course of its renewed life, and discharges a debt of gratitude. For
it conveys that casket, whether the tomb of its body or the cradle of
its resurrection, in which quitting life it died, and dying it rose
again, from Ethiopia to Lycaonia; and so by the resurrection of this
bird the people of those regions understand that a period of five
hundred years is accomplished. So to that bird the five hundredth is the
year of resurrection, but to us the thousandth: <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535.md) it has its resurrection in this
world, we have ours at the end of the world. Many think also that this
bird kindles its own funeral pile, and comes to life again from its own
ashes.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p111"></span>60. But perhaps nature if more deeply
investigated will seem to give a deeper reason for our belief: let our
thoughts turn back to the origin and commencement of the creation of
man. You are men and women, you are not ignorant of the things which
have to do with human nature, and if any of you have not this knowledge,
you know that we are born of nothing. But how small an origin for being
so great as we are! And if I do not speak more plainly, yet you
understand what I mean, or rather what I will not say. Whence, then, is
this head, and that wonderful countenance, whose maker we see not? We
see the work, it is fashioned for various purposes and uses. Whence is
this upright figure, this lofty stature, this power of action, this
quickness of perception, this capacity for walking upright? Doubtless
the organs of nature are not known to us, but that which they effect is
known. Thou too wast once seed, and thy body is the seed of that which
shall rise again. Listen to Paul and learn that thou art this seed: “It
is sown in corruption, it shall rise in incorruption; it is sown in
dishonour, it shall rise in glory; it is sown in weakness, it shall rise
in power; it is sown a natural body, it shall rise a spiritual
body.” <span id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536.md) Thou also, then, art
sown as are other things, why wonderest thou if thou shalt rise again as
shall others? But thou believest as to them, because thou seest; thou
believest not this, because thou seest it not: “Blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed.” <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p114"></span>61. However, before the season comes,
those things also are not believed, for every season is not suited for
the raising of seeds. Wheat is sown at one time, and comes up at
another; at one time the vine is planted, at another the budding twigs
begin to shoot, the foliage grows luxuriant, and the grape is formed; at
one time the olive is planted, at another time, as though pregnant and
loaded with its offspring of berries, it is bent down by the abundance
of its fruit. But before its own period arrives for each, the produce is
restricted, and that which bears has not the age of bearing in its own
power. <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_184"></span>One may see the mother of all at one
time disfigured with mould, at another bare of produce, at another green
and full of flowers, at another dried up. Any spot which might wish to
be always clothed and never to lay aside the golden dress of its seeds,
or the green dress of the meadows, would be barren in itself and
unendowed with the gain of its own produce which it would have
transferred to others.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p115"></span>62. So, then, even if thou wilt not
believe in our resurrection by faith nor by example, thou wilt believe
by experience. For many products, as the vine, the olive, and different
fruits, the end of the year is the fit time for ripening; and for us
also the consummation of the world, as though the end of the year has
set the fitting time for rising again. And fitly is the resurrection of
the dead at the consummation of the world, lest after the resurrection
we should have to fall back into this evil age. For this cause Christ
suffered that He might deliver us from this evil world; lest the
temptations of this world should overthrow us again, and it should be an
injury to us to come again to life, if we came to life again for sin.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p116"></span>63. So then we have both a reason and
a time for the resurrection: a reason because nature in all its produce
remains consistent with itself, and does not fail in the generation of
men alone; a time because all things are produced at the end of the
year. For the seasons of the world consist of one year. What wonder if
the year be one since the day is one. For on one day the Lord hired the
labourers to work in the vineyard, when He said, “Why stand ye here all
the day idle?” <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p118"></span>64. The causes of the beginnings of
all things are seeds. And the Apostle of the Gentiles has said that the
human body is a seed. <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539.md) And so
in succession after sowing there is the substance needful for the
resurrection. But even if there were no substance and no cause, who
could think it difficult for God to create man anew whence He will and
as He wills. Who commanded the world to come into being out of no matter
and no substance? Look at the heaven, behold the earth. Whence are the
fires of the stars? Whence the orb and rays of the sun? Whence the globe
of the moon? Whence the mountain heights, the hard rocks, the woody
groves? Whence are the air diffused around, and the waters, whether
enclosed or poured abroad? But if God made all these things out of
nothing (for “He spake and they were made, He commanded and they were
created” <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) .md), why should we
wonder that which has been should be brought to life again, since we see
produced that which had not been?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p121"></span>65. It is a cause for wonder that
though they do not believe in the resurrection, yet in their kindly care
they make provision that the human race should not perish, <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541.md) and so say that souls pass and
migrate into other bodies that the world may not pass away. But let them
say which is the most difficult, for souls to migrate, or to return;
come back to that which is their own, or seek for fresh dwelling places.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p123"></span>66. But let those who have not been
taught doubt. For us who have read the Law, the Prophets, the Apostles,
and the Gospel it is not lawful to doubt. For who can doubt when he
reads: “And in that time shall all thy people be saved which is written
in the book; and many of them that sleep in the graves of the earth
shall arise with one opening, these to everlasting life, and those to
shame and everlasting confusion. And they that have understanding shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and of the just many shall be
as the stars for ever.” <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542.md) Well,
then, did he speak of the rest of those that sleep, that one may
understand that death lasts not for ever, which like sleep is undergone
for a time, and is put off at its time; and he shows that the progress
of that life which shall be after death is better than that which is
passed in sorrow and pain before death, inasmuch as the former is
compared to the stars, the latter is assigned to trouble.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p125"></span>67. And why should I bring together
what is written elsewhere: “Thou shalt raise me up and I will praise
Thee.” Or that other passage in which holy Job, after experiencing the
miseries of this life, and overcoming all adversity by his virtuous
patience, promised himself a recompense for present evils in the
resurrection, saying: “Thou shalt raise up this body of mine which has
suffered many evils.” <span id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543.md) Isaiah
also, proclaiming the resurrection to the people, says that he is the
announcer of the Lord’s message, for we read thus: “For the mouth of the
Lord hath spoken, and they shall say in that day.” <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544.md) And what the mouth <span
id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_185"></span>of the
Lord declared that the people should say is set forth later on, where it
is written: “Because of Thy fear, O Lord, we have been with child and
have brought forth the Spirit of Thy Salvation, which Thou hast poured
forth upon the earth. They that inhabit the earth shall fall, they shall
rise that are in the graves. For the dew which is from Thee is health
for them but the land of the wicked shall perish. Go, O my people, and
enter into thy chambers; hide thyself for a little until the Lord’s
wrath pass by.” <span id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p129"></span>68. How well did he by the chambers
point out the tombs of the dead, in which for a brief space we are
hidden, that we may be better able to pass to the judgment of God, which
shall try us with the indignation due for our wickednesses. He, then, is
alive who is hidden and at rest, as though withdrawing himself from our
midst and retiring, lest the misery of this world should entangle him
with closer snares, for whom the heavenly oracles affirm by the voices
of the prophets that the joy of the resurrection is reserved, and the
soundness of their freed bodies procured by the divine deed. And dew is
well used as a sign, since by it all vital seeds of the earth are raised
to growth. What wonder is it, then, if the dust and ashes also of our
failing body grow vigorous by the richness of the heavenly dew, and by
the reception of this vital moistening the shapes of our limbs are
refashioned and connected again with each other?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p130"></span>69. And the holy prophet Ezekiel
teaches and describes with a full exposition how vigour is restored to
the dry bones, the senses return, motion is added, and the sinews coming
back, the joints of the human body grow strong; how the bones which were
very dry are clothed with restored flesh, and the course of the veins
and the flow of the blood is covered by the veil of the skin drawn over
them. As we read, the reviving multitude of human bodies seems to spring
up under the very words of the prophet, and one can see on the
widespread plain the new seed shoot forth.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p131"></span>70. But if the wise men of old
believed that a crop of armed men sprang up in the district of Thebes
from the sowing of the hydra’s teeth, whereas it is certainly
established that seeds of one kind cannot be changed into another kind
of plant, nor bring forth produce differing from its own seeds, so that
men should spring from serpents and flesh from teeth; how much more,
indeed, is it to be believed that whatever has been sown rises again in
its own nature, and that crops do not differ from their seed, that soft
things do not spring from hard, nor hard from soft, nor is poison
changed into blood; but that flesh is restored from flesh, bone from
bone, blood from blood, the humours of the body from humours. Can ye
then, ye heathen, who are able to assert a change, deny a restoration of
the nature? Can you refuse to believe the oracles of God, the Gospel,
and the prophets, who believe empty fables?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p132"></span>71. But let us now hear the prophet
himself, who speaks thus: “The hand of the Lord was upon me, and the
Lord led me forth in the Spirit, and placed me in the midst of the
plain, and it was full of men’s bones; and He led me through them round
about, and, lo, there were very many bones on the face of the plain, and
they were very dry. And He said unto me: Son of man, can these bones
live? And I said: Lord, Thou knowest; and He said to me: Prophesy over
these bones, and thou shalt say unto them: O ye dry bones, hear the word
of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord to these bones: Behold I bring upon you
the Spirit of life, and I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up
flesh upon you, and will stretch skin over you, and will put My Spirit
into you, and ye shall live, and know that I am the Lord. And I
prophesied as He commanded me. And it came to pass when I was
prophesying all these things, lo, there was a great earthquake.” <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p134"></span>72. Note how the prophet shows that
there was hearing and movement in the bones before the Spirit of life
was poured upon them. For, above, both the dry bones are bidden to hear,
as if they had the sense of hearing, and that upon this each of them
came to its own joint is pointed out by the words of the prophet, for we
read as follows: “And the bones came together, each one to its joint.
And I beheld, and, lo, sinews and flesh were forming upon them, and skin
came upon them from above, and there was no Spirit in them.” <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p136"></span>73. Great is the lovingkindness of the
Lord, that the prophet is taken as a witness of the future resurrection,
that we, too might see it with his eyes. For all could not be taken as
witnesses, but in that one all we are witnesses, for neither does lying
come upon a holy man, nor error upon so great a prophet.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p137"></span>74. Nor ought it to appear at all
impro<span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_186"></span>bable, that at the command of God the
bones were fitted again to their joints, since we have numberless
instances in which nature has obeyed the commands of heaven; as the
earth was bidden to bring forth the green herb, <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548.md) and did bring it forth; as the rock
at the touch of the rod gave forth water for the thirsting people; <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549.md) and the hard stone poured forth
streams by the mercy of God for those parched with heat. What else did
the rod changed into a serpent <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550.md) signify, than that at the will of
God living things can be produced from those that are without life? Do
you think it more incredible that bones should come together when
bidden, than that streams should be turned back or the sea flee? For
thus does the prophet testify: “The sea saw it and fled, Jordan was
driven back.” <span id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551.md) Nor can there
be any doubt about this fact, which was proved by the rescue of one and
the destruction of the other of two peoples, that the waves of the sea
stood restrained, and at the same time surrounded one people, and poured
back upon the other for their death, that they might overwhelm the one,
but preserve the other. <span id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552.md) And
what do we find in the Gospel itself? Did not the Lord Himself prove
there that the sea grew calm at a word, the clouds were driven away, the
blasts of the winds yielded, and that on the quieted shores the dumb
elements obeyed God?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p143"></span>75. But let us go on with the other
points, that we may observe how by the Spirit of life the dead are
quickened, they that lie in the graves arise, and the tombs are opened:
“And He said unto me: Prophesy, son of man, and say to the Spirit, Come
from the four winds of heaven, O Spirit, and breathe upon these dead,
that they may live. And I prophesied as He commanded me, and the Spirit
of life entered into them, and they lived, and stood up on their feet,
an exceeding great company. And the Lord spake unto me, saying: Son of
man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. For they say, Our bones
are become dry, our hope is lost, we shall perish. Therefore, prophesy
and say: Thus saith the Lord: Behold I will open your graves, and will
bring you up out of your graves into the land of Israel, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord, when I shall open your graves, and bring forth
My people out of the graves, and shall put My Spirit in you, and place
you in your own land, and ye shall know that I am the Lord; I have
spoken, and I will perform it, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p145"></span>76. We notice here how the operations
of the Spirit of life are again resumed; we know after what manner the
dead are raised from the opening tombs. And is it in truth a matter of
wonder that the sepulchres of the dead are unclosed at the bidding of
the Lord, when the whole earth from its utmost limits is shaken by one
thunderclap, the sea overflows its bounds, and again checks the course
of its waves? And finally, he who has believed that the dead shall rise
again “in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump (for
the trumpet shall sound),” <span id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554.md)
“shall be caught up amongst the first in the clouds to meet Christ in
the air;” <span id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555.md) he who has not
believed shall be left, and subject himself to the sentence by his own
unbelief.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p148"></span>77. The Lord also shows us in the
Gospel, to come now to instances, after what manner we shall rise again.
“For He raised not Lazarus alone, but the faith of all; and if thou
believest, as thou readest, thy spirit also, which was dead, revives
with Lazarus.” For what does it mean, that the Lord went to the
sepulchre and cried with a loud voice, “Lazarus, come forth,” <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556.md) except that He would give us a
visible proof, would set forth an example of the future resurrection?
Why did He cry with a loud voice, as though He were not wont to work in
the Spirit, to command in silence, but only that He might show that
which is written: “In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump the dead shall rise again incorruptible”? <span
id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557.md) For the raising of the voice
answers to the peal of trumpets. And He cried, “Lazarus, come forth.”
Why is the name added, except perchance lest one might seem to be raised
instead of another, or that the resurrection were rather accidental than
commanded.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p151"></span>78. So, then, the dead man heard, and
came forth from the tomb, bound hand and foot with grave cloths, and his
face was bound with a napkin. Conceive, if thou canst, how he makes his
way with closed eyes, directs his steps with bound feet, and moves as
though free with fastened limbs. <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558.md) The bands remained on him but did
not restrain him, his eyes were covered yet they saw. So, then, he saw
who was rising again, who was walking, who was leaving <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_187"></span>the
sepulchre. For when the power of the divine command was working, nature
did not require its own functions, and brought, as it were, into
extremity, obeyed no longer its own course, but the divine will. The
bands of death were burst before those of the grave. The power of moving
was exercised before the means of moving were supplied. <span
id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p154"></span>79. If thou marvellest at this,
consider Who gave the command, that thou mayest cease to wonder; Jesus
Christ. the Power of God, the Life, the Light, the Resurrection of the
dead. The Power raised up him that was lying prostrate, the Life
produced his steps, the Light drove away the darkness and restored his
sight, the Resurrection renewed the gift of life.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p155"></span>80. Perchance it may trouble thee that
the Jews took away the stone and loosened the grave cloths, and thou
mayest haply be anxious as to who shall move the stone from thy tomb. As
though He Who could restore the Spirit could not remove the stone; or He
Who made the bound to walk could not burst the bonds; or He Who had shed
light upon the covered eyes could not uncover the face; or He Who could
renew the course of nature could not cleave the stone! But, in order
that they may believe their eyes who will not believe with their heart,
they remove the stone, they see the corpse, they smell the stench, they
loose the grave cloths. They cannot deny that he is dead whom they
behold rising again; they see the signs of death and the proofs of life.
What if, whilst they are busied, they are converted by the very toil
itself? What if, while they hear, they believe their own ears? What if,
while they behold, they are instructed by their own eyes? What if, while
they loose the bonds, they free their own minds? What if, while Lazarus
is being unbound, the people is set free, while they let Lazarus go,
themselves return to the Lord? For, lastly, many who had come to Mary,
seeing what had taken place, believed.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p156"></span>81. And this was not the only instance
which our Lord Jesus Christ set forth, but He raised others also, that
we might at any rate believe more numerous instances. He raised the
young man again, moved by the tears of his widowed mother, when He came
and touched the bier, and said: “Young man, I say unto thee, arise, and
he that was dead sat up and began to speak.” <span
id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560.md) As soon as he heard he forthwith
sat up, he forthwith spake. The working of power, then, is one thing,
the order of nature is another.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p158"></span>82. And what shall I say of the
daughter of the ruler of the synagogue, at whose death multitudes were
weeping and the flute-players piping? For the funeral solemnities were
being performed because of the conviction of death. How quickly at the
word of the Lord does the spirit return, the reviving body rise up, and
food is taken, that the evidence of life may be believed! <span
id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p160"></span>83. And why should we wonder that the
soul is restored at the word of God, that flesh returns to the bones,
when we remember the dead raised by the touch of the prophet’s
body? <span id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562.md) Elijah prayed, and
raised the dead child. <span id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563.md) Peter
in the name of Christ bade Tabitha rise and walk, <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[1565](#fn_1564.md) and the poor rejoicing believed for
the food’s sake which she ministered to them, and shall we not believe
for our salvation’s sake? They purchased the resurrection of another by
their tears, shall we not believe in the purchase of ours by the Passion
of Christ? Who when He gave up the ghost, in order to show that He died
for our resurrection, worked out the course of the resurrection; for so
soon as “He cried again with a loud voice and gave up the ghost, the
earth did quake, and the rocks were rent, and the tombs were opened, and
many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and, going forth out of the
tombs after His resurrection, came into the holy city and appeared unto
many.” <span id="fr_1565"></span>[1566](#fn_1565.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p165"></span>84. If these things happened when He
gave up the ghost, why should we think them incredible when He shall
return to judgment? especially since this earlier resurrection is a
pledge of that future resurrection, and a pattern of that reality Which
is to come; indeed, it is rather itself truth than a pattern. Who, then,
at the Lord’s resurrection opened the graves, gave a hand to those who
were rising, showed them the road to find the holy city? If there was no
one, it was certainly the Divine Power which was working in the bodies
of the dead. Shall one seek for the aid of man where one sees the work
of God?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p166"></span>85. Divine action has no need of human
assistance. God commanded that the heavens should come into existence,
and it was done; He determined that the earth should be created, and it
was created. <span id="fr_1566"></span>[1567](#fn_1566.md) Who carried
together the stones on his shoulders? who <span id="page_188">p.
188</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_188"></span>supplied the expenses?
who furnished assistance to God as He toiled? These things were made in
a moment. Would you know how quickly? “He spake and they were
made.” <span id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567.md) If the elements spring
up at a word, why should the dead not rise at a word? For though they be
dead, yet they once lived, once had the breath of life for feeling, and
strength for acting; and there is a very great difference between not
having been capable of life, and having remained lifeless. The devil
said: “Command this stone that it become bread.” <span
id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568.md) He confesses that at the command of
God nature can be transformed, dost thou not believe that at the command
of God nature can be remade?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p170"></span>86. Philosophers dispute about the
course of the sun and the system of the heavens, and there are those who
think that these should be believed when they are ignorant of what they
are talking about. For neither have they climbed up into the heavens,
nor measured the sky, nor examined the universe with their eyes; for
none of them was with God in the beginning, none of them has said of
God: “When He was preparing the heavens I was with Him, I was with Him
as a master workman, I was he in whom He delighted.” <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569.md) If, then, they are believed, is God
not believed, Who says: “As the new heavens and the new earth, which I
make to remain before Me, saith the Lord; so shall your name and your
seed abide; and month shall be after month, and sabbath after sabbath,
and all flesh shall come in My sight to worship in Jerusalem, saith the
Lord God; and they shall go forth, and shall see the limbs of men who
have transgressed against Me. For their worm shall not die and their
fire shall not be quenched and they shall be a sight to all
flesh.” <span id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p173"></span>87. If the earth and heaven are
renewed, why should we doubt that man, on account of whom heaven and
earth were made, can be renewed? If the transgressor be reserved for
punishment, why should not the just be kept for glory? If the worm of
sins does not die, how shall the flesh of the just perish? For the
resurrection, as the very form of the word shows, is this, that what has
fallen should rise again, that which has died should come to life again.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p174"></span>88. And this is the course and ground
of justice, that since the action of body and soul is common to both
(for what the soul has conceived the body has carried out), each should
come into judgment, and each should be either given over to punishment
or reserved for glory. For it would seem almost inconsistent that, since
the law of the mind fights against the law of the flesh, and the mind
often, when sin dwelling in man acts, does that which it hates; the mind
guilty of a fault shared by another should be subjected to penalty, and
the flesh, the author of the evil, should enjoy rest: and that should
alone suffer which had not sinned alone, or should alone attain to
glory, not having fought alone with the help of grace.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p175"></span>89. The reason, unless I am mistaken,
is complete and just, but I do not require a reason from Christ. If I am
convinced by reason I reject faith. Abraham believed God, <span
id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571.md) let us also believe Him, that we
who are heirs of his race may also be heirs of his faith. David likewise
believed, and therefore did he speak; <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572.md) let us also believe that we may be
able to speak, knowing that “He Who raised up the Lord Jesus shall raise
up us also with Jesus.” <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1574](#fn_1573.md) For
God, Who never lies, promised this; the Truth promised this in His
Gospel, when He said: “This is the will of Him that sent Me, that of all
that which He hath given Me I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up at the last day.” <span id="fr_1574"></span>[1575](#fn_1574.md) And He
thought it not sufficient to have said this once, but marked it by
express repetition, for this follows: “For this is the will of My
Father, Who sent Me, that every one that seeth the Son and believeth on
Him should have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last
day.” <span id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p181"></span>90. Who was He that said this? He in
truth Who when dead raised up many bodies of the departed. If we believe
not God, shall we not believe evidence? Do we not believe what He
promised, since He did even that which He did not promise? And what
reason would He have had for dying, had He not also had a reason for
rising again? For, seeing that God could not die, Wisdom could not die;
and inasmuch as that could not rise again which had not died, flesh is
assumed, which can die, that whilst that, whose nature it is, dies, that
which had died should rise again. For the resurrection could not be
effected except by man; since, “as by man came death, so too by man came
the resurrection of the dead.” <span
id="fr_1576"></span>[1577](#fn_1576.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p183"></span>91. So, then, man rose because man
died; man was raised again, but God raised him. <span id="page_189">p.
189</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_189"></span>Then it was man
according to the Flesh, now God is all in all. <span
id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577.md) For now we know not Christ
according to the flesh, <span id="fr_1578"></span>[1579](#fn_1578.md) but
we possess the grace of that Flesh, so that we know Him the firstfruits
of them that rest, <span id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579.md) the
firstborn of the dead. <span id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580.md) Now
the first-fruits are undoubtedly of the same nature and kind as the
remaining fruits, the first of which are offered to God as a petition
for a richer increase, as a holy thank-offering for all gifts, and as a
kind of libation of that nature which has been restored. Christ, then,
is the firstfruits of them that rest. But is this of His own who are at
rest, who, as it were, freed from death, are holden by a kind of sweet
slumber, or of all those who are dead? “As in Christ all die, so too in
Christ shall all be made alive.” <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581.md) So, then, as the firstfruits of
death were in Adam, so also the firstfruits of the resurrection are in
Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p189"></span>92. All men rise again, but let no one
lose heart, and let not the just grieve at the common lot of rising
again, since he awaits the chief fruit of his virtue. All indeed shall
rise again, <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582.md) but, as says the
Apostle, “each in his own order.” The fruit of the Divine Mercy is
common to all, but the order of merit differs. The day gives light to
all, the sun warms all, the rain fertilises the possessions of all with
genial showers.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p191"></span>93. We are all born, and we shall all
rise again, but in each state, whether of living or of living again,
grace differs and the condition differs. For, “in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, the dead shall rise
incorruptible and we shall be changed.” <span
id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583.md) Moreover, in death itself some
rest, and some live. Rest is good, but life is better. And so the
Apostle rouses him that is resting to life, saying: “Rise, thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.” <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584.md) Therefore he is
aroused that he may live, that he may be like to Paul, that he may be
able to say: “For we that are alive shall not prevent those that are
asleep.” <span id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585.md) He speaks not here
of the common manner of life, and the breath which we all alike enjoy,
but of the merit of the resurrection. For, having said, “And the dead
which are in Christ shall rise first,” he adds further; “And we that are
alive shall together with them be caught up in the clouds, to meet
Christ in the air.” <span id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p196"></span>94. Paul certainly is dead, and by his
honourable passion exchanged the life of the body for everlasting glory;
did he then deceive himself when he wrote that he should be caught up
alive in the clouds to meet Christ? We read the same too of Enoch <span
id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587.md) and of Elijah, <span
id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588.md) and thou too shalt be caught up in
the Spirit. Lo the chariot of Elijah, lo the fire, though not seen are
prepared, that the just may ascend, the innocent be borne forth, and thy
life may not know death. For indeed the apostles knew not death,
according to that which was said: “Verily, verily, I say unto you, many
of those standing here shall not taste death until they see the Son of
man coming in His kingdom.” <span id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589.md)
For he lives, who has nothing in him which can die, who has not from
Egypt any shoe or bond, but has put it off before laying aside the
service of this body. And so not Enoch alone is alive, for not he alone
was caught up; Paul also was caught up to meet Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p200"></span>95. The patriarchs also live, for God
could not be called the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, except
the dead were living; for He is not the God of the dead but of the
living. <span id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590.md) And we, too, shall
live if we be willing to copy the deeds and habits of our predecessors.
We are astonished at the rewards of the patriarchs, let us copy their
faithfulness; we tell of their grace, let us follow their obedience; let
us not, enticed by appetite, fall into the snares of the world. Let us
lay hold of the opportunity, of the commandment of the Law, the mercy of
our vocation, the desire of suffering. The patriarchs went forth from
their own land, let us go forth in purpose from the power of the body;
let us go forth in purpose as they in exile; but they esteemed that not
to be exile which the fear of God caused, necessity did not enforce.
They changed their land for another soil, let us change earth for
heaven; they changed in earthly habitation, let us change in spirit. To
them Wisdom showed the heaven illuminated with stars, <span
id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591.md) let it enlighten the eyes of our
heart. Thus does the type agree with the truth, and the truth with the
type.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p203"></span>96. Abraham, ready to receive
strangers, faithful towards God, devoted in ministering, quick in his
service, saw the Trinity in a type; <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592.md) he added religious duty to
hospitality, when beholding Three he worshipped One, and preserving the
distinction of the Persons, yet addressed one Lord, he offered to Three
the honour of his gift, while <span id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_190"></span>acknowledging one Power. It was not
learning but grace which spoke in him, and he believed better what he
had not learnt than we who have learnt. No one had falsified the
representation of the truth, and so he sees Three, but worships the
Unity. He brings forth three measures of fine meal, and slays one
victim, <span id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593.md) considering that one
sacrifice is sufficient, but a triple gift; one victim, an offering of
three. And in the four kings, <span id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594.md)
who does not understand that he subjected to himself the elements of the
material creation, and all earthly things in a sign whereby the Lord’s
Passion was prefigured? Faithful in war, moderate in his triumph, in
that he preferred not to become richer by the gifts of men, but by those
of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p207"></span>97. He believed that he when old could
beget a son, <span id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595.md) and judged
himself when a father able to sacrifice his son; nor did his fatherly
affection tremble when duty aided the right hand of the old man, <span
id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596.md) for he knew that his son would be
more acceptable to God when sacrificed than when whole. Therefore he
brings his well-beloved son to be sacrificed, and offered promptly him
whom he had received late; nor is he restrained by being called by the
name of father, when his son called him “Father,” and he replied, “My
son.” Dear pledges of love are these names, but the commands of God are
loved still more. And so although their hearts felt for each other,
their purpose remained firm. The father’s hand stretched out the knife
over his son, and the father’s heart struck the blow that the sentence
might not fail of being carried out; he feared lest the stroke should
miss, lest his right hand should fail. He felt the movings of fatherly
affection, but did not shrink from the work of submission, and hastened
his obedience, even when he heard the voice from heaven. Let us then set
God before all those whom we love, father, brother, mother, that He may
preserve for us those whom we love, as in the case of Abraham we behold
rather the liberal Rewarder than the servant.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p210"></span>98. The father offered indeed his son,
but God is appeased not by blood but by dutiful obedience. He showed the
ram in the thicket <span id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597.md) in the
stead of the lad, that He might restore the son to his father, and yet
the victim not fail the priest. And so Abraham was not stained with his
son’s blood, nor was God deprived of the sacrifice. The prophet spoke,
and neither yielded to boastfulness nor continued obstinate, but took
the ram in exchange for the lad. And by this is shown the more how
piously he offered him whom he now so gladly received back. And thou, if
thou offer thy gift to God, dost not lose it. But we are tenacious of
our own; God gave His only Son for us, <span
id="fr_1598"></span>[1599](#fn_1598.md) we refuse ours. Abraham saw this
and recognized the mystery, that salvation should be to us from the
Tree, nor did it escape his notice that in one and the same sacrifice it
was One that seemed to be offered, Another which could be slain.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p213"></span>99. Let us, then, imitate the devotion
of Abraham, let us imitate the goodness of Isaac, let us imitate his
purity. The man was plainly good and chaste, full of devotion towards
God, chaste towards his wife. He returned not evil for evil, yielded to
those who would thrust him out, received them again on their repentance,
neither violent towards insolence, nor stubborn towards kindness.
Fleeing from strife when he went away from others, ready to forgive when
he received them again, and still more lavish of goodness when he
forgave them. The fellowship of his company was sought, he gave in
addition a feast of pleasure.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p214"></span>100. In Jacob, too, let us imitate the
type of Christ, let there be some likeness of his actions in ourselves.
We shall have our share with him, if we imitate him. He was obedient to
his mother, he yielded to his brother, he served his father-in-law, he
sought his wages from the increase, not from a division of the flocks.
There was no covetous division, where his portion brought such gain. Nor
was that sign without a purpose, the ladder from earth to heaven, <span
id="fr_1599"></span>[1600](#fn_1599.md) wherein was seen the future
fellowship between men and angels through the cross of Christ, whose
thigh was paralyzed, <span id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600.md) that in
his thigh he might recognize the Heir of his body, and foretell by the
paralyzing of his thigh the Passion of his Heir.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p217"></span>101. We see, then, that heaven is open
to virtue, and that this is the privilege not only of a few: “For many
shall come from the east and from the west, and the north and the south,
and shall sit down in the kingdom of God,” <span
id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601.md) giving expression to the enjoyment
of perpetual rest since the motions of their souls are stilled. Let us
follow Abraham in our habits, that he may receive us into his bosom, and
cherish us with loving embrace, like Lazarus the in<span
id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_191"></span>heritor of his humility surrounded by
his own special virtues. The followers of the holy patriarch, approved
of God, cherish us not in a bodily bosom, but in a clothing as it were
of good works. “Be not deceived,” says the Apostle, “God is not
mocked.” <span id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p220"></span>102. We have seen, then, how grave an
offence it is not to believe the resurrection; for if we rise not again,
then Christ died in vain, then Christ rose not again. <span
id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603.md) For if He rose not for us, He
certainly rose not at all, for He had no need to rise for Himself. The
universe rose again in Him, the heaven rose again in Him, the earth rose
again in Him, for there shall be a new heaven and a new earth. <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604.md) But where was the necessity of a
resurrection for Him Whom the claims of death held not? For though He
died as man, yet was He free in hell itself.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p223"></span>103. Wilt thou know how free? “I am
become as a man that hath no help, free among the dead.” <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605.md) And well is He called free, Who had
power to raise Himself, according to that which is written: “Destroy
this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” <span
id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606.md) And well is He called free, Who had
descended to rescue others. For He was made as a man, not, indeed, in
appearance only, but so fashioned in truth, for He is man, and who shall
know Him? For, “being made in the likeness of men, and being found in
fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, becoming obedient even unto
death,” <span id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607.md) in order that through
that obedience we might see His glory, “the glory as of the
Only-begotten of the Father,” <span id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608.md)
according to Saint John. For thus is the statement of Scripture
preserved, if both the glory of the Only-begotten and the nature of
perfect man are preserved in Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p228"></span>104. And so He needed no helper. For
He needed none when He made the world, so as to need none when He would
redeem it. No legate, no messenger, but the Lord Himself made it whole.
“He spake and it was done.” <span id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609.md)
The Lord Himself made it whole, Himself in every part, because all
things were by Him. For who should help Him in Whom all things were
created and by Whom all things consist? <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610.md) Who should help Him Who makes all
things in a moment, and raises the dead at the last trump? <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611.md) The “last,” not as though He could
not raise them at the first, or the second, or the third, but an order
is observed, not that a difficulty may be at last overcome, but that the
prescribed number be accomplished.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p232"></span>105. But it is now time, I think, to
speak of the trumpets since my discourse is nearing its end, that the
trumpet may also be the sign of the finishing of my address. We read of
seven trumpets in the Revelation of John, which seven angels
received. <span id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612.md) And there you read
that when the seventh angel sounded his trumpet, there was a great voice
from heaven, saying: “The kingdom of this world is become the kingdom of
our God and of His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever.” <span
id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613.md) The word trumpet is also used for a
voice, as you read: “Behold a door opened in heaven, and the first voice
which I heard, as of a trumpet speaking with me and saying, Come up
hither, and I will show thee the things which must come to pass.” <span
id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614.md) We read also: “Blow up the trumpet
at the beginning of the month \[the new moon\]”; <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615.md) and again elsewhere: “Praise Him
with the sound of the trumpet.” <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p238"></span>106. Therefore we ought with all our
power to observe what is the signification of the trumpets, lest,
accepting them, like old women, as part of the story, we should be in
danger if we were to think things unworthy of spiritual teaching, or not
befitting the dignity of the Scriptures. For when we read that our
warfare is not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual hosts of
wickedness, which are in high places, <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617.md) we ought not to think of weapons of
the flesh, but of such as are mighty before God. <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618.md) It is not enough that one see the
trumpet or hear its sound, unless one understands the signification of
the sound. For if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, how shall one
prepare himself for war? <span id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619.md)
Wherefore it is important that we understand the meaning of the voice of
the trumpet, lest we seem barbarians, when we either hear or utter
trumpet-sounds of this sort. And therefore when we speak, let us pray
that the Holy Spirit would interpret them to us.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p242"></span>107. Let us, then, investigate what we
read in the Old Testament concerning the kinds of trumpets, considering
that those festivals which were enjoined on the Jews by the Law are the
shadow of joys above and of heavenly festivals. For here is the shadow,
there the truth. Let us endeavour to attain to the truth by means of the
shadow. Of which truth the figure is expressed in this manner, where we
read that the Lord said <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_192"></span>to Moses: “Speak unto the children of
Israel, saying, In the seventh month, on the first day of the month,
shall be a rest unto you, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, it shall be
called holy unto you. Ye shall not do any servile work, and ye shall
kindle a whole burnt-offering unto the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620.md) And in the Book of Numbers: “The
Lord spake unto Moses, saying: Make thee two trumpets of beaten work, of
silver shalt thou make them, and they shall be to thee for calling the
assembly and for the journeying of the camp. And thou shalt blow with
them, and all the congregation shall be gathered together at the door of
the tabernacle of witness. But if thou blow with one trumpet, all the
princes and leaders of Israel shall come to thee; and ye shall blow a
signal with the trumpet the first time, and they shall move the camp
forward, and place it on the east. And ye shall blow a signal with the
trumpet the second time, and they shall move the camp forward, and place
it towards Libanus. And ye shall blow a signal with the trumpet the
third time, and they shall move the camp forward, which shall be placed
towards the north \[Boream\]. And ye shall blow a signal with the
trumpet the fourth time, and they shall move the camp forward, which
shall be placed towards the north \[Aquilonem\]. They shall blow a
signal with the trumpet when they move forward. And when ye shall gather
together the assembly, blow with the trumpet, but not the signal. And
the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow with the trumpets, and it
shall be for you a statute for ever throughout your generations. But if
ye shall go out to war into your own land, against the adversaries who
resist you, ye shall sound a signal with the trumpets and ye shall be
remembered before the Lord, and have deliverance from your dead. Also in
the days of your gladness, and on your feast days, and on your new
moons, ye shall blow with the trumpets, and at your whole burnt
sacrifices and at your peace-offerings, and it shall be for you for your
memorial before the Lord, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621.md)  <span
id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p246"></span>108. What then? shall we esteem
festival days by eating and drinking? But let no man judge us in respect
of eating; “for we know that the Law is spiritual.” <span
id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623.md) “Let no man therefore judge us in
any meats or in drink, or in respect of a feast day or new moons, or a
sabbath day, which are a shadow of the things to come, but the body is
of Christ.” <span id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624.md) Let us, then,
seek the body of Christ which the voice of the Father, from heaven, as
it were the last trumpet, has shown to you at the time when the Jews
said that it thundered; <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625.md) the
body of Christ, which again the last trump shall reveal; for “the Lord
Himself shall descend from heaven at the voice of the Archangel, and at
the trump of God, and they that are dead in Christ shall rise
again;” <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626.md) for “where the body
is, there too are the eagles,” <span
id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627.md) where the body of Christ is, there
is the truth.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p252"></span>108. The seventh trumpet, then, seems
to signify the sabbath of the week, which is reckoned not only in days
and years and periods (for which reason the number of the jubilee is
sacred), but includes also the seventieth year, when the people returned
to Jerusalem, who had remained seventy years in captivity. In hundreds
also and in thousands the observation of the sacred number is by no
means passed over, for not without a meaning did the Lord say: “I have
left the seven thousand men, who have not bent their knees before
Baal.” <span id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628.md) Therefore the shadow
of the future rest is figured in time in the days, months, and years of
this world, and therefore the children of Israel are commanded by Moses,
that in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, a rest should
be established for all at the “memorial of the trumpets;” and that no
servile work should be done, but a sacrifice be offered to God, because
that at the end of the week, as it were the sabbath of the world,
spiritual and not bodily work is required of us. For that which is
bodily is servile, for the body serves the soul, but innocence makes
free, guilt reduces to slavery.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p254"></span>109. It was necessary, then, that
spiritual things should be made known as in a mirror and in a riddle;
“For now we see by means of a mirror, but then face to face.” <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629.md) Now we war after the flesh, then in
the Spirit we shall see the divine mysteries. Let, then, the character
of the true law be expressed in our manner of life, who walk in the
image of God, for the shadow of the Law has now passed away. The carnal
Jews had the shadow, the likeness is ours, the reality theirs who shall
rise again. For we <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_193"></span>know that according to the Law there are
these three, the shadow, the image or likeness, and the reality; the
shadow in the Law, the image in the Gospel, the truth in the judgment.
But all is Christ’s, and all is in Christ, Whom now we cannot see
according to the reality, but we see Him, as it were, in a kind of
likeness of future things, of which we have seen the shadow in the Law.
So, then, Christ is not the shadow but the likeness of God, not an empty
likeness but the reality. And so the Law was by Moses, for the shadow
was through man, the likeness was through the Law, the reality through
Jesus. For reality cannot proceed from any other source than from
reality.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p256"></span>110. If, then, any one desires to see
this Image of God, he must love God, that he may be loved by God; and be
no longer a servant but a friend, because he has kept the commandments
of God, that he may enter into the cloud where God is. <span
id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630.md) Let him make to himself two
reasonable trumpets of beaten work of proved silver, that is, composed
of precious words and adorned, from which not a harsh shrill sound with
dread-inspiring voice may be uttered, but high thanks to God may be
poured forth with continuous exultation. For by the voice of such
trumpets the dead are raised, not indeed by the sound of the metal, but
aroused by the word of truth. And perchance it is those two trumpets by
which Paul, through the Divine Spirit, spake when he said: “I will pray
with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding, I will sing
with the Spirit, and I will sing with the understanding;” <span
id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631.md) for the one without the other seems
by no means to have perfect utterance.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p259"></span>111. Yet it is not every one’s
business to sound each trumpet, nor every one’s business to call
together the whole assembly, but that prerogative is granted to the
priests alone, <span id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632.md) and the
ministers of God who sound the trumpets, so that whosoever shall hear
and follow thither where the glory of the Lord is, and shall with early
determination come to the tabernacle of witness, may be able also to see
the divine works, and merit that appointed and eternal home for the
entire succession of his posterity. For then is the war finished and the
enemy put to flight, when the grace of the Spirit and the energy of the
soul act together.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p261"></span>112. And these are salutary trumpets
also, if one believe with the heart, and confess with the mouth; “For
with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation.” <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633.md) For with this twofold trumpet man
arrives at that holy land, namely, the grace of the resurrection. Let
them, then, ever sound to thee, that thou mayest ever hear the voice of
God; may the utterances of the Angels and Prophets ever incite and move
thee, that thou mayest hasten to things above.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p263"></span>113. David was thinking of this
purpose in his breast when he said: “For I will pass into the place of
the marvellous tabernacle, even to the house of God, with the voice of
exultation and thanksgiving, the sound of one that feasts.” <span
id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634.md) For not only are enemies overcome
by the sound of these trumpets; but without them there could not be
rejoicings, and festivals or new moons. For no one, unless he have
received the promises of the Divine Word, and believes the message
derived therefrom, can keep festivals or new moons, in which he desires
to fill himself, freed from bodily pleasure and secular occupation, with
the light of Christ. And sacrifices themselves cannot be pleasing to
Christ unless confession of the mouth accompanies them, which according
to custom stirs up the people to implore the grace of God at the
priestly oblation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p265"></span>114. Let us therefore be preachers of
the Lord, and praise Him in the sound of the trumpet, <span
id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635.md) not thinking little or lightly of
its power, but such things as can fill the ear of the mind, and enter
into the depths of our inmost consciousness, so that we think not that
what suits to the body is to be applied to the Godhead, nor measure the
greatness of Divine Power by human might, so as to enquire how any one
can rise again, or with what kind of body he will come, or how that
which has been dissolved can again coalesce, and what is lost be
restored, for all these things are accomplished as soon as they are
determined by the Divine Will. And it is not a sound of a trumpet
distinguishable by the bodily senses which is expected, but the
invisible power of the Majesty of heaven operates; for with God to will
is to do; nor need we enquire into the force required for the
resurrection, but seek its fruit for ourselves. Which will be
accomplished all the more easily, if freed from faults we attain to the
fulness of the spiritual mystery, and the renewed flesh receives grace
from the Spirit, and the soul <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_194"></span>obtains from Christ the brightness of
eternal light.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p267"></span>115. But those mysteries pertain not
to individuals only, but to the whole human race. For observe the order
of grace according to the type of the Law. When the first trumpet
sounds, it collects those towards the east, as the chief and elect; when
the second sounds, those nearly equal in merit, who, being placed
towards Libanus, have abandoned the follies of the nations; when the
third, those who as it were, tossed on the sea of this world, have been
driven hither and thither by the waves of this life; when the fourth,
those who have by no means been able sufficiently to soften the hardness
of their hearts by the commandments of spiritual utterance, and
therefore are said to be towards the north—for, according to Solomon,
the north is a hard wind. <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p269"></span>116. And so although all are raised
again in a moment, yet all are raised in the order of their merits. And
therefore they rise first, who yielding early to the impulses of
devotion, and as it were going forth before the rising dawn of faith,
received the rays of the eternal Sun. This one may rightly say either of
the patriarchs in the course of the Old Testament, or of the apostles
under the Gospel. And the second are they who, forsaking the rites of
the Gentiles, passed from unholy error under the training of the Church.
So, then, those first were of the fathers, those second of the Gentiles,
for the light of faith took its beginning from those, among these it
will remain to the end of the world. In the third place and in the
fourth, those are raised who are in the south and in the north. The
earth is divided into these four, of these four is the year made up, in
these four is the earth completed, and from these four is the Church
collected. For all who are considered to be joined to holy Church, by
being called by the Divine Name, shall obtain the privilege of the
resurrection and the grace of eternal bliss, for “they shall come from
the east and west, and from the north and south, and shall sit down in
the kingdom of God.” <span id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p271"></span>117. For it is no small light
wherewith Christ encompasses His world: since “His going forth is from
the height of heaven, and His progress to the height thereof, nor is
there any who can hide himself from His heat.” <span
id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638.md) For with His Goodness He enlightens
all, and wills not to reject but to amend the foolish, and desires not
to exclude the hard-hearted from the Church, but to soften them. And so
the Church in the Song of Songs and Christ in the Gospel invites them,
saying: “Come unto Me, all ye who labour and are heavy laden, and I will
refresh you; take My yoke upon you and learn of Me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart.” <span id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p274"></span>118. And you may recognize also the
voice of the invitation of the Church, for she says: “Awake, O north
wind, and come, thou south, blow upon my garden, and let my ointment
flow forth. Let my brother come down into his garden and eat the fruit
of his precious trees.” <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640.md) For
knowing even then, O holy Church, that from those also there would be
fruitful works for thee, thou didst promise to thy Christ fruit from
such as they, thou who didst first say that thou wast brought into the
King’s chamber, loving His breast above wine, since thou lovedst Him Who
loved thee, soughtest Him Who fed thee, and didst despise dangers for
religion’s sake.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p276"></span>119. And then, O Bride, thou art
called to come from Libanus, being in the Lord’s judgment all fair and
without fault. For thus it is written: “Thou art all fair, my love, and
there is no fault in thee. Come hither from Libanus, my bride, come
hither from Libanus.” <span id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p278"></span>120. Afterwards, thou, fearing no
rushing waters, no torrents coming down from Libanus, callest the north
and south winds, wishing them to blow upon thy garden, that thy ointment
may flow forth upon others, and that thou mayest offer to Christ in
others the manifold fruits of thy productiveness.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p279"></span>121. And therefore “blessed is he who
keepeth the words of this prophecy,” <span
id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642.md) which has revealed the resurrection
to us by clearer testimony, saying: “And I saw the dead, great and
small, standing before the throne, and they opened the books; and
another book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead were
judged out of the things which were written in the books, according to
their works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and hell
gave up the dead which were in it.” <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643.md) We must, then, not question how
they shall rise again, whom hell gives up and the sea restores.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p282"></span>122. Hear also when the future grace
of the just is promised: “And I heard,” he says, “a great voice from the
throne saying: Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He shall
dwell with them, and they <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_195"></span>shall be His people, and God Himself
shall be their God with them: and He shall wipe away every tear from
their eyes; and death shall be no more, nor mourning, nor crying, nor
pain, any more.” <span id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p284"></span>123. Compare now, if you will, and
contrast this life with that; and choose, if you then can, unending
bodily existence in toil, and in the wretched misery of such changes as
we endure, in satiety when we have our wishes, in that disgust which
attends our pleasures. If God were willing to let these last for ever,
would you choose them? For if on its own account life is to be escaped
from, that there may be an avoidance of troubles and rest from miseries,
how much more is that rest to be sought for, which shall be followed by
the eternal pleasure of the resurrection to come, where there is no
succession of faults, no enticement to sin?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p285"></span>124. Who is so patient in suffering as
not to pray for death? who has such endurance in weakness as not to wish
rather to die than to live in debility? Who is so brave in sorrow as not
to desire to escape from it even by death? But if we ourselves are
dissatisfied while life lasts, although we know that a limit is fixed
for it, how much more weary should we become of this life if we saw that
the troubles of the body would be with us without end! For who is there
who would wish to be excepted from death? Or what would be more
unendurable than a miserable immortality? “If in this life only,” he
says, “we hope in Christ, we are more miserable than all men;” <span
id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645.md) not because to hope in Christ is
miserable, but because Christ has prepared another life for those who
hope in Him. For this life is liable to sin, that life is reserved for
the reward.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p287"></span>124. And how much weariness do we find
that the short stages of our lives bring us! The boy longs to be a young
man; the youth counts the years leading to riper age; the young man,
unthankful for the advantage of his vigorous time of life, desires the
honour of old age. And so to all there comes naturally the desire of
change, because we are dissatisfied with that which we now are. And
lastly, even the things we have desired are wearisome to us; and what we
have wished to obtain, when we have obtained it, we dislike.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p288"></span>125. Wherefore holy men have not
without reason often lamented their lengthy dwelling here: David <span
id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646.md) lamented it, Jeremiah <span
id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647.md) lamented it, and Elijah <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648.md) lamented it. If we believe wise
men, and those in whom the Divine Spirit dwelt, they were hastening to
better things; and if we enquire as to the judgment of others, that we
may ascertain that all agree in one opinion, what great men have
preferred death to sorrow, what great men have preferred it to fear!
esteeming forsooth the fear of death to be worse than death itself. So
death is not feared on account of evils which belong to it, but is
preferred to the miseries of life, since the departure of the dying is
desired and the dread of the living is avoided.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p292"></span>126. So be it, then. Granted that the
Resurrection is preferable to this life. What! have philosophers <span
id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649.md) themselves found anything with
which we should have a greater delight to continue than to rise again?
Even those indeed who say that souls are immortal do not satisfy me,
seeing they only allow me a partial redemption. What grace can that be
by which I am not wholly benefited? What life is that if the operation
of God dies out in me? What righteousness is that which, if death is the
end of natural existence, is common to the sinner and the just? What is
that truth, that the soul should be considered immortal, because it
moves itself and is always in motion? As regards that which in the body
is common to us with beasts, it is perhaps uncertain what happens before
the body exists, and the truth is not to be gathered from these
differences but destroyed.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p294"></span>127. But is their opinion preferable,
who <span id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650.md) say that our souls, when
they have passed out of these bodies, migrate into the bodies of beasts,
or of various other living creatures? Philosophers, indeed, themselves
are wont to argue that these are ridiculous fancies of poets, such as
might be produced by draughts of the drugs of Circe; <span
id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651.md) and they say that not so much they
who are represented to have undergone such things, as the senses of
those who have invented such tales are changed into the forms of various
beasts as it were by Circe’s cup. For what is so like a marvel as to
believe that men could have been changed into the forms of beasts? How
much greater a marvel, however, would it be that the soul which rules
man should take on itself the nature of a beast so opposed to that of
man, and being capable of reason should be able to pass over to an
irrational animal, than that the form of the body should have been <span
id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="iv.iii.iii-Page_196"></span>changed? You yourselves, who teach these
things, destroy what you teach. For you have given up the production of
these portentous conversions by means of magic incantations.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p297"></span>128. Poets say these things in sport,
and philosophers blame them and at the same time they imagine that those
very things are true of the dead which they consider fictitious as
regards the living. For they who invented such tales did not intend to
assert the truth of their own fable, but to deride the errors of
philosophers, who think that that same soul which was accustomed to
overcome anger by gentle and lowly purpose, can now, inflamed by the
raging impulses of a lion, impatient with anger and with unbridled rage,
thirst for blood and seek for slaughter. Or again, that that soul, which
as it were by royal counsel used to moderate the various storms of the
people, and to calm them with the voice of reason, can now endure to
howl in pathless and desert places after the fashion of a wolf; or that
that soul which, groaning under a heavy burden, used to low in sad
complaint over the labours of the plough, now changed into the fashion
of a man, seeks for horns on his smooth brow; <span
id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652.md) or that another, which used of old
to be borne aloft on rapid wing to the heights of heaven, now thinks of
flight <span id="fr_1653"></span>[1654](#fn_1653.md) no longer in its
power, and mourns that it grows sluggish in the weight of a human body.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p300"></span>129. Perchance you destroyed
Icarus <span id="fr_1654"></span>[1655](#fn_1654.md) through some such
teaching, because the youth, led on by your persuasion, imagined, it may
be, that he had been a bird. By such means too have many old men been
deceived so as to submit to grievous pain, having unhappily believed the
fables about swans, and thought that they, whilst soothing their pain
with mournful strains, would be able to transmute their gray hair into
downy feathers.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p302"></span>130. How incredible are these things!
how odious! How much more fitting is it to believe in accordance with
nature, in accordance with what takes place in every kind of fruit; to
believe in accordance with the pattern of what has happened, in
accordance with the utterances of prophets, and the heavenly promise of
Christ! For what is better than to be sure that the work of God does not
perish, and that those who are made in the image and likeness of God
cannot be transformed into the shapes of beasts; since in truth it is
not the form of the body but of the spirit which is made after the
likeness of God. For in what manner could man, to whom are subjected the
other kinds of living creatures, migrate with the better part of himself
into an animal subjected to himself? Nature does not suffer this, and if
nature did grace would not.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p303"></span>131. But I have seen what you,
Gentiles, think of each other, and indeed it ought not to seem strange
that you who worship beasts should believe that you can be changed into
beasts. But I had rather that you judged better concerning what is due
to you, that you may believe that you will be not in the company of wild
beasts, but in the companionship of angels.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p304"></span>132. The soul has to depart from the
surroundings of this life, and the pollutions of the earthly body, and
to press on to those heavenly companies, though it is for the saints
alone, to attain to them, and to sing praise to God (as in the prophet’s
words we hear of those who are harping <span
id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655.md) and saying: “For great are Thy
marvellous works, O Lord God Almighty, just and true are Thy ways, Thou
King of the nations; who shall not fear and magnify Thy Name, for Thou
only art holy, for all nations shall come and worship before
Thee”), <span id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656.md) and to see Thy
marriage feast, O Lord Jesus, in which the Bride is led from earthly to
heavenly things, while all rejoice in harmony, for “to Thee shall all
flesh come,” <span id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657.md) now no longer
subject to transitory things, but joined to the Spirit, to see the
chambers adorned with linen, roses, lilies, and garlands. Of whom else
is the marriage so adorned? For it is adorned with the purple stripes of
confessors, the blood of martyrs, the lilies of virgins, and the crowns
of priests.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p308"></span>133. Holy David desired beyond all
else for himself that he might behold and gaze upon this, for he says:
“One thing have I asked of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, and see the
pleasure of the Lord.” <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658.md)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p310"></span>134. It is a pleasure to believe this,
a joy to hope for it; and certainly, not to have believed it is a pain,
to have lived in this hope a grace. But if I am mistaken in this, that I
prefer to be associated after death with angels rather than with beasts,
I am gladly mistaken, and so long as I live will never suffer myself to
be cheated of this hope.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p311"></span>135. For what comfort have I left but
that I hope to come quickly to thee, my brother, <span id="page_197">p.
197</span> <span id="iv.iii.iii-Page_197"></span>and that thy departure
will not cause a long severance between us, and that it may be granted
me, through thy intercessions, that thou mayest quickly call me who long
for thee. For who is there who ought not to wish for himself beyond all
else that “this corruptible should put on incorruption, and this mortal
put on immortality”? <span id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659.md) that we
who succumb to death through the frailty of the body, being raised above
nature, may no longer have to fear death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[174:1486](2100178.htm#fr_1485.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span> Not only the Martyrs and Saints, but
ordinary Christians, are meant here, for these used to be commemorated
with special prayers and offerings of the Holy Eucharist on their
behalf, especially on the anniversaries of their deaths.

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[175:1487](2100178.htm#fr_1486.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span> [Rom. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[175:1488](2100178.htm#fr_1487.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span> S. [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[175:1489](2100178.htm#fr_1488.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span> [Rom. xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[175:1490](2100178.htm#fr_1489.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span> S. Aug. *De Pec. Orig.* c. 41.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[177:1491](2100178.htm#fr_1490.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[177:1492](2100178.htm#fr_1491.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30"></span> [Gen. xxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[177:1493](2100178.htm#fr_1492.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31"></span> [Gen. xlix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[177:1494](2100178.htm#fr_1493.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33"></span> [Gen. xxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[177:1495](2100178.htm#fr_1494.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34"></span> [Gen. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[177:1496](2100178.htm#fr_1495.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p36"></span> [2 Sam. xiii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#029.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[177:1497](2100178.htm#fr_1496.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37"></span> [2 Sam. xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[177:1498](2100178.htm#fr_1497.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p38"></span> [2 Sam. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p38.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[177:1499](2100178.htm#fr_1498.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p40"></span> St. Ambrose has *index meus in
matutinum*; some <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p40.1"></span>mss.</span> *vindex*; the Roman Psalter,
*judex*; the Vulgate, nearer the Hebrew, *Castigatio*; LXX. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.iii-p40.2"></span>ἔλεγχος</span>.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[177:1500](2100178.htm#fr_1499.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p41"></span> [Psa.
73.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p41.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[177:1501](2100178.htm#fr_1500.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p43"></span> S. [John xiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[177:1502](2100178.htm#fr_1501.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p44"></span> S. [Luke
22:60](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#060.md),
[61](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#061.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[178:1503](2100178.htm#fr_1502.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p45"></span> “*Atque haud dubie pro nobis tentatus
est Petrus, ut in fortiore non esset tentamenti periculum.*” A difficult
passage, and the meaning of it seems to be, that had a stronger than St.
Peter been tried, and had overcome, we should not have had the warning
against presumption, and the help of the example of one like ourselves.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[178:1504](2100178.htm#fr_1503.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p47"></span> [2 Sam.
18.33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p47.1"></span> \[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[178:1505](2100178.htm#fr_1504.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p49"></span> [Psa.
103.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1505"></span>[178:1506](2100178.htm#fr_1505.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p50"></span> [Psa.
144.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[178:1507](2100178.htm#fr_1506.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p52"></span> [Eccles. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[178:1508](2100178.htm#fr_1507.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p54"></span> [Wis.
7:7](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#007.md),
[17](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p54.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[178:1509](2100178.htm#fr_1508.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p56"></span> [Job iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[178:1510](2100178.htm#fr_1509.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p57"></span> [Psa.
39.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[178:1511](2100178.htm#fr_1510.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p58"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[179:1512](2100178.htm#fr_1511.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p60"></span> [Psa.
39.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.1"></span> \[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[179:1513](2100178.htm#fr_1512.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p61"></span> [Psa.
120.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[179:1514](2100178.htm#fr_1513.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p63"></span> [Jer. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p63.1"></span>
\[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[179:1515](2100178.htm#fr_1514.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p65"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[179:1516](2100178.htm#fr_1515.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p67"></span> *Cf.*S. Ambr. *de Bono Mortis,* c. 9,
and *In Luc.* vii. 35.

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[179:1517](2100178.htm#fr_1516.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p68"></span> S. [Matt. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[179:1518](2100178.htm#fr_1517.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p69"></span> [Ezek. xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[179:1519](2100178.htm#fr_1518.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p71"></span> [Gen. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p71.1"></span>
ff. \[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[179:1520](2100178.htm#fr_1519.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p74"></span> [Rev. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[179:1521](2100178.htm#fr_1520.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p75"></span> S. [Luke xxiii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#030.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[180:1522](2100178.htm#fr_1521.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p76"></span> S. [Luke xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[180:1523](2100178.htm#fr_1522.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p78"></span> [Phil. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[180:1524](2100178.htm#fr_1523.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p79"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[180:1525](2100178.htm#fr_1524.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p81"></span> [Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[180:1526](2100178.htm#fr_1525.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p82"></span> [Phil.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[180:1527](2100178.htm#fr_1526.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p85"></span> [Num. xxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p85.1"></span>
\[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[180:1528](2100178.htm#fr_1527.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p88"></span> [Psa.
116.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[180:1529](2100178.htm#fr_1528.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p90"></span> The reference of course is to the sign
of the Cross, which, as we know from various authorities, the early
Christians constantly used, at rising, lying down, going in or out, at
prayers, etc., etc.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[181:1530](2100178.htm#fr_1529.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p92"></span> [Wisd. i.
13](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p92.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[181:1531](2100178.htm#fr_1530.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p94"></span> [1 Thess.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[181:1532](2100178.htm#fr_1531.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p96"></span> S. [John xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[182:1533](2100178.htm#fr_1532.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p102"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[182:1534](2100178.htm#fr_1533.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p106"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[183:1535](2100178.htm#fr_1534.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p109"></span> *Scripturarum.* It is impossible to
suppose that St. Ambrose here means Holy Scripture, but is referring to
such writers as Herodotus, Tacitus, and Pliny. Other Fathers,
Tertullian, St. Cyril of Jerusalem, St. Basil, with several more, refer
also to the fable of the Phœnix in speaking of the Resurrection.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[183:1536](2100178.htm#fr_1535.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p110"></span> St. Ambrose may have believed that
the world would end with <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p110.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1000, or possibly a thousand
is simply taken as a number signifying completeness, as St. Augustine
(*De Civ. Dei,* XX. 7) explains the thousand years of [Rev. xx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p110.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[183:1537](2100178.htm#fr_1536.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p112"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p112.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[183:1538](2100178.htm#fr_1537.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p112.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p113"></span> S. [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[184:1539](2100178.htm#fr_1538.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p117"></span> S. [Matt. xx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[184:1540](2100178.htm#fr_1539.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p119"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[184:1541](2100178.htm#fr_1540.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p119.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p120"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[184:1542](2100178.htm#fr_1541.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p122"></span> The immortality of the soul may be
believed by those who deny the resurrection of the body, and was taught
by many philosophers amongst the heathen. The resurrection of the body
is a matter of divine revelation, and the very highest and best amongst
the heathen seem not to have admitted it even as a speculation.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[184:1543](2100178.htm#fr_1542.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p123.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p124"></span> [Dan.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[184:1544](2100178.htm#fr_1543.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p126"></span> [Job xix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p126.1"></span>. Somewhat loosely from the LXX.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[184:1545](2100178.htm#fr_1544.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p126.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p127"></span> [Isa.
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[185:1546](2100178.htm#fr_1545.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p127.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p128"></span> [Is. xxvi.
18-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p128.1"></span> \[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[185:1547](2100178.htm#fr_1546.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p132.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p133"></span> [Ezek. xxxvii.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p133.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[185:1548](2100178.htm#fr_1547.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p134.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p135"></span> [Ezek. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[186:1549](2100178.htm#fr_1548.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p137.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p138"></span> [Gen. i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[186:1550](2100178.htm#fr_1549.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p138.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p139"></span> [Num. xx.
11](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[186:1551](2100178.htm#fr_1550.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p139.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p140"></span> [Ex. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[186:1552](2100178.htm#fr_1551.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p140.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p141"></span> [Psa.
114.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[186:1553](2100178.htm#fr_1552.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p141.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p142"></span> [Ex. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p142.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[186:1554](2100178.htm#fr_1553.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p143.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p144"></span> [Ezek. xxxvii.
9-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[186:1555](2100178.htm#fr_1554.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p145.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p146"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[186:1556](2100178.htm#fr_1555.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p146.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p147"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[186:1557](2100178.htm#fr_1556.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p148.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p149"></span> S. [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[186:1558](2100178.htm#fr_1557.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p149.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p150"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[186:1559](2100178.htm#fr_1558.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p152"></span> *inseparabili gressu, separabilique
progressu.* A literal version is impossible. His feet were bound, yet he
as it were walked, the usual mode of progress when the limbs are free.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[187:1560](2100178.htm#fr_1559.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p152.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p153"></span> *agebatur prius quam parabatur
incessus.*

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[187:1561](2100178.htm#fr_1560.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p156.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p157"></span> S. [Luke
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[187:1562](2100178.htm#fr_1561.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p158.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p159"></span> S. [Mark v.
38-43](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[187:1563](2100178.htm#fr_1562.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p160.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p161"></span> [2 Kings
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#034.md), [2 Kings
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[187:1564](2100178.htm#fr_1563.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p161.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p162"></span> [1 Kings
17.22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[187:1565](2100178.htm#fr_1564.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p162.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p163"></span> [Acts ix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[187:1566](2100178.htm#fr_1565.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p163.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p164"></span> S. [Matt. xxvii.
50-53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[187:1567](2100178.htm#fr_1566.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p166.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p167"></span> [Gen. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p167.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[188:1568](2100178.htm#fr_1567.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p167.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p168"></span> [Psa.
33.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[188:1569](2100178.htm#fr_1568.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p168.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p169"></span> S. [Luke iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[188:1570](2100178.htm#fr_1569.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p170.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p171"></span> [Prov.
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027.md),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[188:1571](2100178.htm#fr_1570.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p171.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p172"></span> [Is. lxvi.
22-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[188:1572](2100178.htm#fr_1571.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p175.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p176"></span> [Gen. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[188:1573](2100178.htm#fr_1572.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p176.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p177"></span> [Psa.
116.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[188:1574](2100178.htm#fr_1573.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p177.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p178"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[188:1575](2100178.htm#fr_1574.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p178.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p179"></span> S. [John vi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[188:1576](2100178.htm#fr_1575.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p179.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p180"></span> [John
6.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p180.1"></span> *.*

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[188:1577](2100178.htm#fr_1576.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p181.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p182"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[189:1578](2100178.htm#fr_1577.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p183.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p184"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[189:1579](2100178.htm#fr_1578.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p184.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p185"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[189:1580](2100178.htm#fr_1579.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p185.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p186"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[189:1581](2100178.htm#fr_1580.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p186.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p187"></span> [Col. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p187.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[189:1582](2100178.htm#fr_1581.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p187.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p188"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[189:1583](2100178.htm#fr_1582.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p189.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p190"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[189:1584](2100178.htm#fr_1583.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p191.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p192"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[189:1585](2100178.htm#fr_1584.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p192.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p193"></span> [Eph. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[189:1586](2100178.htm#fr_1585.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p193.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p194"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[189:1587](2100178.htm#fr_1586.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p194.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p195"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[189:1588](2100178.htm#fr_1587.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p196.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p197"></span> [Gen. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[189:1589](2100178.htm#fr_1588.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p197.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p198"></span> [2 Kings
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p198.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[189:1590](2100178.htm#fr_1589.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p198.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p199"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[189:1591](2100178.htm#fr_1590.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p200.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p201"></span> S. [Luke xx.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#038.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p201.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[189:1592](2100178.htm#fr_1591.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p201.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p202"></span> [Gen. xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p202.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[189:1593](2100178.htm#fr_1592.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p203.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p204"></span> [Gen. xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p204.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[190:1594](2100178.htm#fr_1593.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p204.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p205"></span> [Gen. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p205.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[190:1595](2100178.htm#fr_1594.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p205.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p206"></span> [Gen.
xiv](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[190:1596](2100178.htm#fr_1595.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p207.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p208"></span> [Gen. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[190:1597](2100178.htm#fr_1596.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p208.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p209"></span> [Gen. xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[190:1598](2100178.htm#fr_1597.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p210.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p211"></span> [Gen. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p211.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[190:1599](2100178.htm#fr_1598.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p211.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p212"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[190:1600](2100178.htm#fr_1599.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p214.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p215"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p215.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[190:1601](2100178.htm#fr_1600.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p215.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p216"></span> [Gen. xxxii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[190:1602](2100178.htm#fr_1601.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p217.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p218"></span> S. [Matt. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p218.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[191:1603](2100178.htm#fr_1602.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p218.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p219"></span> [Gal. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[191:1604](2100178.htm#fr_1603.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p220.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p221"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p221.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[191:1605](2100178.htm#fr_1604.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p221.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p222"></span> [Rev. xxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p222.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[191:1606](2100178.htm#fr_1605.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p223.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p224"></span> [Ps.
88:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[191:1607](2100178.htm#fr_1606.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p224.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p225"></span> S. [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p225.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[191:1608](2100178.htm#fr_1607.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p225.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p226"></span> [Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p226.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[191:1609](2100178.htm#fr_1608.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p226.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p227"></span> S. [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p227.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[191:1610](2100178.htm#fr_1609.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p228.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p229"></span> [Psa.
33.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[191:1611](2100178.htm#fr_1610.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p229.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p230"></span> [Col. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p230.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[191:1612](2100178.htm#fr_1611.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p230.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p231"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p231.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[191:1613](2100178.htm#fr_1612.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p232.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p233"></span> [Rev. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p233.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[191:1614](2100178.htm#fr_1613.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p233.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p234"></span> [Rev. xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[191:1615](2100178.htm#fr_1614.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p234.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p235"></span> [Rev. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p235.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[191:1616](2100178.htm#fr_1615.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p235.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p236"></span> [Psa.
81.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p236.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[191:1617](2100178.htm#fr_1616.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p236.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p237"></span> [Ps. cl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p237.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[191:1618](2100178.htm#fr_1617.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p238.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p239"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p239.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[191:1619](2100178.htm#fr_1618.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p239.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p240"></span> [2 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p240.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[191:1620](2100178.htm#fr_1619.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p240.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p241"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[192:1621](2100178.htm#fr_1620.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p242.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p243"></span> [Lev.
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p243.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[192:1622](2100178.htm#fr_1621.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p243.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p244"></span> [Num. x.
1-10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[192:1623](2100178.htm#fr_1622.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p244.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p245"></span> St. Ambrose translates the Septuagint
as usual, but there are some variations. Probably Libanus is a copyist’s
mistake for Liba \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p245.1"></span>Λίβα</span>\] the W.S.W. wind. So, too,
Boream perhaps should be *mare* \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p245.2"></span>παρὰθάλασσαν</span>\]. In ch. 115, St.
Ambrose in explaining the third trumpet speaks of the sea. The third and
fourth trumpets are not mentioned except in the Septuagint, and it may
be noticed that St. Ambrose changes the description of the positions of
the camps \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p245.3"></span>παρεμβάλλουσαι</span>\], *consttuta,* into
a direction, *constituentur.*

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[192:1624](2100178.htm#fr_1623.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p246.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p247"></span> [Rom. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p247.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[192:1625](2100178.htm#fr_1624.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p247.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p248"></span> [Col. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[192:1626](2100178.htm#fr_1625.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p248.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p249"></span> S. [John xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p249.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[192:1627](2100178.htm#fr_1626.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p249.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p250"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p250.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[192:1628](2100178.htm#fr_1627.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p250.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p251"></span> S. [Luke xvii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p251.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[192:1629](2100178.htm#fr_1628.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p252.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p253"></span> [1 Kings
19.18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p253.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[192:1630](2100178.htm#fr_1629.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p254.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p255"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p255.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[193:1631](2100178.htm#fr_1630.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p256.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p257"></span> [Ex. xxiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p257.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[193:1632](2100178.htm#fr_1631.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p257.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p258"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p258.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[193:1633](2100178.htm#fr_1632.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p259.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p260"></span> [Num. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p260.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[193:1634](2100178.htm#fr_1633.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p261.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p262"></span> [Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p262.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[193:1635](2100178.htm#fr_1634.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p263.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p264"></span> [Psa.
42.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p264.1"></span> \[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[193:1636](2100178.htm#fr_1635.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p265.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p266"></span> [Ps. cl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p266.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[194:1637](2100178.htm#fr_1636.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p267.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p268"></span> [Prov. xxvii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p268.1"></span>
\[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[194:1638](2100178.htm#fr_1637.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p269.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p270"></span> S. [Luke xiii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p270.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[194:1639](2100178.htm#fr_1638.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p271.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p272"></span> [Psa.
19.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p272.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[194:1640](2100178.htm#fr_1639.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p272.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p273"></span> S. [Matt.
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p273.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[194:1641](2100178.htm#fr_1640.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p274.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p275"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p275.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[194:1642](2100178.htm#fr_1641.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p276.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p277"></span> [Cant.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p277.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[194:1643](2100178.htm#fr_1642.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p279.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p280"></span> [Rev. xxi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p280.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[194:1644](2100178.htm#fr_1643.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p280.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p281"></span> [Rev.
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p281.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[195:1645](2100178.htm#fr_1644.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p282.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p283"></span> [Rev. xxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p283.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[195:1646](2100178.htm#fr_1645.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p285.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p286"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p286.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[195:1647](2100178.htm#fr_1646.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p288.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p289"></span> [Psa.
120.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p289.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[195:1648](2100178.htm#fr_1647.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p289.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p290"></span> [Jer. xx.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p290.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[195:1649](2100178.htm#fr_1648.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p290.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p291"></span> [1 Kings xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p291.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[195:1650](2100178.htm#fr_1649.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p292.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p293"></span> Cicero, *Tusc. Disp.* I.; Plato,
*Phædo.*

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[195:1651](2100178.htm#fr_1650.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p294.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p295"></span> From the Egyptians this opinion seems
to have passed on to Pythagoras and Plato.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[195:1652](2100178.htm#fr_1651.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p295.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p296"></span> Ovid, *Metamorph.* XIV. 1.

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[196:1653](2100178.htm#fr_1652.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p297.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p298"></span> Verg. *Ecl.* VI. 51.

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[196:1654](2100178.htm#fr_1653.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p298.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p299"></span> Ovid, *Metam.* II. 4.

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[196:1655](2100178.htm#fr_1654.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p300.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p301"></span> *Metam.* VIII. 3.

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[196:1656](2100178.htm#fr_1655.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p304.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p305"></span> [Rev. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.iii.iii-p305.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[196:1657](2100178.htm#fr_1656.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p305.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p306"></span> [Rev.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p306.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[196:1658](2100178.htm#fr_1657.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p306.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p307"></span> [Psa.
65.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p307.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[196:1659](2100178.htm#fr_1658.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p308.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p309"></span> [Psa.
27.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p309.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[197:1660](2100178.htm#fr_1659.md) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p311.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p312"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p312.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exposition of the Christian Faith.](2100179.md)
