[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100282)  [Next](2100284.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.ix"></span> <span id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span
id="iv.v.ix-Page_323"></span>

### <span id="iv.v.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p1"></span>Of the mystical feast of the altar of the
Lord. Lest any should think lightly of it, St. Ambrose shows that it is
of higher antiquity than the sacred rites of the Jews, since it was
foreshadowed in the sacrifice of Melchisedech, and far better than the
manna, as being the Body of Christ.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p2"></span>43. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.v.ix-p2.1"></span>The</span> cleansed people, rich with these
adornments, hastens to the altar of Christ, saying: “I will go to the
altar of God, to God Who maketh glad my youth;” <span
id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884.md) for having laid aside the slough of
ancient error, renewed with an eagle’s youth, it hastens to approach
that heavenly feast. It comes, and seeing the holy altar arranged, cries
out: “Thou hast prepared a table in my sight.” David introduces the
people as speaking, where he says: “The Lord feedeth me, and nothing
shall be wanting to me, in a place of good pasture hath He placed me. He
hath led me forth by the water of refreshment.” And later: “For though I
walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evils, for Thou
art with me. Thy rod and Thy staff have comforted me. Thou hast prepared
in my sight a table against them that trouble me. Thou hast anointed my
head with oil, and Thy inebriating cup, how excellent it is!” <span
id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885.md)

<span id="iv.v.ix-p5"></span>44. We must now pay attention, lest
perchance any one seeing that what is visible (for things which are
invisible cannot be seen nor comprehended by human eyes), should say,
“God rained down manna and rained down quails upon the Jews,” <span
id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886.md) but for the Church beloved of Him
the things which He has prepared are those of which it is said: “That
eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart
of man, what things God hath prepared for them that love Him.” <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887.md) So, lest any one should say this,
we will take great pains to prove that the sacraments of the Church are
both more ancient than those of the synagogue, and more excellent than
the manna.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p8"></span>45. The lesson of Genesis just read shows
that they are more ancient, for the synagogue took its origin from the
law of Moses. But Abraham was far earlier, who, after conquering the
enemy, and recovering his own nephew, as he was enjoying his victory,
was met by Melchisedech, who brought forth those things which Abraham
reverently received. It was not Abraham who brought them forth, but
Melchisedech, who is introduced without father, without mother, having
neither beginning of days, nor ending, but like the Son of God, of Whom
Paul says to the Hebrews: “that He remaineth a priest for ever,” Who in
the Latin version is called King of righteousness and King of peace.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p9"></span>46. Do you recognize Who that is? Can a man
be king of righteousness, when himself he can hardly be righteous? Can
he be king of peace, when he can hardly be peaceable? He it is Who is
without mother according to His Godhead, for He was begotten of God the
Father, of one substance with the Father; without a father according to
His Incarnation, for He was born of a Virgin; having neither beginning
nor end, for He is the beginning and end of all things, the first and
the last. The sacrament, then, which you received is the gift not of man
but of God, brought forth by Him Who blessed Abraham the father of
faith, whose grace and deeds we admire.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p10"></span>47. We have proved the sacraments of the
Church to be the more ancient, now recognize that they are superior. In
very truth it is a marvellous thing that God rained manna on the
fathers, and fed them with daily food from heaven; so that it is said,
“So man did eat angels’ food.” <span
id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888.md) But yet all those who ate that food
died in the wilderness, but that food which you receive, that living
Bread which came down from heaven, furnishes the substance of eternal
life; and whosoever shall eat of this Bread shall never die, and it is
the Body of Christ.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p12"></span>49. Now consider whether the bread of
angels be more excellent or the Flesh of Christ, which is indeed the
body of life. That manna came from heaven, this is above the heavens;
that was of heaven, this is of the Lord of the heavens; that was liable
to corruption, if kept a second day, this is far from all corruption,
for whosoever shall taste it holily shall not be able to feel
corruption. For them water flowed from the rock, for you Blood flowed
from Christ; water satisfied them for a time, the Blood satiates you for
eternity. The Jew drinks and thirsts again, you after drinking will be
beyond the power of thirsting; that was in a shadow, this is in truth.

<span id="iv.v.ix-p13"></span>49. If that which you so wonder at is but
shadow, how great must that be whose very shadow you wonder at. See now
<span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="iv.v.ix-Page_324"></span>what happened in the case of the fathers
was shadow: “They drank, it is said, of that Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ. But with many of them God was not well
pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things
were done in a figure concerning us.” <span
id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889.md) You recognize now which are the
more excellent, for light is better than shadow, truth than a figure,
the Body of its Giver than the manna from heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[323:2885](2100283.htm#fr_2884.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p3"></span> [Psa.
43.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[323:2886](2100283.htm#fr_2885.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p4"></span> [Psa.
23.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p4.1"></span>.
After being baptized and confirmed in the baptistery, which was detached
from the church, the newly “enlightened” were led in solemn procession
into the church to be present at the celebration of the Mysteries, and
to receive their first communion.

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[323:2887](2100283.htm#fr_2886.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p6"></span> [Ex. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[323:2888](2100283.htm#fr_2887.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p7"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[323:2889](2100283.htm#fr_2888.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p11"></span> [Psa.
88.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[324:2890](2100283.htm#fr_2889.md) <span
id="iv.v.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ix-p14"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.v.ix-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. In order that no one through observing the outward
part should waver in faith, many instances are brought forward wherein
the outward nature has been changed, and so it is proved that bread is
made the true body of Christ. The treatise then is brought to a
termination with certain remarks as to the effects of the sacrament, the
disposition of the recipients, and such like.](2100284.md)
