[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100041)  [Next](2100043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXX.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p1"></span>On kindness and its several parts,
namely, good-will and liberality. How they are to be combined. What else
is further needed for any one to show liberality in a praiseworthy
manner.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p2"></span>143. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p2.1"></span>Now</span> we can go on to speak of
kindness, which breaks up into two parts, goodwill and liberality.
Kindness to exist in perfection must consist of these two qualities. It
is not enough just to wish well; we must <span id="page_25">p. 25</span>
<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-Page_25"></span>also do well. Nor, again, is it
enough to do well, unless this springs from a good source even from a
good will. “For God loveth a cheerful giver.” <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) If we act unwillingly, what is our
reward? Wherefore the Apostle, speaking generally, says: “If I do this
thing willingly, I have a reward, but if unwillingly, a dispensation is
given unto me.” <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) In the Gospel,
also, we have received many rules of just liberality.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p5"></span>144. It is thus a glorious thing to
wish well, and to give freely, with the one desire to do good and not to
do harm. For if we were to think it our duty to give the means to an
extravagant man to live extravagantly, or to an adulterer to pay for his
adultery, it would not be an act of kindness, for there would be no
good-will in it. We should be doing harm, not good, to another if we
gave him money to aid him in plotting against his country, or in
attempting to get together at our expense some abandoned men to attack
the Church. Nor, again, does it look like liberality to help one who
presses very hardly on widows and orphans, or attempts to seize on their
property with any show of violence.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p6"></span>145. It is no sign of a liberal
spirit <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) to extort from one what
we give to another, or to gain money unjustly, and then to think it can
be well spent, unless we act as Zacchæus <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) did, and restore fourfold what we have
taken from him whom we have robbed, and make up for such heathenish
crimes by the zeal of our faith and by true Christian labour. Our
liberality must have some sure foundation.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p9"></span>146. The first thing necessary is to do
kindness in good faith, and not to act falsely when the offering is
made. Never let us say we are doing more, when we are really doing less.
What need is there to speak at all? In a promise a cheat lies hid. It is
in our power to give what we like. Cheating shatters the foundation, and
so destroys the work. Did Peter grow angry only so far as to desire that
Ananias and his wife should be slain? <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) Certainly not. He wished that others,
through knowing their example, should not perish.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p11"></span>147. Nor is it a real act of
liberality if thou givest for the sake of boasting about it, rather than
for mercy’s sake. Thy inner feelings give the name to thy acts. As it
comes forth from thee, so will others regard it. See what a true judge
thou hast! He consults with thee how to take up thy work, and first of
all he questions thy mind. “Let not,” he says, “thy left hand know what
thy right hand doth.” <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) This does
not refer to our actual bodies, but means: Let not him who is of one
mind with thee, not even thy brother, know what thou doest, lest thou
shouldst lose the fruit of thy reward hereafter by seeking here thy
price in boastfulness. But that liberality is real where a man hides
what he does in silence, and secretly assists the needs of individuals,
whom the mouth of the poor, and not his own lips, praises.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p13"></span>148. Perfect liberality is proved by
its good faith, the case it helps, the time and place when and where it
is shown. But first we must always see that we help those of the
household of faith. <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) It is a
serious fault if a believer is in want, and thou knowest it, or if thou
knowest that he is without means, that he is hungry, that he suffer
distress, especially if he is ashamed of his need. It is a great fault
if he is overwhelmed by the imprisonment or false accusation of his
family, and thou dost not come to his help. If he is in prison,
and—upright though he is—has to suffer pain and punishment for some debt
(for though we ought to show mercy to all, yet we ought to show it
especially to an upright man); if in the time of his trouble he obtains
nothing from thee; if in the time of danger, when he is carried off to
die, thy money seems more to thee than the life of a dying man; what a
sin is that to thee! Wherefore Job says beautifully: “Let the blessing
of him that was ready to perish come upon me.” <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219)

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p16"></span>149. God, indeed, is not a respecter
of persons, for He knows all things. And we, indeed, ought to show mercy
to all. But as many try to get help on false pretences, and make out
that they are miserably off; therefore where the case is plain and the
person well known, and no time is to be lost, mercy ought to be shown
more readily. For the Lord is not exacting to demand the utmost.
Blessed, indeed, is he who forsakes all and follows Him, but blessed
also is he who does what he can to the best of his powers with what he
has. The Lord preferred the two mites of the widow to all the gifts of
the rich, for she gave all that she had, but they only gave a small part
out of all their abundance. <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) It
is the intention, therefore, that makes the gift valuable or poor, and
gives to things their value. The Lord does not want us to give away all
our goods at once, but to impart them little by little; unless, indeed,
our case is like that of Elisha, who <span id="page_26">p. 26</span>
<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-Page_26"></span>killed his oxen, and fed the
people on what he had, so that no household cares might hold him back,
and that he might give up all things, and devote himself to the
prophetic teaching. <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221)

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p19"></span>150. True liberality also must be
tested in this way: <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) that we
despise not our nearest relatives, if we know they are in want. For it
is better for thee to help thy kindred who feel the shame of asking help
from others, or of going to another to beg assistance in their need.
Not, however, that they should become rich on what thou couldst
otherwise give to the poor. It is the facts of the case we must
consider, and not personal feeling. Thou didst not dedicate thyself to
the Lord on purpose to make thy family rich, but that thou mightest win
eternal life by the fruit of good works, and atone for thy sins by
showing mercy. They think perhaps that they are asking but little, but
they demand the price thou shouldst pay for thy sins. They attempt to
take away the fruits of thy life, and think they are acting
rightly. <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) And one accuses thee
because thou hast not made him rich, when all the time he wished to
cheat thee of the reward of eternal life.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p22"></span>151. So far we have given our advice,
now let us look for our authority. First, then, no one ought to be
ashamed of becoming poor after being rich, if this happens because he
gives freely to the poor; for Christ became poor when He was rich, that
through His poverty He might enrich all. <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) He has given us a rule to follow, so
that we may give a good account of our reduced inheritance; whoever has
stayed the hunger of the poor has lightened his distress. “Herein I give
my advice,” says the Apostle, “for this is expedient for you, that ye
should be followers of Christ.” <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225)
Advice is given to the good, but warnings restrain the wrong-doers.
Again he says, as though to the good: “For ye have begun not only to do,
but also to be willing, a year ago.” <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) Both of these, and not only one, is
the mark of perfection. Thus he teaches that liberality without
good-will, and good-will without liberality, are neither of them
perfect. Wherefore he also urges us on to perfection, saying: <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) “Now, therefore, perform the doing of
it; that as the will to do it was ready enough in you, so also there may
be the will to accomplish it out of that which ye have. For if the will
be ready, it is accepted according to that a man hath, and not according
to that he hath not. But not so that others should have plenty, and ye
should be in want: but let there be equality,—your abundance must now
serve for their want, that their abundance may serve for your want; that
there may be equality, as it is written: “He that gathered much had
nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack.” <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228)

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p28"></span>152. We notice how the Apostle
includes both good-will and liberality, as well as the manner, the
fruits of right giving, and the persons concerned. The manner certainly,
for he gave advice to those not perfect: For only the imperfect suffer
anxiety. But if any priest or other cleric, being unwilling to burden
the Church, <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) does not give away
all that he has, but does honourably what his office demands, he does
not seem to me to be imperfect. I think also that the Apostle here spoke
not of anxiety of mind, but rather of domestic troubles.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p30"></span>153. And I think it was with reference
to the persons concerned that he said: “that your abundance might serve
for their want, and their abundance for your want.” This means, that the
abundance of the people might arouse them to good works, so as to supply
the want of food of others; whilst the spiritual abundance of these
latter might assist the want of spiritual merits among the people
themselves, and so win them a blessing.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p31"></span>154. Wherefore he gave them an
excellent example: “He that gathered much had nothing over, and he that
gathered little had no lack.” That example is a great encouragement to
all men to show mercy. For he that possesses much gold has nothing over,
for all in this world is as nothing; and he that has little has no lack,
for what he loses is nothing already. The whole matter is without loss,
for the whole of it is lost already.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p32"></span>155. We can also rightly understand it
thus. He that has much, although he does not give away, has nothing
over. For however much he gets, he always is in want, because he longs
for more. And he who has little has no lack, for it does not cost much
to feed the poor. In like manner, too, the poor person that gives
spiritual blessings in return for money, although he <span
id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-Page_27"></span>has much
grace, has nothing over. For grace does not burden the mind, but
lightens it.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p33"></span>156. It can further be taken in this
way: Thou, O man, hast nothing over! For how much hast thou really
received, though it may seem much to thee? John, than whom none was
greater among those born of woman, yet was less than he who is least in
the kingdom of heaven. <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230)

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p35"></span>157. Or once more. The grace of God is
never superabundant, humanly speaking, for it is spiritual. Who can
measure its greatness or its breadth, which one cannot see? Faith, if it
were as a grain of mustard seed, can transplant mountains—and more than
a grain is not granted thee. If grace dwelt fully in thee, wouldst thou
not have to fear lest thy mind should begin to be elated at so great a
gift? For there are many who have fallen more terribly, from spiritual
heights, than if they had never received grace at all from the Lord. And
he who has little has no lack, for it is not tangible so as to be
divided; and what seems little to him that has is much to him that
lacks.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p36"></span>158. In giving we must also take into
consideration age and weakness; sometimes, also, that natural feeling of
shame, which indicates good birth. One ought to give more to the old who
can no longer supply themselves with food by labour. So, too, weakness
of body must be assisted, and that readily. Again, if any one after
being rich has fallen into want, we must assist, especially if he has
lost what he had from no sin of his own, but owing to robbery or
banishment or false accusation.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p37"></span>159. Perchance some one may say: A
blind man sits here in one place, and people pass him by, whilst a
strong young man often has something given him. That is true; for he
comes over people by his importunity. That is not because in their
judgment he deserves it, but because they are wearied by his begging.
For the Lord speaks in the Gospel of him who had already closed his
door; how that when one knocks at his door very violently, he rises and
gives what is wanted, because of his importunity. <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_212"></span>[25:213](2100042.htm#fr_212) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p3"></span> [2 Cor. ix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[25:214](2100042.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p4"></span> [1 Cor. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[25:215](2100042.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p7"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 14, § 43.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[25:216](2100042.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p8"></span> S. [Luke xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[25:217](2100042.htm#fr_216) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p10"></span> [Acts v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[25:218](2100042.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p12"></span> S. [Mat. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[25:219](2100042.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p14"></span> [Gal. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[25:220](2100042.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p15"></span> [Job xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[25:221](2100042.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p17"></span> S. [Luke
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[26:222](2100042.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p18"></span> [1 Kings
19.20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[26:223](2100042.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p20"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 17, § 58.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[26:224](2100042.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p21"></span> “*Et se juste facere putant.*” These
words are omitted in many <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p21.1"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_224"></span>[26:225](2100042.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p23"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[26:226](2100042.htm#fr_225) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p24"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[26:227](2100042.htm#fr_226) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p25"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[26:228](2100042.htm#fr_227) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p26"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
11-15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[26:229](2100042.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p27"></span> [Ex. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[26:230](2100042.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p29"></span> St. Ambrose, allowing clergy to
retain some of their patrimony so as not to burden the Church, is less
strict than St. Augustine, who would have them give up everything and
live in common. *Serm.* 355.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[27:231](2100042.htm#fr_230) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p34"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[27:232](2100042.htm#fr_231) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p38"></span> S. [Luke xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.ii.xxx-p38.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI. A kindness received should be returned with a freer
hand. This is shown by the example of the earth. A passage from Solomon
about feasting is adduced to prove the same, and is expounded later in a
spiritual sense.](2100043)
