[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100335)  [Next](2100337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p1"></span>St. Ambrose having set forth the
Virgin Mary as a pattern for life, adduces Thecla as a model for
learning how to die. Thecla suffered not from the beasts to whom she was
condemned, but on the contrary received from them signs of reverence. He
then proceeds to introduce a more recent example.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p2"></span>19. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>Let</span>, then, holy Mary instruct you
in the discipline of life, and Thecla teach you how to be offered, for
she, avoiding nuptial intercourse, and condemned through her husband’s
rage, changed even the disposition of wild beasts by their reverence for
virginity. For being made ready for the wild beasts, when avoiding the
gaze of men, she offered her vital parts to a fierce lion, caused those
who had turned away their immodest looks to turn them back modestly.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p3"></span>20. The beast was to be seen lying
on the ground, licking her feet, showing without a sound that it could
not injure the sacred body of the virgin. So the beast reverenced his
prey, and forgetful of his own nature, put on that nature which men had
lost. One could see, as it were, by some transfusion of nature, men
clothed with savageness, goading the beast to cruelty, and the beast
kissing the feet of the virgin, teaching them what was due from men.
Virginity has in itself so much that is admirable, that even lions
admire it. Food did not induce them though kept without their meal; no
impulse hurried them on when excited; anger did not exasperate them when
stirred up, nor did their habits lead them blindly as they were wont,
nor their own natural disposition possess them with fierceness. They set
an example of piety when reverencing the martyr; and gave a lesson in
favor of chastity when they did nothing but kiss the virgin’s feet, with
their eyes turned to the ground, as though through modesty, fearing that
any male, even a beast, should see the virgin naked.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.iii-p4"></span>21. Some one will say: “Why have you
brought forward the example of Mary, as if any one could be found to
imitate the Lord’s mother? And why that of Thecla, whom the Apostle of
the Gentiles trained? Give us a teacher of our own sort if you wish for
disciples.” I will, therefore, set before you a recent example of this
sort, that you may understand that the Apostle is the teacher, not of
one only, but of all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. A virgin at Antioch, having refused to sacrifice to
idols, was condemned to a house of ill-fame, whence she escaped
unharmed, having changed clothes with a Christian soldier. Then when he
was condemned for this, she returned and the two contended for the prize
of martyrdom, which was at last given to each.](2100337)
