[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100355)  [Next](2100357) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.viii"></span>

### <span id="iv.viii.viii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VII.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p1"></span>By the example of Judith is shown that
courage is not wanting in widows; her preparation for her visit to
Holofernes is dwelt upon, as also her chastity and her wisdom, her
sobriety and moderation. Lastly, St. Ambrose, after demonstrating that
she was no less brave than prudent, sets forth her modesty after her
success.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p2"></span>37. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.viii-p2.1"></span>But</span> bravery also is usually not
wanting to a good widow. For this is true bravery, which surpasses the
usual nature and the weakness of the sex by the devotion of the mind,
such as was in her who was named Judith, <span
id="fr_3347"></span>[3348](#fn_3347) who of herself alone was able to
rouse up from utter prostration and defend from the enemy men broken
down by the siege, smitten with fear, and pining with hunger. For she,
as we read, when Holofernes, dreaded after his success in so many
battles, had driven countless thousands of men within the walls; when
the armed men were afraid, and were already treating about the final
surrender, went forth outside the wall, both excelling that army which
she delivered, and braver than that which she put to flight.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p4"></span>38. But in order to learn the
dispositions of ripe widowhood, run through the course of the
Scriptures. From the time when her husband died she laid aside the
garments of mirth, and took those of mourning. Every day she was intent
on fasting except on the Sabbath and the Lord’s Day and the times of
holy days, not as yielding to desire of refreshment, but out of respect
for religion. For this is that which is said: “Whether ye eat or drink,
all is to be done in the name of Jesus Christ,” <span
id="fr_3348"></span>[3349](#fn_3348) that even the very refreshment of
the body is to have respect to the worship of holy religion. So then,
holy Judith, <span id="fr_3349"></span>[3350](#fn_3349) strengthened by
lengthened mourning and by daily fasting, sought not the enjoyments of
the world regardless of danger, and strong in her contempt for death. In
order to accomplish her stratagem she put on that robe of mirth,
wherewith in her husband’s lifetime she was wont <span id="page_398">p.
398</span> <span id="iv.viii.viii-Page_398"></span>to be clothed, as
though she would give pleasure to her husband, if she freed her country.
But she saw another man whom she was seeking to please, even Him, of
Whom it is said: “After me cometh a Man Who is preferred before
me.” <span id="fr_3350"></span>[3351](#fn_3350) And she did well in
resuming her bridal ornaments when about to fight, for the reminders of
wedlock are the arms of chastity, and in no other way could a widow
please or gain the victory.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p8"></span>39. Why relate the sequel? How she
amongst thousands of enemies, remained chaste. Why speak of her wisdom,
in that she designed such a scheme? She chose out the commander, to ward
off from herself the insolence of inferiors, and prepare an opportunity
for victory. She reserved the merit of abstinence and the grace of
chastity. For unpolluted, as we read, either by food or by adultery, she
gained no less a triumph over the enemy by preserving her chastity than
by delivering her country.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p9"></span>40. What shall I say of her sobriety?
Temperance, indeed, is the virtue of women. When the men were
intoxicated with wine and buried in sleep, the widow took the sword, put
forth her hand, cut off the warrior’s head, and passed unharmed through
the midst of the ranks of the enemy. You notice, then, how much
drunkenness can injure a woman, seeing that wine so weakens men that
they are overcome by women. Let a widow, then, be temperate, pure in the
first place from wine, that she may be pure from adultery. He will tempt
you in vain, if wine tempts you not. For if Judith had drunk she would
have slept with the adulterer. But because she drank not, the sobriety
of one without difficulty was able both to overcome and to escape from a
drunken army.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p10"></span>41. And this was not so much a work
of her hands, as much more a trophy of her wisdom. For having overcome
Holofernes by her hand alone, she overcame the whole army of the enemies
by her wisdom. For hanging up the head of Holofernes, a deed which the
wisdom of the men had been unable to plan, she raised the courage of her
countrymen, and broke down that of the enemy. She stirred up her own
friends by her modesty, and struck terror into the enemy so that they
were put to flight and slain. And so the temperance and sobriety of one
widow not only subdued her own nature, but, which is far more, even made
men more brave.

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p11"></span>42. And yet she was not so elated by
this success, though she might well rejoice and exult by right of her
victory, as to give up the exercises of her widowhood, but refusing all
who desired to wed her she laid aside her garments of mirth and took
again those of her widowhood, not caring for the adornments of her
triumph, thinking those things better whereby vices of the body are
subdued than those whereby the weapons of an enemy are overcome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3347"></span>[397:3348](2100356.htm#fr_3347) <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p3"></span> [Judith viii.
11](../../../bib/apo/jdt008.htm#011)<span id="iv.viii.viii-p3.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_3348"></span>[397:3349](2100356.htm#fr_3348) <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p5"></span> [1 Cor. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031)<span
id="iv.viii.viii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3349"></span>[397:3350](2100356.htm#fr_3349) <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p6"></span> [Judith x.
3](../../../bib/apo/jdt010.htm#003)<span id="iv.viii.viii-p6.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_3350"></span>[398:3351](2100356.htm#fr_3350) <span
id="iv.viii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.viii-p7"></span> S. [John i.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#030)<span
id="iv.viii.viii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Though many other widows came near to Judith in
virtue, St. Ambrose proposes to speak of Deborah only. What a pattern of
virtue she must have been for widows, who was chosen to govern and
defend men. It was no small glory to her that when her son was over the
host he refused to go forth to battle unless she would go also. So that
she led the army and foretold the result. In this story the conflicts
and triumphs of the Church, and her spiritual weapons, are set forth,
and every excuse of weakness is taken from women.](2100357)
