[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100363)  [Next](2100365) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.xvi"></span>

### <span id="iv.viii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p1"></span>St. Ambrose meets the objection of
those who make the desire of having children an excuse for second
marriage, and especially in the case of those who have children of their
former marriage; and points out the consequent troubles of disagreements
amongst the children, and even between the married persons, and gives a
warning against a wrong use of Scripture instances in this matter.

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p2"></span>86. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Perhaps,</span> however, it may seem good
to some that marriage should again be entered upon for the sake of
having children. But if the desire of children be a reason for marrying,
certainly where there are children, the reason does not exist. And is it
wise to wish to have a second trial of that fruitfulness which has
already been tried in vain, or to submit to the solitude which you have
already borne? This is the case of those who have no children.

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p3"></span>87. Then, too, she who has borne
children, and has lost them (for she who has a hope of bearing children
will have an intenser longing), does not she, I say, seem to herself to
be covering over the deaths of her lost children by the celebration of a
second marriage? Will she not again suffer what she is again seeking?
and does she not shrink at the graves of her hopes, the memories of the
bereavements she has suffered, the voices of the mourners? Or, when the
torches are lit and night is coming on, does she not think rather that
funeral rites are being prepared than a bridal chamber? Why, then, my
daughter, do you seek again those sorrows which you dread, more than you
look for children whom you no longer hope for? If sorrow is so grievous,
one should rather avoid than seek that which causes it.

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p4"></span>88. And what advice shall I give to you
who have children? What reason have you for marrying? Perhaps foolish
light-mindedness, or the habit of incontinence, or the consciousness of
a wounded spirit is urging you on. But counsel is given to the sober,
not to the drunken, and so my words are addressed to the free conscience
which is whole in each respect. She that is wounded has a remedy, she
that is upright a counsel. What do you intend to do then, my daughter?
Why do you seek for heirs from without when you have your own? You are
not desiring of children, for you have them, but servitude from which
you are free. For this true servitude, in which love is exhausted, which
no longer the charm of virginity, and early youth, full of holy modesty
and grace, excites; when offences are more felt, and rudeness is more
suspected, and agreement less common, which is not bound fast by love
deeply rooted by time, or by beauty in its prime of youth. Duty to a
husband is burdensome, so that you are afraid to love your children and
blush to look at them; and a cause of disagreement arises from that
which ordinarily causes mutual love to increase the tender affections of
parents. You wish to give birth to offspring who will be not the <span
id="page_407">p. 407</span> <span
id="iv.viii.xvi-Page_407"></span>brothers but the adversaries of your
children. For what is to bring forth other children other than to rob
the children which you have, who are deprived alike of the offices of
affection and of the profit of their possessions.

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p5"></span>89. The divine law has bound together
husband and wife by its authority, and yet mutual love remains a
difficult matter. For God took a rib from the man, and formed the woman
so as to join them one to the other, and said: “They shall be one
flesh.” <span id="fr_3403"></span>[3404](#fn_3403) He said this not of a
second marriage but of the first, for neither did Eve take a second
husband, nor does holy Church recognize a second bridegroom. “For that
is a great mystery in Christ and in the Church. <span
id="fr_3404"></span>[3405](#fn_3404) Neither, again, did Isaac know
another wife besides Rebecca, <span id="fr_3405"></span>[3406](#fn_3405)
nor bury his father, Abraham, with any wife but Sarah.” <span
id="fr_3406"></span>[3407](#fn_3406)

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p10"></span>90. But in holy Rachel <span
id="fr_3407"></span>[3408](#fn_3407) there was rather the figure of a
mystery than a true order of marriage. Notwithstanding, in her, also, we
have something which we can refer to the grace of the first marriage,
since he loved her best whom he had first betrothed, and deceit did not
shut out his intention, nor the intervening marriage destroy his love
for his betrothed. And so the holy patriarch has taught us, how highly
we ought to esteem a first marriage, since he himself esteemed his first
betrothal so highly. Take care, then, my daughter, lest you be both
unable to hold fast the grace of marriage, and also increase your own
troubles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3403"></span>[407:3404](2100364.htm#fr_3403) <span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p6"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3404"></span>[407:3405](2100364.htm#fr_3404) <span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p7"></span> [Eph. v.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#032)<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3405"></span>[407:3406](2100364.htm#fr_3405) <span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p8"></span> [Gen. xxiv.
67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#067)<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3406"></span>[407:3407](2100364.htm#fr_3406) <span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p9"></span> [Gen. xxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#010)<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3407"></span>[407:3408](2100364.htm#fr_3407) <span
id="iv.viii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p11"></span> [Gen. xxix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#028)<span id="iv.viii.xvi-p11.1"></span>
ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Selections from the Letters of St. Ambrose.](2100365)
