[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100334)  [Next](2100336) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p1"></span>The life of Mary is set before
virgins as an example, and her many virtues are dwelt upon, her
chastity, humility, hard life, love of retirement, and the like; then
her kindness to others, her zeal in learning, and love of frequenting
the temple. St. Ambrose then sets forth how she, adorned with all these
virtues, will come to meet the numberless bands of virgins and lead them
with great triumph to the bridal chamber of the Spouse.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p2"></span>6. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>Let</span>, then, the life of Mary be as
it were virginity itself, set forth in a likeness, from which, as from a
mirror, the appearance of chastity and the form of virtue is reflected.
From this you may take your pattern of life, showing, as an example, the
clear rules of virtue: what you have to correct, to effect, and to hold
fast.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p3"></span>7. The first thing which kindles
ardour in learning is the greatness of the teacher. What is greater than
the Mother of God? What more glorious than she whom Glory Itself chose?
What more chaste than she who bore a body without contact with another
body? For why should I speak of her other virtues? She was a virgin not
only in body but also in mind, who stained the sincerity of its
disposition by no guile, who was humble in heart, grave in speech,
prudent in mind, sparing of words, studious in reading, resting her hope
not on uncertain riches, but on the prayer of the poor, intent on work,
modest in discourse; wont to seek not man but God as the judge of her
thoughts, to injure no one, to have goodwill towards all, to rise up
before her elders, not to envy her equals, to avoid boastfulness, to
follow reason, to love virtue. When did she pain her parents even by a
look? When did she disagree with her neighbours? When did she despise
the lowly? When did she avoid the needy? Being wont only to go to such
gatherings of men as mercy would not blush at, nor modesty pass by.
There was nothing gloomy in her eyes, nothing forward in her words,
nothing unseemly in her acts, there was not a silly movement, nor
unrestrained step, nor was her voice petulant, that the very appearance
<span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-Page_375"></span>of her outward being might be the
image of her soul, the representation of what is approved. For a
well-ordered house ought to be recognized on the very threshold, and
should show at the very first entrance that no darkness is hidden
within, as our soul hindered by no restraints of the body may shine
abroad like a lamp placed within.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p4"></span>8. Why should I detail her spareness
of food, her abundance of services—the one abounding beyond nature, the
other almost insufficient for nature? And there were no seasons of
slackness, but days of fasting, one upon the other. And if ever the
desire for refreshment came, her food was generally what came to hand,
taken to keep off death, not to minister to comfort. Necessity before
inclination caused her to sleep, and yet when her body was sleeping her
soul was awake, and often in sleep either went again through what had
been read, or went on with what had been interrupted by sleep, or
carried out what had been designed, or foresaw what was to be carried
out.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p5"></span>9. She was unaccustomed to go from
home, except for divine service, and this with parents or kinsfolk. Busy
in private at home, accompanied by others abroad, yet with no better
guardian than herself, as she, inspiring respect by her gait and
address, progressed not so much by the motion of her feet as by step
upon step of virtue. But though the Virgin had other persons who were
protectors of her body, she alone guarded her character; she can learn
many points if she be her own teacher, who possesses the perfection of
all virtues, for whatever she did is a lesson. Mary attended to
everything as though she were warned by many, and fulfilled every
obligation of virtue as though she were teaching rather than learning.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p6"></span>10. Such has the Evangelist shown
her, such did the angel find her, such did the Holy Spirit choose her.
Why delay about details? How her parents loved her, strangers praised
her, how worthy she was that the Son of God should be born of her. She,
when the angel entered, was found at home in privacy, without a
companion, that no one might interrupt her attention or disturb her; and
she did not desire any women as companions, who had the companionship of
good thoughts. Moreover, she seemed to herself to be less alone when she
was alone. For how should she be alone, who had with her so many books,
so many archangels, so many prophets?

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p7"></span>11. And so, too, when Gabriel visited
her, <span id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224) did he find her, and
Mary trembled, being disturbed, as though at the form of a man, but on
hearing his name recognized him as one not unknown to her. And so she
was a stranger as to men, but not as to the angel; that we might know
that her ears were modest and her eyes bashful. Then when saluted she
kept silence, and when addressed she answered, and she whose feelings
were first troubled afterwards promised obedience.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p9"></span>12. And holy Scripture points out how
modest she was towards her neighbours. For she became more humble when
she knew herself to be chosen of God, and went forthwith to her
kinswoman in the hill country, not in order to gain belief by anything
external, for she had believed the word of God. “Blessed,” she said,
“art thou who didst believe.” <span id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225)
And she abode with her three months. Now in such an interval of time it
is not that faith is being sought for, but kindness which is being
shown. And this was after that the child, leaping in his mother’s womb,
had saluted the mother of the Lord, attaining to reason before birth.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p11"></span>13. And then, in the many subsequent
wonders, when the barren bore a son, the virgin conceived, the dumb
spake, the wise men worshipped, Simeon waited, the stars gave notice.
Mary, who was moved by the angel’s entrance, was unmoved by the
miracles. “Mary,” it is said, “kept all these things in her
heart.” <span id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226) Though she was the
mother of the Lord, yet she desired to learn the precepts of the Lord,
and she who brought forth God, yet desired to know God.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p13"></span>14. And then, how she also went
every year to Jerusalem at the solemn day of the passover, and went with
Joseph. Everywhere is modesty the companion of her singular virtues in
the Virgin. This, without which virginity cannot exist, must be the
inseparable companion of virginity. And so Mary did not go even to the
temple without the guardianship of her modesty.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p14"></span>15. This is the likeness of
virginity. For Mary was such that her example alone is a lesson for all.
If, then, the author displeases us not, let us make trial of the
production, that whoever desires its reward for herself may imitate the
pattern. How many kinds of virtues shine forth in one Virgin! The secret
of modesty, the banner of faith, the service of devotion, the Virgin
within the house, the companion for the ministry, the mother at the
temple.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p15"></span><span id="page_376">p. 376</span>
<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-Page_376"></span>16. Oh! how many virgins shall
she meet, how many shall she embrace and bring to the Lord, and say:
“She has been faithful to her espousal, to my Son; she has kept her
bridal couch with spotless modesty.” How shall the Lord Himself commend
them to His Father, repeating again those words of His: “Holy Father,
these are they whom I have kept for Thee, on whom the Son of Man leant
His head and rested; I ask that where I am there they may be with
Me.” <span id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227) And if they ought to
benefit not themselves only, who lived not for themselves alone, one
virgin may redeem her parents, another her brothers. “Holy Father, the
world hath not known Me, but these have known Me, and have willed not to
know the world.” <span id="fr_3228"></span>[3229](#fn_3228)

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p18"></span>17. What a procession shall that be,
what joy of applauding angels when she is found worthy of dwelling in
heaven who lived on earth a heavenly life! Then too Mary, <span
id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229) taking her timbrel, shall stir up
the choirs of virgins, singing to the Lord because they have passed
through the sea of this world without suffering from the waves of this
world. <span id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230) Then each shall
rejoice, saying: “I will go to the altar of God; to God Who maketh my
youth glad;” <span id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231) and, “I will
offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay my vows unto the Most High.” <span
id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232)

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p23"></span>18. Nor would I hesitate to admit
you to the altars of God, whose souls I would without hesitation call
altars, on which Christ is daily offered for the redemption of the body.
For if the virgin’s body be a temple of God, what is her soul, which,
the ashes, as it were, of the body being shaken off, once more uncovered
by the hand of the Eternal Priest, exhales the vapour of the divine
fire. Blessed virgins, who emit a fragrance through divine grace as
gardens do through flowers, temples through religion, altars through the
priest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[375:3225](2100335.htm#fr_3224) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p8"></span> S. [Luke i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#028)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[375:3226](2100335.htm#fr_3225) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p10"></span> S. [Luke i.
56](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#056)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[375:3227](2100335.htm#fr_3226) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p12"></span> S. [Luke ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[376:3228](2100335.htm#fr_3227) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p16"></span> S. [John xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3228"></span>[376:3229](2100335.htm#fr_3228) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p17"></span> S. [John xvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#025)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[376:3230](2100335.htm#fr_3229) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p19"></span> Mary is the same name as the Hebrew
Miriam.

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[376:3231](2100335.htm#fr_3230) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p20"></span> [Ex. xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[376:3232](2100335.htm#fr_3231) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p21"></span> [Psa.
43.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[376:3233](2100335.htm#fr_3232) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p22"></span> [Psa.
50.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. St. Ambrose having set forth the Virgin Mary as a
pattern for life, adduces Thecla as a model for learning how to die.
Thecla suffered not from the beasts to whom she was condemned, but on
the contrary received from them signs of reverence. He then proceeds to
introduce a more recent example.](2100336)
