[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100373)  [Next](2100375) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix"></span>

### <span id="v.ix-p0.1"></span>Letter XL.

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span>St. Ambrose begs Theodosius to listen to him,
as he cannot be silent without great risk to both. He points out that
Theodosius though God-fearing may be led astray, and points out that his
decision respecting the restoration of the Jewish synagogue is full of
peril, exposing the bishop to the danger of either acting against the
truth or of death. The case of Julian is referred to, and the reasons
given for the imperial rescript are met, especially by the plea that the
Jews had burnt many churches. St. Ambrose touches on the temple of the
Valentinians, whom he declares to be worse than heathen, and points out
what a door would be opened to the calumnies of the Jews and a triumph
over Christ Himself. The Emperor is lastly warned by the example of
Maximus not to take the part of Jews or heretics, and is urged to
clemency.

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.ix-p2.1"></span>Ambrose</span>, Bishop, to the most clement
prince, and blessed Emperor, Theodosius the Augustus.

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span>1. I am continually harassed by almost
incessant cares, most blessed Emperor, but I have never been in such
anxiety as at present, since I see that I must take heed that there be
nothing which may be ascribed to me savouring even of sacrilege. And so
I entreat you to listen with patience to what I say. For, if I am
unworthy to be heard by you, I am unworthy to offer for you, who have
been entrusted by you with your vows and prayers. Will you not yourself
hear him whom you wish to be heard for you? Will you not hear him
pleading his own cause whom you have heard for others? And do you not
fear for your own decision, lest by thinking him unworthy to be heard by
you, you make him unworthy to be heard for you?

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span>2. But it is neither the part of an emperor to
refuse liberty of speech, nor of a priest not to say what he thinks. For
there is nothing in you emperors so popular and so estimable as to
appreciate freedom in those even who are in subjection to you by
military obedience. For this is the difference between good and bad
princes, that the good love liberty, the bad slavery. And there is
nothing in a priest so full of peril as regards God, or so base in the
opinion of men, as not freely to declare what he thinks. For it is
written: “I spoke of Thy testimonies before kings, and was not
ashamed;” <span id="fr_3549"></span>[3550](#fn_3549) and in another
place: “Son of man, I have set Thee a watchman unto the house of Israel,
in order,” it is said, “that if the righteous doth turn from his
righteousness, and commit iniquity, because thou hast not given him
warning,” that is, hast not told him what to guard against, “the memory
of his righteousness shall not be retained, and I will require his blood
at thine hand. But if thou warn the righteous that he sin not, and he
doth not sin, the righteous shall surely live because thou hast warned
him, and thou shalt deliver thy soul.” <span
id="fr_3550"></span>[3551](#fn_3550)

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span>3. I had rather then, O Emperor, have
fellowship with you in good than in evil, and therefore the silence of
the priest ought to displease your Clemency, and his freedom to please
you. For you are involved in the risk of my silence, but are aided by
the benefit of my freedom. I am not, then, officiously intruding in
things where I ought not, nor interfering in the affairs of others. I am
obeying the commands of God. And I do this first of all out of love for
you, good-will toward you, and desire of preserving your well-doing. If
I am not believed in this, or am forbidden to act on this feeling, I
speak in very truth for fear of offending God. For if my peril would set
you free, I would patiently offer myself for you, though not willingly,
for I had rather that without my peril you might be acceptable to God
and glorious. But if the guilt of silence and dissimulation on my part
would both weigh me down and not set you free, I had <span
id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_441"></span>rather that
you should think me too importunate, than useless and base. Since it is
written, as the holy Apostle Paul says, whose teaching you cannot
controvert: “Be instant, in season, out of season, reprove, entreat,
rebuke with all patience and doctrine.” <span
id="fr_3551"></span>[3552](#fn_3551)

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span>4. We, then, also have One Whom it is even
more perilous to displease, especially since even emperors are not
displeased when every one discharges his own office, and you patiently
listen to every one making suggestions in his own sphere, nay, you
rebuke him if he act not according to the order of his service. Can
this, then, seem to you offensive in priests, which you willingly accept
from those who serve you; since we speak not what we wish, but what we
are bidden? For you know the passage: “When ye shall stand before kings
and rulers, take no thought what ye shall speak, for it shall be given
you in that hour what ye shall speak; for it is not ye that speak, but
the Spirit of your Father Who speaketh in you.” <span
id="fr_3552"></span>[3553](#fn_3552) And if I were speaking in state
causes, although justice must be observed even in them, I should not
feel such dread if I were not listened to, but in the cause of God whom
will you listen to, if not to the priest, at whose greater peril sin is
committed? Who will dare to tell you the truth if the priest dare not?

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span>5. I know that you are Godfearing, merciful,
gentle, and calm, having the faith and fear of God at heart, but often
some things escape our notice. “Some have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.” <span id="fr_3553"></span>[3554](#fn_3553) And
I think that we ought to take care lest this also come upon faithful
souls. I know your piety towards God, your lenity towards men, I myself
am bound by the benefits of your favour. And therefore I fear the more,
I am the more anxious; lest even you condemn me hereafter by your own
judgment, because through my want of openness or my flattery you should
not have avoided some fault. If I saw that you sinned against me, I
ought not to keep silence, for it is written: “If thy brother sin
against thee, rebuke him at first, then chide him sharply before two or
three witnesses. If he will not hear thee, tell the Church.” <span
id="fr_3554"></span>[3555](#fn_3554) Shall I, then, keep silence in the
cause of God? Let us, then, consider what I have to fear.

<span id="v.ix-p14"></span>6. A report was made by the military Count of
the East that a synagogue had been burnt, and that this was done at the
instigation of the Bishop. You gave command that the others should be
punished, and the synagogue be rebuilt by the Bishop himself. I do not
urge that the Bishop’s account ought to have been waited for, for
priests are the calmers of disturbances, and anxious for peace, except
when even they are moved by some offence against God, or insult to the
Church. Let us suppose that that Bishop was too eager in the matter of
burning the synagogue, and too timid at the judgment-seat, are not you
afraid, O Emperor, lest he comply with your sentence, lest he fail in
his faith?

<span id="v.ix-p15"></span>7. Are you not also afraid, lest, which will
happen, he oppose your Count with a refusal? He will then be obliged to
make him either an apostate <span id="fr_3555"></span>[3556](#fn_3555)
or a martyr, either of these alien to the times, either of them
equivalent to persecution, if he be compelled either to apostatize or to
undergo martyrdom. You see in what direction the issue of the matter
inclines. If you think the Bishop firm, guard against making a martyr of
a firm man; if you think him vacillating, avoid causing the fall of one
who is frail. For he has a heavy responsibility who has caused the weak
to fall.

<span id="v.ix-p17"></span>8. Having, then, thus stated the two sides of
the matter, suppose that the said Bishop says that he himself kindled
the fire, <span id="fr_3556"></span>[3557](#fn_3556) collected the
crowd, gathered the people together, in order not to lose an opportunity
of martyrdom, and instead of the weak to put forward a stronger athlete.
O happy falsehood, whereby one gains for others acquittal, for himself
grace! This it is, O Emperor, which I, too, have requested, that you
would rather take vengeance on me, and if you consider this a crime,
would attribute it to me. Why order judgment against one who is absent?
You have the guilty man present, you hear his confession. I declare that
I set fire to the synagogue, or at least that I ordered those who did
it, that there might not be a place where Christ was denied. If it be
objected to me that I did not set the synagogue on fire here, I answer,
it began to be burnt by the judgment of God, and my work came to an end.
And if the very truth be asked, I was the more slack because I did not
expect that it would be punished. Why should I do that <span
id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_442"></span>which as it
was unavenged would also be without reward? These words hurt modesty but
recall grace, lest that be done whereby an offence against God most High
may be committed.

<span id="v.ix-p19"></span>9. But let it be granted that no one will
cite the Bishop to the performance of this task, for I have asked this
of your Clemency, and although I have not yet read that this edict is
revoked, let us notwithstanding assume that it is revoked. What if
others more timid offer that the synagogue be restored at their cost; or
that the Count, having found this previously determined, himself orders
it to be rebuilt out of the funds of Christians? You, O Emperor, will
have an apostate Count, and to him will you entrust the victorious
standards? Will you entrust the labarum, consecrated as it is by the
Name of Christ, to one who restores the synagogue which knows not
Christ? Order the labarum to be carried into the synagogue, and let us
see if they do not resist.

<span id="v.ix-p20"></span>10. Shall, then, a place be made for the
unbelief of the Jews out of the spoils of the Church, and shall the
patrimony, which by the favour of Christ has been gained for Christians,
be transferred to the treasuries of unbelievers? We read that of old
temples were built for idols of the plunder taken from Cimbri, and the
spoils of other enemies. Shall the Jews write this inscription on the
front of their synagogue: “The temple of impiety, erected from the
plunder of Christians”?

<span id="v.ix-p21"></span>11. But, perhaps, the cause of discipline
moves you, O Emperor. Which, then, is of greater importance, the show of
discipline or the cause of religion? It is needful that judgment should
yield to religion.

<span id="v.ix-p22"></span>12. Have you not heard, O Emperor, how, when
Julian had commanded that the temple of Jerusalem should be restored,
those who were clearing the rubbish were consumed by fire? <span
id="fr_3557"></span>[3558](#fn_3557) Will you not beware lest this
happen now again? For you ought not to have commanded what Julian
commanded.

<span id="v.ix-p24"></span>13. But what is your motive? Is it because a
public building of whatever kind has been burnt, or because it was a
synagogue? If you are moved by the burning of a building of no
importance (for what could there be in so mean a town?), do you not
remember, O Emperor, how many prefects’ houses have been burnt at Rome,
and no one inflicted punishment for it? And, in truth, if any emperor
had desired to punish the deed sharply, he would have injured the cause
of him who had suffered so great a loss. Which, then, is more fitting,
that a fire in some part of the buildings of Callinicum, or of the city
of Rome, should be punished, if indeed it were right at all? At
Constantinople lately, the house of the bishop was burnt and your
Clemency’s son interceded with his father, praying that you would not
avenge the insult offered to him, that is, to the son of the emperor,
and the burning of the episcopal house. Do you not consider, O Emperor,
that if you were to order this deed to be punished, he would again
intervene against the punishment? That favour was, however, fittingly
obtained by the son from the father, for it was worthy of him first to
forgive the injury done to himself. That was a good division in the
distribution of favour, that the son should be entreated for his own
loss, the father for that of the son. Here there is nothing for you to
keep back for your son. Take heed, then, lest you derogate aught from
God.

<span id="v.ix-p25"></span>14. There is, then, no adequate cause for
such a commotion, that the people should be so severely punished for the
burning of a building, and much less since it is the burning of a
synagogue, a home of unbelief, a house of impiety, a receptacle of
folly, which God Himself has condemned. For thus we read, where the Lord
our God speaks by the mouth of the prophet Jeremiah: “And I will do to
this house, which is called by My Name, wherein ye trust, and to the
place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to Shiloh,
and I will cast you forth from My sight, as I cast forth your brethren,
the whole seed of Ephraim. And do not thou pray for that people, and do
not thou ask mercy for them, and do not come near Me on their behalf,
for I will not hear thee. Or seest thou not what they do in the cities
of Judah?” <span id="fr_3558"></span>[3559](#fn_3558) God forbids
intercession to be made for those.

<span id="v.ix-p27"></span>15. And certainly, if I were pleading
according to the law of nations, I could tell how many of the Church’s
basilicas the Jews burnt in the time of the Emperor Julian: two at
Damascus, one of which is scarcely now repaired, and this at the cost of
the Church, not of the Synagogue; the other basilica still is a rough
mass of shapeless ruins. Basilicas were burnt at Gaza, Ascalon, Berytus,
and in almost every place in those parts, and no one demanded <span
id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_443"></span>punishment.
And at Alexandria a basilica was burnt by heathen and Jews, which
surpassed all the rest. The Church was not avenged, shall the Synagogue
be so?

<span id="v.ix-p28"></span>16. Shall, then, the burning of the temple of
the Valentinians be also avenged? But what is but a temple in which is a
gathering of heathen? Although the heathen invoke twelve gods, the
Valentinians worship thirty-two Æons whom they call gods. And I have
found out concerning these also that it is reported and ordered that
some monks should be punished, who, when the Valentinians were stopping
the road on which, according to custom and ancient use, they were
singing psalms as they went to celebrate the festival of the Maccabees,
enraged by their insolence, burnt their hurriedly-built temple in some
country village.

<span id="v.ix-p29"></span>17. How many have to offer themselves to such
a choice, when they remember that in the time of Julian, he who threw
down an altar, and disturbed a sacrifice, was condemned by the judge and
suffered martyrdom? And so the judge who heard him was never esteemed
other than a prosecutor, for no one thought him worthy of being
associated with, or of a kiss. And if he were not now dead, I should
fear, O Emperor, that you would take vengeance on him, although he
escaped not the vengeance of heaven, outliving his own heir.

<span id="v.ix-p30"></span>18. But it is related that the judge was
ordered to take cognizance of the matter, and that it was written that
he ought not to have reported the deed, but to have punished it, and
that the money chests which had been taken away should be demanded. I
will omit other matters. The buildings of our churches were burnt by the
Jews, and nothing was restored, nothing was asked back, nothing
demanded. But what could the Synagogue have possessed in a far distant
town, when the whole of what there is there is not much; there is
nothing of value, and no abundance? And what then could the scheming
Jews lose by the fire? These are artifices of the Jews who wish to
calumniate us, that because of their complaints, an extraordinary
military inquiry may be ordered, and a soldier sent, who will, perhaps,
say what one said once here, O Emperor, before your accession: “How will
Christ be able to help us who fight for the Jews against Christ, who are
sent to avenge the Jews? They have destroyed their own armies, and wish
to destroy ours.”

<span id="v.ix-p31"></span>19. Further, into what calumnies will they
not break out, who by false witness calumniated even Christ? Into what
calumnies will not men break out who are liars, even in things belonging
to God? Whom will they not say to have been the instigators of that
sedition? Whom will they not assail, even of those whom they recognize
not, that may gaze upon the numberless ranks of Christians in chains,
that they may see the necks of the faithful people bowed in captivity,
that the servants of God may be concealed in darkness, may be beheaded,
given over to the fire, delivered to the mines, that their sufferings
may not quickly pass away?

<span id="v.ix-p32"></span>20. Will you give this triumph over the
Church of God to the Jews? this trophy over Christ’s people, this
exultation, O Emperor, to the unbelievers? this rejoicing to the
Synagogue, this sorrow to the Church? The people of the Jews will set
this solemnity amongst their feast-days, and will doubtless number it
amongst those on which they triumphed either over the Amorites, or the
Canaanites, or were delivered from the hand of Pharaoh, King of Egypt,
or of Nebuchodonosor, King of Babylon. They will add this solemnity, in
memory of their having triumphed over the people of Christ.

<span id="v.ix-p33"></span>21. And whereas they deny that they
themselves are bound by the Roman laws, and repute those laws as
criminal, yet now they think that they ought to be avenged, as it were,
by the Roman laws. Where were those laws when they themselves set fire
to the roofs of the sacred basilicas? If Julian did not avenge the
Church because he was an apostate, will you, O Emperor, avenge the
injury done to the Synagogue, because you are a Christian?

<span id="v.ix-p34"></span>22. And what will Christ say to you
afterwards? Do you not remember what He said by the prophet Nathan to
holy David? <span id="fr_3559"></span>[3560](#fn_3559) “I have chosen
thee the youngest of thy brethren, and from a private man have made thee
emperor. I have placed of the fruit of thy seed on the imperial throne.
I have made barbarous nations subject unto thee, I have given thee
peace, I have delivered thine enemy captive into thy power. Thou hadst
no corn for provision for thine army, I opened to thee the gates, I
opened to thee their stores by the hand of the enemies themselves. Thy
enemies gave to thee their provisions which they had prepared for
themselves. I troubled the counsels of thy enemy, so that he made
himself bare. I so fettered the usurper of the empire himself and bound
his mind, that whilst he still had means of <span id="page_444">p.
444</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_444"></span>escape, yet with all
belonging to him, as though for fear lest any should escape thee, he
shut himself in. His officer and forces on the other element, <span
id="fr_3560"></span>[3561](#fn_3560) whom before I had scattered, that
they might not join to fight against thee, I brought together again to
complete thy victory. Thy army, gathered together from many unsubdued
nations, I bade keep faith, tranquillity, and concord as if of one
nation. When there was the greatest danger lest the perfidious designs
of the barbarians should penetrate the Alps, I conferred victory on thee
within the very wall of the Alps, that thou mightest conquer without
loss. Thus, then, I caused thee to triumph over thy enemy, and thou
givest My enemies a triumph over My people.”

<span id="v.ix-p37"></span>23. Is it not on this account that Maximus
was forsaken, who, before the days of the expedition, hearing that a
synagogue had been burnt in Rome, had sent an edict to Rome, as if he
were the upholder of public order? Wherefore the Christian people said,
No good is in store for him. That king has become a Jew, we have heard
of him as a defender of order, and Christ, Who died for sinners, soon
tested him. If this was said of words, what will be said of punishment?
And then at once he was overcome by the Franks and the Saxons, in
Sicily, at Siscia, at Petavio, in a word everywhere. What has the
believer in common with the unbeliever? The instances of his unbelief
ought to be done away with together with the unbeliever himself. That
which injured him, that wherein he who was conquered offended, the
conqueror ought not to follow but to condemn.

<span id="v.ix-p38"></span>24. I have, then, recounted these things not
as to one who is ungrateful, but have enumerated them as rightly
bestowed, in order that, warned by them, you, to whom more has been
given, may love more. When Simon answered in these words the Lord Jesus
said: “Thou hast judged rightly.” <span
id="fr_3561"></span>[3562](#fn_3561) And straightway turning to the
woman who anointed His feet with ointment, setting forth a type of the
Church, He said to Simon: “Wherefore I say unto thee, her sins which are
many are forgiven, since she loved much. But he to whom less is forgiven
loveth less.” <span id="fr_3562"></span>[3563](#fn_3562) This is the
woman who entered into the house of the Pharisee, and cast off the Jew,
but gained Christ. For the Church shut out the Synagogue, why is it now
again attempted that in the servant of Christ the Synagogue should
exclude the Church from the bosom of faith, from the house of Christ?

<span id="v.ix-p41"></span>25. I have brought these matters together in
this address, O Emperor, out of love and zeal for you. For I owe it to
your kindnesses (whereby, at my request, you have liberated many from
exile, from prison, from the extreme penalty of death) that I should not
fear even offending your feelings for the sake of your own salvation (no
one has greater confidence than he who loves from his heart, certainly
no one ought to injure him who takes thought for him); that I may not
lose in one moment that favour granted to every priest and received by
me for so many years; and yet it is not the loss of favour which I
deprecate but the peril to salvation.

<span id="v.ix-p42"></span>26. And yet how great a thing it is, O
Emperor, that you should not think it necessary to enquire or to punish
in regard to a matter as to which up to this day no one has enquired, no
one has ever inflicted punishment. It is a serious matter to endanger
your salvation for the Jews. When Gideon <span
id="fr_3563"></span>[3564](#fn_3563) had slain the sacred calf, the
heathen said, The gods will themselves avenge the injury done to them.
Who is to avenge the Synagogue? Christ, Whom they slew, Whom they
denied? Will God the Father avenge those who do not receive the Father,
since they have not received the Son? Who is to avenge the heresy of the
Valentinians? How can your piety avenge them, seeing it has commanded
them to be excluded, and denied them permission to meet together? If I
set before you Josiah as a king approved of God, will you condemn that
in them which was approved in him? <span
id="fr_3564"></span>[3565](#fn_3564)

<span id="v.ix-p45"></span>27. But at any rate if too little confidence
is placed in me, command the presence of those bishops whom you think
fit, let it be discussed, O Emperor, what ought to be done without
injury to the faith. If you consult your officers concerning pecuniary
causes, how much more just is it that you should consult the priests of
God in the cause of religion.

<span id="v.ix-p46"></span>28. Let your Clemency consider from how many
plotters, how many spies the Church suffers. If they come upon a slight
crack, they plant a dart in it. I speak after the manner of men, but God
is feared more than men, Who is rightly set before even emperors. If any
one thinks it right that deference should be paid to a friend, a parent,
or a neighbour, I am right in judging that deference should be paid to
God, <span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span
id="v.ix-Page_445"></span>and that He should be preferred to all.
Consult, O Emperor, your own advantage, or suffer me to consult mine.

<span id="v.ix-p47"></span>29. What shall I answer hereafter, if it be
discovered that, by authority given from this place, Christians have
been slain by the sword, or by clubs, or thongs knotted with lead? How
shall I explain such a fact? How shall I excuse it to those bishops, who
now mourn bitterly because some, who have discharged the office of the
priesthood for thirty and many more years, or other ministers of the
Church, are withdrawn from their sacred office, and set to discharge
municipal duties? <span id="fr_3565"></span>[3566](#fn_3565) For if they
who war for you serve for a stated time of service, how much more ought
you to consider those who war for God. How, I say, shall I excuse this
to the bishops, who make complaint concerning the clergy, and write that
the Churches are wasted by a serious attack upon them?

<span id="v.ix-p49"></span>30. I was desirous that this should come to
the knowledge of your Clemency. You will, when it pleases you, vouchsafe
to consider and give order according to your will, but exclude and cast
out that which troubles me, and troubles me rightly. You do yourself
whatever you order to be done, even if he, your officer, do not do it. I
much prefer that you should be merciful, than that he should not do what
he has been ordered.

<span id="v.ix-p50"></span>31. You have those <span
id="fr_3566"></span>[3567](#fn_3566) for whom you ought yet to invite
and to merit the mercy of the Lord in regard to the Roman Empire; you
have those for whom you hope even more than for yourself; let the grace
of God for them, let their salvation appeal to you in these words of
mine. I fear that you may commit your cause to the judgment of others.
Everything is still unprejudiced before you. On this point I pledge
myself to our God for you, do not fear your oath. <span
id="fr_3567"></span>[3568](#fn_3567) Is it possible that that should
displease God which is amended for His honour? You need not alter
anything in that letter, whether it be sent or is not yet sent. Order
another to be written, which shall be full of faith, full of piety. For
you it is possible to change for the better, for me it is not possible
to hide the truth.

<span id="v.ix-p53"></span>32. You forgave the Antiochians the insult
offered to you; <span id="fr_3568"></span>[3569](#fn_3568) you have
recalled the daughters of your enemy, and given them to be brought up by
a relative; you sent sums of money to the mother of your enemy from your
own treasury. This so great piety, this so great faith towards God, will
be darkened by this deed. Do not you, then, I entreat, who spared
enemies in arms, and preserved your adversaries, think that Christians
ought to be punished with such eagerness.

<span id="v.ix-p55"></span>33. And now, O Emperor, I beg you not to
disdain to hear me who am in fear both for yourself and for myself, for
it is the voice of a Saint which says: “Wherefore was I made to see the
misery of my people?” <span id="fr_3569"></span>[3570](#fn_3569) that I
should commit an offence against God. I, indeed, have done what could be
done consistently with honour to you, that you might rather listen to me
in the palace, lest, if it were necessary, you should listen to me in
the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3549"></span>[440:3550](2100374.htm#fr_3549) <span
id="v.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span> [Psa.
119.46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046)<span id="v.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3550"></span>[440:3551](2100374.htm#fr_3550) <span
id="v.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span> [Ezek.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#021)<span id="v.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3551"></span>[441:3552](2100374.htm#fr_3551) <span
id="v.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span id="v.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3552"></span>[441:3553](2100374.htm#fr_3552) <span
id="v.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span> S. [Matt.
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020)<span id="v.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3553"></span>[441:3554](2100374.htm#fr_3553) <span
id="v.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p12"></span> [Rom. x.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="v.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3554"></span>[441:3555](2100374.htm#fr_3554) <span
id="v.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p13"></span> S. [Matt. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)<span id="v.ix-p13.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_3555"></span>[441:3556](2100374.htm#fr_3555) <span
id="v.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p16"></span> *Prævaricator*, in a civil case, one who
acts collusively with the defendant, and betrays the other side. Hence
in ecclesiastical Latin the word came to mean Apostate.

<span id="fn_3556"></span>[441:3557](2100374.htm#fr_3556) <span
id="v.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p18"></span> A Canon \[60\] of the Council of Elvira,
<span class="sc"><span id="v.ix-p18.1"></span>a.d.</span> 305 or 6, lays
down that if any one is killed for breaking idols, he is not to be
reckoned as a martyr, but perhaps St. Ambrose here considers the burning
of the synagogue as a retaliation for the destruction of churches.

<span id="fn_3557"></span>[442:3558](2100374.htm#fr_3557) <span
id="v.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p23"></span> The miracles of this nature which prevented
the rebuilding of the Jewish Temple are mentioned by the usual
ecclesiastical historians, and confirmed by the heathen Ammianus
Marcellinus, XXIII. I.

<span id="fn_3558"></span>[442:3559](2100374.htm#fr_3558) <span
id="v.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p26"></span> [Jer. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#014)<span id="v.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3559"></span>[443:3560](2100374.htm#fr_3559) <span
id="v.ix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p35"></span> [2 Sam.
7.8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#008)<span id="v.ix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3560"></span>[444:3561](2100374.htm#fr_3560) <span
id="v.ix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p36"></span> Referring to the fleet under Andragathius,
which Maximus had prepared expecting that Theodosius would come by sea.

<span id="fn_3561"></span>[444:3562](2100374.htm#fr_3561) <span
id="v.ix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p39"></span> S. [Luke vii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#043)<span id="v.ix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3562"></span>[444:3563](2100374.htm#fr_3562) <span
id="v.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p40"></span> S. [Luke vii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)<span id="v.ix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3563"></span>[444:3564](2100374.htm#fr_3563) <span
id="v.ix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p43"></span> [Judg. vi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#031)<span id="v.ix-p43.1"></span>, very
loosely.

<span id="fn_3564"></span>[444:3565](2100374.htm#fr_3564) <span
id="v.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p44"></span> [2 Kings
22.1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001)<span id="v.ix-p44.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_3565"></span>[445:3566](2100374.htm#fr_3565) <span
id="v.ix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p48"></span> Cf. *Ep.* XVIII. 13, 14.

<span id="fn_3566"></span>[445:3567](2100374.htm#fr_3566) <span
id="v.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p51"></span> *i.e.* his children.

<span id="fn_3567"></span>[445:3568](2100374.htm#fr_3567) <span
id="v.ix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p52"></span> It is possible that keeping an oath may be
contrary to duty. Cf. *Off. Min.* I. 264.

<span id="fn_3568"></span>[445:3569](2100374.htm#fr_3568) <span
id="v.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p54"></span> In the year before this the people of
Antioch, enraged at new taxation, rose and destroyed the statues of the
Emperor and Empress. This was the occasion on which St. Chrysostom
preached the Homilies on the Statues. Theodosius, at first greatly
enraged, subsequently pardoned the people. Cf. St. Chrys. *Hom. 20 ad
Antioch.*

<span id="fn_3569"></span>[445:3570](2100374.htm#fr_3569) <span
id="v.ix-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p56"></span> [1 Macc. ii.
7](../../../bib/apo/ma1002.htm#007)<span id="v.ix-p56.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLI: To Marcellina on the Same.](2100375)
