[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100146)  [Next](2100148.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p1"></span>*A passage of St. Paul abused by
heretics, to prove a distinction between the Divine Persons, is
explained, and it is proved that the whole passage can be rightly said
of each Person, though it refers specially to the Son. It is then proved
that each member of the passage is applicable to each Person, and as to
say,* of Him are all things *is applicable to the Father, so may* all
things are through Him and in Him *also be said of Him.*

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p2"></span>85. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>Another</span> similar passage is that
which they say implies difference, where it is written: “But to us there
is one Father, of Whom are all things and we unto Him, and one Lord
Jesus Christ, through Whom are all things, and we through Him.” <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126.md) For they pretend that when it is
said “of Him,” the matter is signified, when “through Him,” either the
instrument of the work or some office, but when it is said “in Him,”
either the place or the time in which all things that are made are seen.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p4"></span>86. So, then, their desire is to prove
that there is some difference of substance, being anxious to make a
distinction between as it were the instrument, and the proper worker or
author, and also between time or place and the instrument. But is the
Son, then, alien as regards His Nature from the Father, because an
instrument is alien from the <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-Page_126"></span>worker or author? or is the Son alien
from the Spirit, because either time or place is not of the same class
as an instrument?

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p5"></span>87. Compare now our assertions. They
will have it that matter is of God as though of the nature of God, as
when you say that a chest is made of wood or a statue of stone; that
after this fashion matter has come forth from God, and that the same
matter has been made by the Son as if by some sort of instrument; so
that they declare that the Son is not so much the Artificer as the
instrument of the work; and that all things have been made in the
Spirit, as if in some place or time; they attribute each part severally
to each Person severally and deny that all are in common.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p6"></span>88. But we show that all things are so
of God the Father, that God the Father has suffered no loss because all
things are either through Him or in Him, and yet all things are not of
Him as if of matter; then, too, that all things are through the Lord the
Son, so that He is not deprived of the attribute that all things are of
the Son and in Him; and that all things are in the Spirit, so that we
may teach that all things are through the Spirit, and all things from
the Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p7"></span>89. For these particles, like those of
which we have spoken before, imply each other. For the Apostle did not
so say, All things are of God, and all things are through the Son, as to
signify that the substance of the Father and the Son could be severed,
but that he might teach that by a distinction without confusion the
Father is one, the Son another. Those particles, then, are not as it
were in opposition to each other, but are as it were allied and agreed,
so as often to suit even one Person, as it is written: “For of Him, and
through Him, and in Him are all things.” <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p9"></span>90. But if you really consider whence
the passage is taken you will have no doubt that it is said of the Son.
For the Apostle says, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, “Who hath
known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been His counsellor?” <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128.md) And he adds: “For of Him and in Him
are all things.” Which Isaiah had said of the Artificer of all, as you
read: “Who hath measured out the water with his hand, and the heaven
with a span, and all the earth with his closed hand? Who hath placed the
mountains in scales and the hills in a balance? Who hath known the mind
of the Lord, or who hath been His counsellor?” <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p12"></span>91. And the Apostle added: “For of
Him, and through Him, and in Him are all things.” What is “of Him”? That
the nature of everything is of His will, and He is the Author of all
things which have come into being. “Through Him” means what? That the
establishment and continuance of all things is His gift. What is “in
Him”? That all things by a wonderful kind of longing and unspeakable
love look upon the Author of their life, and the Giver of their graces
and functions, according to that which is written: “The eyes of all look
unto Thee,” and “Thou openest Thine hand and fillest every living
creature with Thy good pleasure.” <span
id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p14"></span>92. And of the Father, too, you may
rightly say “of Him,” for of Him was the operative Wisdom, Which of His
own and the Father’s will gave being to all things which were not.
“Through Him,” because all things were made through His Wisdom. “In
Him,” because He is the Fount of substantial Life, in Whom we live and
move and have our being.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p15"></span>93. Of the Spirit also, as being
formed by Him, strengthened by Him, established in Him, we receive the
gift of eternal life.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p16"></span>94. Since, then, these expressions
seem suitable either to the Father or the Son or the Holy Spirit, it is
certain that nothing derogatory is spoken of in them, since we both say
that many things are of the Son, and many through the Father, as you
find it said of the Son: “That we may be increased through all things in
Him, Who is Christ the Head, from Whom,” says he, “the whole body,
framed and knit together through every joint of the supply for the
measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the building up
of itself in love.” <span id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131.md) And
again, writing to the Colossians of those who have not the knowledge of
the Son of God, he says: “Because they hold not the Head, from Whom all
the body being supplied and joined together through joints and bands,
increaseth to the increase of God.” <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132.md) For we said above that Christ is
the Head of the Church. And in another place you read: “Of His fulness
have all we received.” <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133.md) And
the Lord Himself said: “He shall take of Mine and show it unto
you.” <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134.md) And before, He said: “I
perceive that virtue is gone out of Me.” <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p22"></span>95. In like manner that you may
recognize the Unity, it is also said of the Spirit: “For he that soweth
in the Spirit shall of the Spirit <span id="page_127">p. 127</span>
<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-Page_127"></span>reap eternal life.” <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136.md) And John says: “Hereby we know that
He is in us because He hath given us of His Spirit.” <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137.md) And the Angel says: “That Which
shall be born of her is of the Holy Spirit.” <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138.md) And the Lord says: “That which is
born of the Spirit is Spirit.” <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p27"></span>96. So, then, as we read that all
things are of the Father, so, too, that all things can be said to be of
the Son, through Whom are all things; and we are taught by proof that
all things are of the Spirit in Whom are all things.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p28"></span>97. Now let us consider whether we can
teach that anything is through the Father. But it is written: “Paul the
servant of Christ through the will of God;” <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140.md) and elsewhere: “Wherefore thou art
now not a servant but a son, and if a son an heir also through
God;” <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141.md) and again: “As Christ
rose from the dead by the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142.md) And elsewhere God the Father says
to the Son: “Behold proselytes shall come to Thee through Me.” <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p33"></span>98. You will find many other passages,
if you look for things done through the Father. Is, then, the Father
less because we read that many things are in the Son and of the Son, and
find in the heavenly Scriptures very many things done or given through
the Father?

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p34"></span>99. But in like manner we also read of
many things done through the Spirit, as you find: “But God hath revealed
them to us through His Spirit;” <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144.md) and in another place: “Keep the
good deposit through the Holy Spirit;” <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145.md) and to the Ephesians: “to be
strengthened through His Spirit;” <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146.md) and to the Corinthians: “To another
is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom;” <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147.md) and in another place: “But if
through the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall
live;” <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148.md) and above: “He Who
raised Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies
through the indwelling of His Spirit in you.” <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p41"></span>100. But perhaps some one may say,
Show me that we can read expressly that all things are of the Son, or
that all things are of the Spirit. But I reply, Let them also show that
it is written that all things are through the Father. But since we have
proved that these expressions suit either the Father or the Son or the
Holy Spirit, and that no distinction of the divine power can arise from
particles of this kind, there is no doubt but that all things are of Him
through Whom all things are; and that all things are through Him through
Whom all are; and that we must understand that all things are through
Him or of Him in Whom all are. For every creature exists both of the
will, and through the operation and in the power of the Trinity, as it
is written: “Let Us make man after Our image and likeness;” <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150.md) and elsewhere: “By the word of the
Lord were the heavens established, and all their power by the Spirit of
His mouth.” <span id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[125:1127](2100147.htm#fr_1126.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p3"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[126:1128](2100147.htm#fr_1127.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p8"></span> [Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[126:1129](2100147.htm#fr_1128.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p10"></span> [Isa. xl.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[126:1130](2100147.htm#fr_1129.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p11"></span> [Isa. xl.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[126:1131](2100147.htm#fr_1130.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p13"></span> [Ps.
145:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[126:1132](2100147.htm#fr_1131.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p17"></span> [Eph.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[126:1133](2100147.htm#fr_1132.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p18"></span> [Col. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[126:1134](2100147.htm#fr_1133.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p19"></span> S. [John i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[126:1135](2100147.htm#fr_1134.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p20"></span> S. [John xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[126:1136](2100147.htm#fr_1135.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p21"></span> S. [Luke viii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#046.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[127:1137](2100147.htm#fr_1136.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p23"></span> [Gal. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[127:1138](2100147.htm#fr_1137.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p24"></span> [1 John iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[127:1139](2100147.htm#fr_1138.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p25"></span> S. [Matt. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[127:1140](2100147.htm#fr_1139.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p26"></span> S. [John iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[127:1141](2100147.htm#fr_1140.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p29"></span> [1 Cor. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[127:1142](2100147.htm#fr_1141.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p30"></span> [Gal. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[127:1143](2100147.htm#fr_1142.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p31"></span> [Rom. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[127:1144](2100147.htm#fr_1143.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p32"></span> [Isa. liv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p32.1"></span>
\[LXX.\].

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[127:1145](2100147.htm#fr_1144.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p35"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[127:1146](2100147.htm#fr_1145.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p36"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[127:1147](2100147.htm#fr_1146.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p37"></span> [Eph. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[127:1148](2100147.htm#fr_1147.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p38"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[127:1149](2100147.htm#fr_1148.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p39"></span> [Rom. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[127:1150](2100147.htm#fr_1149.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p40"></span> [Rom. viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[127:1151](2100147.htm#fr_1150.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p42"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[127:1152](2100147.htm#fr_1151.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.x-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p43"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii.x-p43.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Being about to prove that the will, the calling, and
the commandment of the Trinity is one, St. Ambrose shows that the Spirit
called the Church exactly as the Father and the Son did, and proves this
by the selection of SS. Paul and Barnabas, and especially by the mission
of St. Peter to Cornelius. And by the way he points out how in the
Apostle's vision the calling of the Gentiles was shadowed forth, who
having been before like wild beasts, now by the operation of the Spirit
lay aside that wildness. Then having quoted other passages in support of
this view, he shows that in the case of Jeremiah cast into a pit by
Jews, and rescued by Abdemelech, is a type of the slighting of the Holy
Spirit by the Jews, and of His being honoured by the Gentiles.](2100148.md)
