[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100285)  [Next](2100287) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span>

### <span id="iv.vi.i-p0.1"></span>Introduction.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>These</span> two books were written against the
Novatian heresy, which took its name, and to a considerable extent its
form, from Novatus, a priest of the Church of Carthage, and Novatian,
schismatically consecrated bishop at Rome. It was the outcome of a
struggle which had long existed in the Church upon the question of the
restitution to Church privileges of those who had fallen into grievous
sin, and the possibility of their repentance.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p2"></span>The severest ground was taken by the
Novatians, who were condemned successively by many councils, which
maintained the power of the Church to admit those guilty of any sin
whatsoever to repentance, and prescribed various rules and penalties
applicable to different cases. The heresy, however, lasted for some
time, becoming weaker in the fifth century, and gradually fading away as
a separate body with a distinctive name. “Novatianism, in the tests
which it used, its efforts after a perfectly pure communion, its
crotchetty interpretations of Scripture, and many other features,
presents a striking parallel to many modern sects.” \[See *Dict. Chr.
Biog.,* Blunt, Sects and heresies, Ceillier, II. 427, etc.\]

<span id="iv.vi.i-p3"></span>St. Ambrose, in writing against the
Novatians, seems to have had some recent publication of theirs in his
mind, which is now unknown. He begins by commending gentleness, a
quality singularly wanting in the sect; speaks of the power committed to
the Church of forgiving the greatest sins, and points out how God is
more inclined to mercy than to severity, and refutes the arguments of
the Novatians based on certain passages of holy Scripture. In the second
book, after urging the necessity of careful and speedy repentance, and
the necessity of confessing one’s sins, St. Ambrose meets the Novatian
arguments based on [Heb. vi. 4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p3.1"></span>, from which they inferred the impossibility of
restoration; and on St. [Matt. 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)<span id="iv.vi.i-p3.2"></span>,
our Lord’s words concerning sin against the Holy Spirit.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p4"></span>As regards the date of this treatise, it
must have been somewhat before the exposition of [Ps.
xxxvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#000)<span
id="iv.vi.i-p4.1"></span>, which refers to it, but there is nothing else
which can be taken as a certain guide. Possibly the Benedictine Editors
are right in assigning it to about <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 384.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p5"></span>Some few persons, probably on doctrinal
grounds, have been led to question the authorship of this treatise, but
it is quoted by St. Augustine, and there has never been any real doubt
on the subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I.](2100287)
