[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100031)  [Next](2100033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xx"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xx-p0.1"></span>Chapter XX.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xx-p1"></span>If we are to preserve our modesty we
must avoid fellowship with profligate men, also the banquets of
strangers, and intercourse with women; our leisure time at home should
be spent in pious and virtuous pursuits.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xx-p2"></span>85. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xx-p2.1"></span>Modesty</span> has indeed its rocks—not any
that she brings with her, but those, I mean, which she often runs
against, as when we associate with profligate men, who, under the form
of pleasantry, administer poison to the good. And the latter, if they
are very constant in their attendance at banquets and games, and often
join in jests, enervate that manly gravity of theirs. Let us then take
heed that, in wishing to relax our minds, we do not destroy all harmony,
the blending as it were of all good works. For habit quickly bends
nature in another direction.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xx-p3"></span>86. For this reason I think that what ye
wisely do is befitting to the duties of clerics, and especially to those
of the priesthood—namely, that ye avoid the banquets of strangers, but
so that ye are still hospitable to travellers, and give no occasion for
reproach by reason of your great care in the matter. Banquets with
strangers engross one’s attention, and soon produce a love for feasting.
Tales, also, of the world and its pleasures often creep in. One cannot
shut one’s ears; and to forbid them is looked on as a sign of
haughtiness. One’s glass, too, even against one’s will, is filled time
after time. It is better surely to excuse oneself once for all at one’s
own home, than often at another’s. When one rises sober, at any rate
one’s presence need not be condemned by the insolence of another.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xx-p4"></span>87. There is no need for the younger
clergy to go to the houses of widows or virgins, except for the sake of
a definite visit, and in that case only with the elder clergy, that is,
with the bishop, or, if the matter be somewhat important, with the
priests. Why <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span
id="iv.i.ii.xx-Page_16"></span>should we give room to the world to
revile? What need is there for those frequent visits to give ground for
rumours? What if one of those women should by chance fall? Why shouldst
thou undergo the reproach of another’s fall? How many even strong men
have been led away by their passions? How many are there who have not
indeed yielded to sin, but have given ground for suspicion?

<span id="iv.i.ii.xx-p5"></span>88. Why dost thou not spend the time
which thou hast free from thy duties in the church in reading? Why dost
thou not go back again to see Christ? Why dost thou not address Him, and
hear His voice? We address Him when we pray, we hear Him when we read
the sacred oracles of God. What have we to do with strange houses? There
is one house which holds all. They who need us can come to us. What have
we to do with tales and fables? An office to minister at the altar of
Christ is what we have received; no duty to make ourselves agreeable to
men has been laid upon us.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xx-p6"></span>89. We ought to be humble, gentle, mild,
serious, patient. We must keep the mean in all things, so that a calm
countenance and quiet speech may show that there is no vice in our
lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. We must guard against anger, before it arises; if it
has already arisen we must check and calm it, and if we cannot do this
either, at least we should keep our tongue from abuse, so that our
passions may be like boys' quarrels. He relates what Archites said, and
shows that David led the way in this matter, both in his actions and in
his writings.](2100033)
