[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100270)  [Next](2100272) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVII.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p1"></span>Christ acted for our advantage in
being unwilling to reveal the day of judgment. This is made plain by
other words of our Lord and by a not dissimilar passage from Paul’s
writings. Other passages in which the same ignorance seems to be
attributed to the Father are brought forward to meet those who are
anxious to know why Christ answered His disciples, as though He did not
know. From these Ambrose argues against them that if they admit
ignorance and inability in the Father, they must admit that the same
Substance exists in the Son as in the Father; unless they prefer to
accuse the Son of falsehood; since it belongs neither to Him nor to the
Father to deceive, but the unity of both is pointed out in the passage
named.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p2"></span>208. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p2.1"></span>But</span> we ask for what reason He
was unwilling to state the time. If we ask it, we shall not find it is
owing to ignorance, but to wisdom. For it was not to our advantage to
know; in order that we being ignorant of the actual moments of judgment
to come, might ever be as it were on guard, and set on the watch-tower
of virtue, and so avoid the habits of sin; lest the day of the Lord
should come upon us in the midst of our wickedness. For it is not to our
advantage to know but rather to fear the future; for it is written: “Be
not high-minded but fear.” <span id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p4"></span>209. For if He had distinctly
stated the day, he would seem to have laid down a rule <span
id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-Page_311"></span>of life for that one age which was
nearest to the judgment, and the just man in the earlier times would be
more negligent, and the sinner more free from care. For the adulterer
cannot cease from the desire of committing adultery unless he fears
punishment day by day, nor can the robber forsake the hiding places in
the woods where he dwells, unless he knows punishment is hanging over
him day by day. For impurity generally spurs them on, but fear is
irksome to the end.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p5"></span>210. Therefore I have said that it
was not to our advantage to know; nay, it is to our advantage to be
ignorant, that through ignorance we might fear, through watchfulness be
corrected, as He Himself said: “Be ye ready, for ye know not at what
hour the Son of Man cometh.” <span id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788)
For the soldier does not know how to watch in the camp unless he knows
that war is at hand.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p7"></span>211. Wherefore at another time also
the Lord Himself when asked by his Apostles (Yes, for they did not
understand it as Arius did, but believed that the Son of God knew the
future. For unless they had believed this, they would never have asked
the question.)—the Lord, I say, when asked when He would restore the
kingdom to Israel, did not say that He did not know, but says: “It is
not for you to know the times or years, which the Father hath put in His
own power.” <span id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789) Mark what He
said: It is not for you to know! Read again, “It is not for you.” “For
you,” He said, not “for Me,” for now He spoke not according to His own
perfection but as was profitable to the human body and our soul. “For
you” therefore He said, not “for Me.”

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p9"></span>212. Which example the Apostle also
followed: “But of the times and seasons, brethren,” he says, “ye have no
need that I write unto you.” <span id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790)
Thus not even the Apostle himself, the servant of Christ, said that he
knew not the seasons, but that there was no need for the people to be
taught; for they ought ever to be armed with spiritual armour, that the
virtue of Christ may stand forth in each one. But when the Lord says:
“Of the times which the Father hath put in His own power,” <span
id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791) He certainly cannot be without a
share in His Father’s knowledge, in whose power He is by no means
without a share. For power grows out of wisdom and virtue; and Christ is
both of these.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p12"></span>213. But you ask, why did He not
refuse His disciples as one who knew, but would not say; and, why did He
state instead that neither the angels nor the Son knew? <span
id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792) I too will ask you why God says in
Genesis: “I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether
according to the cry that is come unto Me. And if not, that I may
know.” <span id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793) Why does Scripture
also say of God: “And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower,
which the sons of men builded.” <span
id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794) Why also does the prophet say in
the Book of the Psalms: “The Lord looked down upon the children of men,
to see if there were any that did understand, and that did seek
God”? <span id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795) Just as though in one
place, if God had not descended, and in the other, if He had not looked
down, He would have been ignorant either of men’s work or of their
merits.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p17"></span>214. But in the Gospel of Luke
also thou hast the same, for the Father says: “What shall I do? I will
send My beloved Son; it may be that they will reverence Him.” <span
id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796) In Matthew and in Mark thou hast:
“But He sent His only Son, saying: they will reverence My Son;” <span
id="fr_2797"></span>[2798](#fn_2797) In one book He says: “It may be
that they will reverence My Son;” <span
id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798) and is in doubt as though He does
not know; for this is the language of one in doubt. But in the two other
books He says: “They will reverence My Son;” that is, He declares that
reverence will be shown.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p21"></span>215. But God can neither be in
doubt, nor can He be deceived. For he only is in doubt, who is ignorant
of the future; and he is deceived, who has predicted one thing, whilst
another has happened. Yet what is plainer than the fact that Scripture
states the Father to have said one thing of the Son, and that the same
Scripture proves another think to have taken place? The Son was beaten,
He was mocked, was crucified, and died. <span
id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799) He suffered much worse things in
the flesh than those servants who had been appointed before. Was the
Father deceived, or was He ignorant of it, or was He unable to give
help? But He that is true cannot make a mistake; for it is written: “God
is faithful Who doth not lie.” <span
id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800) How was He ignorant, Who knows all?
What could He not do, Who could do all?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p24"></span>216. Yet if either He was
ignorant, or had not power (for you would sooner agree to say that the
Father did not know than own that the Son knows), you see from this very
<span id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-Page_312"></span>fact that the Son is of one
Substance with the Father; seeing that the Son like the Father (to speak
in accordance with your foolish ideas) does not know all things, and
cannot do all things. For I am not so eager or rash in giving praise to
the Son as to dare to say that the Son can do more than the Father; for
I make no distinction of power between the Father and the Son.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p25"></span>217. But perhaps you say that the
Father did not say so, but that the Son erred about the Father. So now
you convict the Son not only of weakness, but also of blasphemy and
lying. However if you do not believe the Son with regard to the Father,
neither may you believe Him with regard to that. For if He wished to
deceive us in saying that the Father was in doubt as though He knew not
what would take place, He wished also to deceive us about Himself in
saying that He did not know the future. It would be far more endurable
for Him to stretch the veil of ignorance in front of that which He does
of His own accord, than that He should seem to be deluded by a result
contrary to what He had foretold in the things He had declared of His
Father.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p26"></span>218. But neither is the Father
deceived, not does the Son deceive. It is the custom of the holy
Scriptures to speak thus, as the examples I have already given, and many
others testify, so that God feigns not to know what He does know. In
this then a unity of Godhead, and a unity of character is proved to
exist in the Father and in the Son; seeing that, as God the Father hides
what is known to Him, so also the Son, Who is the image of God in this
respect, hides what is known to Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[310:2788](2100271.htm#fr_2787) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p3"></span> [Rom. xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[311:2789](2100271.htm#fr_2788) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p6"></span> S. [Matt. xxiv.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[311:2790](2100271.htm#fr_2789) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p8"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[311:2791](2100271.htm#fr_2790) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p10"></span> [1 Thess. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[311:2792](2100271.htm#fr_2791) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p11"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[311:2793](2100271.htm#fr_2792) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p13"></span> S. [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[311:2794](2100271.htm#fr_2793) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p14"></span> [Gen. xviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[311:2795](2100271.htm#fr_2794) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p15"></span> [Gen. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[311:2796](2100271.htm#fr_2795) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p16"></span> [Ps. liii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[311:2797](2100271.htm#fr_2796) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p18"></span> S. [Luke xx.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2797"></span>[311:2798](2100271.htm#fr_2797) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p19"></span> S. [Matt. xxi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#037)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[311:2799](2100271.htm#fr_2798) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p20"></span> S. [Mark xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[311:2800](2100271.htm#fr_2799) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p22"></span> S. [Matt. xxvii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p22.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[311:2801](2100271.htm#fr_2800) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p23"></span> [Tit. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xviii-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Wishing to give a reason for the Lord's answer to
the apostles, he assigns the one received to Christ's tenderness. Then
when another reason is supplied by others he confesses that it is true;
for the Lord spoke it by reason of His human feelings. Hence he gathers
that the knowledge of the Father and the Son is equal, and that the Son
is not inferior to the Father. After having set beside the text, in
which He is said to be inferior, another whereby He is declared to be
equal, he censures the rashness of the Arians in judging about the Son,
and shows that whilst they wickedly make Him to be inferior, He is
rightly called a Stone by Himself.](2100272)
