[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100179)  [Next](2100181) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.i"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.i-p0.1"></span>Preface.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p1.1"></span>On</span> the eve of setting out for the East,
to aid his uncle Valens in repelling a Gothic invasion, Gratian, the
Emperor of the West, requested St. Ambrose to write him a treatise in
proof of the Divinity of Jesus Christ. Gratian’s object in making this
request was to secure some sort of preservative against the corrupting
influence of Arianism, which at that time (<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.i-p1.2"></span>a.d.</span> 378) had gained the upper hand of
Orthodoxy in the Eastern provinces of the Empire, owing to its
establishment at the Imperial Court. In compliance with Gratian’s wish,
the Bishop of Milan composed a treatise, which now forms the first two
Books of the *De Fide.* With this work the Emperor was so much pleased
that on his return from the East, after the death of Valens at
Hadrianople, he wrote to St. Ambrose, begging for a fresh copy of the
treatise, and further, for its enlargement by the addition of a
discourse on the Divinity of the Holy Spirit. The original treatise was,
indeed, enlarged by St. Ambrose in 379, but the additional Books dealt,
not with the Divinity of the Holy Spirit, but rather with new objections
raised by the Arian teachers, and points which had either been passed
over or not fully discussed already. In this way St. Ambrose’s
Exposition was brought into its present form.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p2"></span>The object of the Exposition is, as has
already been indicated, to prove the Divinity of Jesus Christ, and His
co-eternity, co-equality, and consubstantiality, as God the Son, with
God the Father. This the author does by constant appeal to the
Scriptures, both of the Old and of the New Testament, which the Arians
had in many cases forced into the mould of false interpretation to make
them fit their doctrine.

<span id="iv.iv.i-p3"></span>Besides the title of *De Fide*, that of *De
Trinitate* was one by which this treatise was largely known in after
ages; it is certain, though, that the former was that assigned by St.
Ambrose himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prefatory Note.](2100181)
