[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100372)  [Next](2100374) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii"></span>

### <span id="v.viii-p0.1"></span>Letter XXII.

<span id="v.viii-p1"></span>St. Ambrose in a letter to his sister gives
an account of the finding of the bodies of SS. Gervasius and Protasius,
and of his addresses to the people on that occasion. Preaching from
[Psalm xix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#000)<span
id="v.viii-p1.1"></span>, he allegorically expounded the “heavens” to
represent the martyrs and apostles, and the “day” he takes to be their
confession. They were humbled by God, and then raised again. He then
gives an account of the state in which their bodies were found, and of
their translation to the basilica. In another address he speaks of the
joy of the Catholics and the malice of the Arians who denied the
miracles that were being wrought, as the Jews used to do, and points out
that their faith is quite different from that of the martyrs, and that
since the devils acknowledge the Trinity, and they do not, they are
worse than the very devils themselves.

<span id="v.viii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.viii-p2.1"></span>To</span> the lady, his sister, dearer to him
than his eyes and life, Ambrose Bishop.

<span id="v.viii-p3"></span>1. As I do not wish anything which takes
place here in your absence to escape the knowledge of your holiness, you
must know that we have found some bodies of holy martyrs. For after I
had dedicated the basilica, <span id="fr_3521"></span>[3522](#fn_3521)
many, as it were, with one mouth began to address me, and said:
Consecrate this as you did the Roman basilica. And I answered:
“Certainly I will if I find any <span id="page_437">p. 437</span> <span
id="v.viii-Page_437"></span>relics of martyrs.” And at once a kind of
prophetic ardour seemed to enter my heart.

<span id="v.viii-p5"></span>2. Why should I use many words? God favoured
us, for even the clergy were afraid who were bidden to clear away the
earth from the spot before the chancel screen of SS. Felix and Nabor. I
found the fitting signs, and on bringing in some on whom hands were to
be laid, <span id="fr_3522"></span>[3523](#fn_3522) the power of the
holy martyrs became so manifest, that even whilst I was still silent,
one <span id="fr_3523"></span>[3524](#fn_3523) was seized and thrown
prostrate at the holy burial-place. We found two men of marvellous
stature, such as those of ancient days. All the bones were perfect, and
there was much blood. During the whole of those two days there was an
enormous concourse of people. Briefly we arranged the whole in order,
and as evening was now coming on transferred them to the basilica of
Fausta, <span id="fr_3524"></span>[3525](#fn_3524) where watch was kept
during the night, and some received the laying on of hands. On the
following day we translated the relics to the basilica called Ambrosian.
During the translation a blind man was healed. <span
id="fr_3525"></span>[3526](#fn_3525) I addressed the people then as
follows:

<span id="v.viii-p10"></span>3. When I considered the immense and
unprecedented numbers of you who are here gathered together, and the
gifts of divine grace which have shone forth in the holy martyrs, I must
confess that I felt myself unequal to this task, and that I could not
express in words what we can scarcely conceive in our minds or take in
with our eyes. But when the course of holy Scripture began to be read,
the Holy Spirit Who spake in the prophets granted me to utter something
worthy of so great a gathering, of your expectations, and of the merits
of the holy martyrs.

<span id="v.viii-p11"></span>4. “The heavens,” it is said, “declare the
glory of God.” <span id="fr_3526"></span>[3527](#fn_3526) When this
Psalm is read, it occurs to one that not so much the material elements
as the heavenly merits seem to offer praise worthy of God. And by the
chance of this day’s lessons it is made clear what “heavens” declare the
glory of God. Look at the holy relics at my right hand and at my left,
see men of heavenly conversation, behold the trophies of a heavenly
mind. These are the heavens which declare the glory of God, these are
His handiwork which the firmament proclaims. For not worldly
enticements, but the grace of the divine working, raised them to the
firmament of the most sacred Passion, and long before by the testimony
of their character and virtues bore witness of them, that they continued
steadfast against the dangers of this world.

<span id="v.viii-p13"></span>5. Paul was a heaven, when he said: “Our
conversation is in heaven.” <span id="fr_3527"></span>[3528](#fn_3527)
James and John were heavens, and then were called “sons of
thunder”; <span id="fr_3528"></span>[3529](#fn_3528) and John, being as
it were a heaven, saw the Word with God. <span
id="fr_3529"></span>[3530](#fn_3529) The Lord Jesus Himself was a heaven
of perpetual light, when He was declaring the glory of God, that glory
which no man had seen before. And therefore He said: “No man hath seen
God at any time, except the only-begotten Son, Who is in the bosom of
the Father, He hath declared Him.” <span
id="fr_3530"></span>[3531](#fn_3530) If you seek for the handiwork of
God, listen to Job when he says: “The Spirit of God Who hath made
me.” <span id="fr_3531"></span>[3532](#fn_3531) And so strengthened
against the temptations of the devil, he kept his footsteps constantly
without offence. But let us go on to what follows.

<span id="v.viii-p19"></span>6. “Day,” it is said, “unto day uttereth
speech.” <span id="fr_3532"></span>[3533](#fn_3532) Behold the true
days, where no darkness of night intervenes. Behold the days full of
life and eternal brightness, which uttered the word of God, not in
speech which passes away, but in their inmost heart, by constancy in
confession, and perseverance in their witness.

<span id="v.viii-p21"></span>7. Another Psalm which was read says: “Who
is like unto the Lord our God, Who dwelleth on high, and regardeth lowly
things in heaven and in the earth?” <span
id="fr_3533"></span>[3534](#fn_3533) The Lord regarded indeed lowly
things when He revealed to His Church the relics of the holy martyrs
lying hidden under the unnoted turf, whose souls were in heaven, their
bodies in the earth: “raising the poor out of the dust, and lifting the
needy from the mire,” <span id="fr_3534"></span>[3535](#fn_3534) and you
see how He hath “set them with the princes of His people.” <span
id="fr_3535"></span>[3536](#fn_3535) Whom are we to esteem as the
princes of the people but the holy martyrs? amongst whose number
Protasius and Gervasius long unknown are now enrolled, who have caused
the Church of Milan, barren of martyrs hitherto, now as the mother of
many children, to rejoice in the distinctions and instances of her own
sufferings.

<span id="v.viii-p25"></span><span id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span
id="v.viii-Page_438"></span>8. Nor let this seem at variance with the
true faith: “Day unto day uttereth the word;” soul unto soul, life unto
life, resurrection unto resurrection; “and night unto night showeth
knowledge;” <span id="fr_3536"></span>[3537](#fn_3536) that is, flesh
unto flesh, they, that is, whose passion has shown to all the true
knowledge of the faith. Good are these nights, bright nights, not
without stars: “For as star differeth from star in brightness, so too is
the resurrection of the dead.” <span
id="fr_3537"></span>[3538](#fn_3537)

<span id="v.viii-p28"></span>9. For not without reason do many call this
the resurrection of the martyrs. I do not say whether they have risen
for themselves, for us certainly the martyrs have risen. You know—nay,
you have yourselves seen—that many are cleansed from evil spirits, that
very many also, having touched with their hands the robe of the saints,
are freed from those ailments which oppressed them; you see that the
miracles of old time are renewed, when through the coming of the Lord
Jesus grace was more largely shed forth upon the earth, and that many
bodies are healed as it were by the shadow of the holy bodies. How many
napkins are passed about! how many garments, laid upon the holy relics
and endowed with healing power, are claimed! All are glad to touch even
the outside thread, and whosoever touches will be made whole.

<span id="v.viii-p29"></span>10. Thanks be to Thee, Lord Jesus, that at
this time Thou hast stirred up for us the spirits of the holy martyrs,
when Thy Church needs greater protection. <span
id="fr_3538"></span>[3539](#fn_3538) Let all know what sort of champions
I desire, who are able to defend, but desire not to attack. These have I
gained for you, O holy people, such as may help all and injure none.
Such defenders do I desire, such are the soldiers I have, that is, not
soldiers of this world, but soldiers of Christ. I fear no ill-will on
account of them, the more powerful their patronage is the greater safety
is there in it. And I wish for their protection for those very persons
who grudge them to me. Let them come, then, and see my attendants. I do
not deny that I am surrounded by such arms: “Some trust in chariots, and
some in horses, but we will boast in the Name of the Lord our
God.” <span id="fr_3539"></span>[3540](#fn_3539)

<span id="v.viii-p32"></span>11. The course of divine Scripture relates
that Elisha, when surrounded by the army of the Syrians, told his
servant, who was afraid, not to fear; “for,” said he, “they that be for
us are more than those against us;” <span
id="fr_3540"></span>[3541](#fn_3540) and in order to prove this, he
prayed that the eyes of Gehazi might be opened, and when they were
opened, he saw that numberless hosts of angels were present. And we,
though we cannot see them, yet feel their presence. Our eyes were shut,
so long as the bodies of the saints lay hidden. The Lord opened our
eyes, and we saw the aids wherewith we have been often protected. We
used not to see them, but yet we had them. And so, as though the Lord
had said to us when trembling, “See what great martyrs I have given
you,” so we with opened eyes behold the glory of the Lord, which is
passed in the passion of the martyrs, and present in their working. We
have escaped, brethren, no slight lead of shame; we had patrons and knew
it not. We have found this one thing, in which we seem to excel those
who have gone before us. That knowledge of the martyrs, which they lost,
we have regained.

<span id="v.viii-p34"></span>12. The glorious relics are taken out of an
ignoble burying-place, the trophies are displayed under heaven. The tomb
is wet with blood. The marks of the bloody triumph are present, the
relics are found undisturbed in their order, the head separated from the
body. Old men now repeat that they once heard the names of these martyrs
and read their titles. The city which had carried off the martyrs of
other places had lost her own. Though this be the gift of God, yet I
cannot deny the favour which the Lord Jesus has granted to the time of
my priesthood, and since I myself am not worthy to be a martyr, I have
obtained these martyrs for you.

<span id="v.viii-p35"></span>13. Let these triumphant victims be brought
to the place where Christ is the victim. But He upon the altar, Who
suffered for all; they beneath the altar, who were redeemed by His
Passion. I had destined this place for myself, for it is fitting that
the priest should rest there where he has been wont to offer, but I
yield the right hand portion to the sacred victims; that place was due
to the martyrs. Let us, then, deposit the sacred relics, and lay them up
in a worthy resting-place, and let us celebrate the whole day with
faithful devotion.

<span id="v.viii-p36"></span>14. The people called out and demanded that
the deposition of the martyrs should be postponed until the Lord’s day,
but at length it was agreed that it should take place the following day.
On the following <span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="v.viii-Page_439"></span>day again I preached to the people on this
sort.

<span id="v.viii-p37"></span>15. Yesterday I handled the verse, “Day
unto day uttereth speech,” <span id="fr_3541"></span>[3542](#fn_3541) as
my ability enabled me; to-day holy Scripture seems to me not only to
have prophesied in former times, but even at the present. For when I
behold your holy celebration continued day and night, the oracles of the
prophet’s song have declared that these days, yesterday and to-day, are
the days of which it is most opportunely said: “Day unto day uttereth
speech;” and these the nights of which it is most fittingly said that
“Night unto night showeth knowledge.” For what else but the Word of God
have you during these two days uttered with inmost affection, and have
proved yourselves to have the knowledge of the faith.

<span id="v.viii-p39"></span>16. And they who usually do so have a
grudge against this solemnity of yours; and since because of their
envious disposition they cannot endure this solemnity, they hate the
cause of it, and go so far in their madness as to deny the merits of the
martyrs, whose deeds even the evil spirits confess. But this is not to
be wondered at since such is the faithlessness of unbelievers that the
confession of the devil is often more easy to endure. For the devil
said: “Jesus, Son of the living God, why art Thou come to torment us
before the time?” <span id="fr_3542"></span>[3543](#fn_3542) And the
Jews hearing this, even themselves denied Him to be the Son of God. And
at this time you have heard the devils crying out, and confessing to the
martyrs that they cannot bear their sufferings, and saying, “Why are ye
come to torment us so severely?” And the Arians say: “These are not
martyrs, and they cannot torment the devil, nor deliver any one,” while
the torments of the devils are proved by their own words, and the
benefits of the martyrs are declared by the restoring of the healed, and
the proof of those that are loosed.

<span id="v.viii-p41"></span>17. They deny that the blind man received
sight, but he denies not that he is healed. He says: I who could not see
now see. He says: I ceased to be blind, and proves it by the fact. They
deny the benefit, who are unable to deny the fact. <span
id="fr_3543"></span>[3544](#fn_3543) The man is known: so long as he was
well he was employed in the public service; his name is Severus, a
butcher by trade. He had given up his occupation when this hindrance
befel him. He calls for evidence those persons by whose kindness he was
supported; he adduces those as able to affirm the truth of his
visitation whom he had as witnesses of his blindness. He declares that
when he touched the hem of the robe of the martyrs, wherewith the sacred
relics were covered, his sight was restored.

<span id="v.viii-p43"></span>18. Is not this like that which we read in
the Gospel? For we praise the power of the same Author in each case, nor
does it be a work or a gift, since He confers a gift in His works, and
works in His gift. For that which He gave to others to be done, this His
Name effects in the work of others. So we read in the Gospel, that the
Jews, when they saw the gift of healing in the blind man, called for the
testimony of his parents, and asked: “How doth your son see?” when he
said: “Whereas I was blind, now I see.” <span
id="fr_3544"></span>[3545](#fn_3544) And in this case the man says, “I
was blind and now I see.” Ask others if you do not believe me; ask
strangers if you think his parents are in collusion with me. The
obstinacy of these men is more hateful than that of the Jews, for the
latter, when they doubted, at least asked his parents; the others
enquire in secret and deny in public, incredulous not as to the work,
but as to its Author.

<span id="v.viii-p45"></span>19. But I ask what it is that they do not
believe; is it whether any one can be aided by the martyrs? This is the
same thing as not to believe Christ, for He Himself said: “Ye shall do
greater things than these.” <span id="fr_3545"></span>[3546](#fn_3545)
How? By those martyrs whose merits have been long efficacious, whose
bodies were long since found? Here I ask, do they bear a grudge against
me, or against the holy martyrs? If against me, are any miracles wrought
by me? by my means or in my name? Why, then, grudge me what is not mine?
If it be against the martyrs (for if they bear no grudge against me, it
can only be against them), they show that the martyrs were of another
faith than that which they believe. For otherwise they would not have
any feeling against their works, did they not judge that they have not
the faith which was in them, that faith established by the tradition of
our forefathers, which the devils themselves cannot deny, but the Arians
do.

<span id="v.viii-p47"></span>21. We have to-day heard those on whom
hands were laid say, that no one can be <span id="page_440">p.
440</span> <span id="v.viii-Page_440"></span>saved unless he believe in
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit; that he is dead and buried who
denies the Holy Spirit, and believes not the almighty power of the
Trinity. The devil confesses this, but the Arians refuse to do so. The
devil says: Let him who denies the Godhead of the Holy Spirit be so
tormented as himself was tormented by the martyrs.

<span id="v.viii-p48"></span>22. I do not accept the devil’s testimony
but his confession. The devil spoke unwillingly, being compelled and
tormented. That which wickedness suppresses, torture extracts. The devil
yields to blows, and the Arians have not yet learned to yield. How great
have been their sufferings, and yet, like Pharaoh, they are hardened by
their calamities! The devil said, as we find it written: “I know Thee
Who Thou art, Thou art the Son of the living God.” <span
id="fr_3546"></span>[3547](#fn_3546) And the Jews said: “We know not
whence He is.” <span id="fr_3547"></span>[3548](#fn_3547) The evil
spirits said to-day, yesterday, and during the night, We know that ye
are martyrs. And the Arians say, We know not, we will not understand, we
will not believe. The evil spirits say to the martyrs, Ye are come to
destroy us. The Arians say, The torments of the devils are not real but
fictitious and made-up tales. I have heard of many things being made up,
but no one has ever been able to feign that he was an evil spirit. What
is the meaning of the torment we see in those on whom hands are laid?
What room is there here for fraud? what suspicion of pretence?

<span id="v.viii-p51"></span>23. But I will not make use of the voice of
evil spirits in support of the martyrs. Their holy sufferings are proved
by the benefits they confer. These have persons to judge of them,
namely, those who are cleansed, and witnesses, namely, those who are set
free. That voice is better than that of devils, which the soundness of
those utters who came infirm; better is the voice which blood sends
forth, for blood has a loud voice reaching from earth to heaven. You
have read how God said: “Thy brother’s blood crieth unto Me.” <span
id="fr_3548"></span>[3549](#fn_3548) This blood cries by its colour, the
blood cries by the voice of its effects, the blood cries by the triumph
of its passion. We have acceded to your request, and have postponed till
to-day the deposition of the relics which was to have taken place
yesterday.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3521"></span>[436:3522](2100373.htm#fr_3521) <span
id="v.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p4"></span> This was probably the church now known as
Sant Ambrogio, at Milan, where St. Ambrose and his brother, together
with SS. Gervasius and Protasius, now rest. Of course the church has
been rebuilt, though in ancient times. The church of SS. Nabor and Felix
is that now called San Francisco.

<span id="fn_3522"></span>[437:3523](2100373.htm#fr_3522) <span
id="v.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p6"></span> This laying on of hands was not
confirmation, but for the exorcising of those possessed of evil spirits,
the *energameni.* See *Dict. Chr. Ant. s.v.* “Exorcism.”

<span id="fn_3523"></span>[437:3524](2100373.htm#fr_3523) <span
id="v.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p7"></span> \[*Urna.*\] But it would seem, though all
<span class="sc"><span id="v.viii-p7.1"></span>ms.</span> authority
supports this reading, as though *una,* “a woman,” must be the true one.
For from the context it would seem plain that one of those brought in
was thrown prostrate, and there is no connection in which an “urn” could
be brought into the narrative. See Fleury, XVIII. 47.

<span id="fn_3524"></span>[437:3525](2100373.htm#fr_3524) <span
id="v.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p8"></span> Now SS. Vitalis and Agricola.

<span id="fn_3525"></span>[437:3526](2100373.htm#fr_3525) <span
id="v.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p9"></span> This statement is corroborated by St.
Augustine, *Conf.* IX. 7; *De Civ. Dei.* XXII. 8, 2; and *Sermo de
Diversis,* CCLXXVI. 5.

<span id="fn_3526"></span>[437:3527](2100373.htm#fr_3526) <span
id="v.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p12"></span> [Psa.
19.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="v.viii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3527"></span>[437:3528](2100373.htm#fr_3527) <span
id="v.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p14"></span> [Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="v.viii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3528"></span>[437:3529](2100373.htm#fr_3528) <span
id="v.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p15"></span> S. [Mark iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017)<span id="v.viii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3529"></span>[437:3530](2100373.htm#fr_3529) <span
id="v.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p16"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="v.viii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3530"></span>[437:3531](2100373.htm#fr_3530) <span
id="v.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p17"></span> S. [John
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="v.viii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3531"></span>[437:3532](2100373.htm#fr_3531) <span
id="v.viii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p18"></span> [Job xxxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004)<span id="v.viii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3532"></span>[437:3533](2100373.htm#fr_3532) <span
id="v.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p20"></span> [Psa.
19.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="v.viii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3533"></span>[437:3534](2100373.htm#fr_3533) <span
id="v.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p22"></span> [Ps.
113:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006)<span id="v.viii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3534"></span>[437:3535](2100373.htm#fr_3534) <span
id="v.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p23"></span> [Psa.
113.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span id="v.viii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3535"></span>[437:3536](2100373.htm#fr_3535) <span
id="v.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p24"></span> [Psa.
113.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008)<span id="v.viii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3536"></span>[438:3537](2100373.htm#fr_3536) <span
id="v.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p26"></span> [Psa.
19.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="v.viii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3537"></span>[438:3538](2100373.htm#fr_3537) <span
id="v.viii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p27"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span id="v.viii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3538"></span>[438:3539](2100373.htm#fr_3538) <span
id="v.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p30"></span> This would seem to refer to the
persecution stirred up by Justina, in order to gain one of the churches
for Arian use. The following sentence: “*Tales ego ambio defensores,*”
was inscribed by St. Charles Borromeo on a banner of SS. Gervasius and
Protasius, which he caused to be made and carried in procession through
Milan at the time of the great plague.

<span id="fn_3539"></span>[438:3540](2100373.htm#fr_3539) <span
id="v.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p31"></span> [Psa.
20.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008)<span id="v.viii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3540"></span>[438:3541](2100373.htm#fr_3540) <span
id="v.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p33"></span> [2 Kings
6.16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#016)<span id="v.viii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3541"></span>[439:3542](2100373.htm#fr_3541) <span
id="v.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p38"></span> [Psa.
19.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#002)<span id="v.viii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3542"></span>[439:3543](2100373.htm#fr_3542) <span
id="v.viii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p40"></span> S. [Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span id="v.viii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3543"></span>[439:3544](2100373.htm#fr_3543) <span
id="v.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p42"></span> The truth of this miracle, of which,
unless it took place, St. Ambrose could not have spoken in a public
address, is also supported by St. Augustine, who was at this time in
Milan, and if not himself on the spot, as he may well have been, would
at least know whether such an event had taken place. See St. Augustine,
*De Civ. Dei.* XXII. 8, and specially, *Sermo in natali Martyrum
Gervasii et Protasii.*

<span id="fn_3544"></span>[439:3545](2100373.htm#fr_3544) <span
id="v.viii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p44"></span> S. [John ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#025)<span id="v.viii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3545"></span>[439:3546](2100373.htm#fr_3545) <span
id="v.viii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p46"></span> S. [John xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="v.viii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3546"></span>[440:3547](2100373.htm#fr_3546) <span
id="v.viii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p49"></span> S. [Mark i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024)<span id="v.viii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3547"></span>[440:3548](2100373.htm#fr_3547) <span
id="v.viii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p50"></span> S. [John ix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#030)<span id="v.viii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3548"></span>[440:3549](2100373.htm#fr_3548) <span
id="v.viii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii-p52"></span> [Gen. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#010)<span id="v.viii-p52.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XL: To Theodosius as to the Burning of a Jewish
Synagogue.](2100374)
