[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100058)  [Next](2100060.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XLVII.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p1"></span>What is seemly should always shine
forth in our life. What passions, then, ought we to allow to come to a
head, and which should we restrain?

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p2"></span>234. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p2.1"></span>If</span> any one preserves an even tenor
in the whole of life, and method in all that he does, and sees there is
order and consistency in his words and moderation in his deeds, then
what is seemly stands forth conspicuous in his life and shines forth as
in some mirror.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p3"></span>235. There should be besides a
pleasant way of speaking, so that we may win the good-will of those who
hear us, and make ourselves agreeable to all our friends and
fellow-citizens, if possible. Let none show himself to be given to
flattery, nor to be desirous of flattery from any one. The one is a mark
of artfulness, the other of vanity.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p4"></span>236. Let no one ever look down on
what another, least of all a good man, thinks of him, for thus he learns
to give regard to the good. For to disregard the judgment of good men is
a sign of conceitedness or of weakness. One of these arises from pride,
the other from carelessness.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p5"></span>237. We must also guard against the
motions of our soul. The soul must always watch and look after itself,
so as to guard itself against itself. For there are motions in which
there is a kind of passion that breaks forth as it were in a sort of
rush. Wherefore in Greek it is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p5.1"></span>ὁρμή</span>, because it comes out
suddenly with some force. In these there lies no slight force of soul or
of nature. Its force, however, is twofold: on the one side it rests on
passion, on the other on reason, which checks passion, and makes it
obedient to itself, and leads it whither it will; and trains it by
careful teaching to know what ought to be done, and what ought to be
avoided, so as to make it submit to its kind tamer.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p6"></span>238. For we ought to be careful never
to do anything rashly or carelessly, or anything at all for which we
cannot give a reasonable ground. For though a reason for our action is
not given to every one, yet everybody looks into it. Nor, indeed, have
we anything whereby we can excuse ourselves. For though there is a sort
of natural force in every passion of ours, yet that same passion is
subject to reason by the law of nature itself, and is obedient to
it. <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md) Wherefore it is the duty of
a careful watchman so to keep a lookout, that passion may not outrun
reason nor utterly forsake it, lest by outstripping it confusion be
caused, and reason be shut out, and come to nothing by such desertion.
Disquiet destroys consistency. Withdrawal shows cowardice and implies
indolence. For when the mind is disquieted passion spreads wide and far,
and in a fierce outburst endures not the reins of reason and feels not
the management of its driver so as to be turned back. Wherefore as a
rule not only is the soul perturbed and reason lost, but one’s
countenance gets inflamed by anger or by lust. it grows pale with fear,
it contains not itself in pleasure, and cannot bear joy.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p8"></span>239. When this happens, then that
natural judgment and weight of character is cast aside, and that
consistency which alone in deed and thought can keep up its own
authority and what is seemly, can no longer be retained.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p9"></span>240. But fiercer passion springs from
excessive anger, <span id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) which the pain
of some wrong received kindles within us. The monitions of the psalm
which forms the opening of our subject instruct us on this point.
Beautifully, then, has it come about that, in writing on duties, we used
that declaration of our opening passage which also itself has to do with
the direction of duty.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p11"></span>241. But since (as was but right) we
there only touched upon the matter, as to how <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> <span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-Page_39"></span>each one ought to take
care not to be disturbed when wrong is done him, for fear that our
preliminary remarks should run to too great length, I think that I will
now discuss it a little more fully. For the occasion is opportune, as we
are speaking on the different parts of temperance, to see how anger may
be checked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_329"></span>[38:330](2100059.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p7"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 29, § 102.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[38:331](2100059.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xlvii-p10"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 38, § 137.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII. The argument for restraining anger is given
again. Then the three classes of those who receive wrongs are set forth;
to the most perfect of which the Apostle and David are said to have
attained. He takes the opportunity to state the difference between this
and the future life.](2100060.md)
