[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100078)  [Next](2100080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVI.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p1"></span>Due measure must be observed in
liberality, that it may not be expended on worthless persons, when it is
needed by worthier ones. However, alms are not to be given in too
sparing and hesitating a way. One ought rather to follow the example of
the blessed Joseph, whose prudence is commended at great length.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p2"></span>76. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p2.1"></span>It</span> is clear, then, <span
id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485.md) that there ought to be due measure in
our liberality, that our gifts may not become useless. Moderation must
be observed, especially by priests, for fear that they should give away
for the sake of ostentation, and not for justice’ sake. Never was the
greed of beggars greater than it is now. They come in full vigour, they
come with no reason but that they are on the tramp. They want to empty
the purses of the poor—to deprive them of their means of support. Not
content with a little, they ask for more. In the clothes that cover them
they seek a ground to urge their demands, and with lies about their
lives they ask for further sums of money. If any one were to trust their
tale too readily, he would quickly drain the fund which is meant to
serve for the sustenance of the poor. Let there be method in our giving,
so that the poor may not go away empty nor the subsistence of the needy
be done away and become the spoil of the dishonest. Let there be then
such due measure that kindness may never be put aside, and true need
never be left neglected.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p4"></span>77. Many pretend they have debts. Let
the truth be looked into. They bemoan the fact that they have been
stripped of everything by robbers. In such a case give credit only if
the misfortune is apparent, or the person is well known; and then
readily give help. To those rejected by the Church supplies must be
granted if they are in want of food. He, then, that observes method in
his giving is hard towards none, but is free towards all. We ought not
only to lend our ears to hear the voices of those who plead, but also
our eyes to look into their needs. Weakness calls more loudly to the
good dispenser than the voice of the poor. It cannot always be that the
cries of an importunate beggar will never extort more, but let us not
always give way to impudence. He must be seen who does not see thee. He
must be sought for who is ashamed to be seen. He also that is in prison
must come to thy thoughts; another seized with sickness must present
himself to thy mind, as he cannot reach thy ears.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p5"></span>78. The more people see thy zeal in
showing mercy, the more will they love thee. I know many priests who had
the more, the more they gave. For they who see a good dispenser give him
something to distribute in his round of duty, sure that the act of mercy
will reach the poor. If they see him giving away either in excess or too
sparingly, they contemn either of these; in the one case because he
wastes the fruits of another’s labours by unnecessary payments, on the
other hand because he hoards them in his money bags. As, then,
method <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486.md) must be observed in
liberality, so also at times it seems as though the spur must be
applied. Method, then, so that the kindness one shows may be able to be
shown day by day, and that we may not have to withdraw from a needful
case what we have freely spent on waste. A spur, because money is better
laid out in food for the poor than on a purse for the rich. We must take
care lest in our money chests we shut up the welfare of the needy, and
bury the life of the poor as it were in a sepulchre.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p7"></span>79. Joseph could have given away all
the wealth of Egypt, and have spent the royal treasures; but he would
not even seem to be wasteful of what was another’s. He preferred to sell
the corn rather than to give it to the hungry. For if he had given it to
a few there would have been none for most. He gave good proof of that
liberality whereby there was enough for all. He opened the storehouses
that all might buy their corn supply, lest if they received it for
nothing, they should give up cultivating the <span id="page_56">p.
56</span> <span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-Page_56"></span>ground. For he who has
the use of what is another’s often neglects his own.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p8"></span>80. First of all, then, he gathered up
their money, then their implements, last of all he acquired for the king
all their rights to the ground. <span id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487.md)
He did not wish to deprive all of them of their property, but to support
them in it. He also imposed a general tax, <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md) that they might hold their own in
safety. So pleasing was this to all from whom he had taken the land,
that they looked on it, not as the selling of their rights, but as the
recovery of their welfare. Thus they spoke: “Thou hast saved our lives,
let us find grace in the sight of our Lord.” <span
id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489.md) For they had lost nothing of their
own, but had received a new right. Nothing of what was useful to them
had failed, for they had now gained it in perpetuity.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p12"></span>81. O noble man! <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490.md) who sought not for the fleeting glory
of a needless bounty, but set up as his memorial the lasting benefits of
his foresight. He acted so that the people should help themselves by
their payments, and should not in their time of need seek help from
others. For it was surely better to give up part of their crops than to
lose the whole of their rights. He fixed the impost at a fifth of their
whole produce, and thus showed himself clear-sighted in making provision
for the future, and liberal in the tax he laid upon them. Never after
did Egypt suffer from such a famine.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p14"></span>82. How splendidly he inferred the
future. First, how acutely, when interpreting the royal dream, he stated
the truth. This was the king’s first dream. <span
id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491.md) Seven heifers came up out of the river
well-favoured and fat-fleshed, and they fed at the banks of the river.
And other bullocks ill-favoured and lean-fleshed came up out of the
river after the heifers, and fed near them on the very edge of the
river. And these thin and wretched bullocks seemed to devour those
others which were so fat and well-favoured. And this was the second
dream. <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492.md) Seven fat ears full and
good came up from the ground. And after them seven wretched ears,
blasted with the wind and withered, endeavoured to take their place. And
it seemed that the barren and thin ears devoured the rich and fruitful
ears.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p17"></span>83. This dream Joseph unfolded as
follows: that the seven heifers were seven years, and the seven ears
likewise were seven years,—interpreting the times by the produce of
cattle and crops. For both the calving of a heifer takes a year, and the
produce of a crop fills out a whole year. And they came up out of the
river just as days, years, and times pass by and flow along swiftly like
the rivers. He therefore states that the seven earlier years of a rich
land will be fertile and fruitful but the latter seven years will be
barren and unfruitful, whose barrenness will eat up the richness of the
former time. Wherefore he warns them to see that supplies of corn are
got together in the fruitful years that they may help out the needs of
the coming scarcity.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p18"></span>84. What shall we admire first? His
powers of mind, with which he descended to the very resting-place of
truth? Or his counsel, whereby he foresaw so great and lasting a need?
Or his watchfulness or justice? By his watchfulness, when so high an
office was given him, he gathered together such vast supplies; and
through his justice he treated all alike. And what am I to say of his
greatness of mind? For though sold by his brothers into slavery, <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493.md) he took no revenge for this wrong, but
put an end to their want. What of his gentleness, whereby by a pious
fraud he sought to gain the presence of his beloved brother whom, under
pretence of a well-planned theft, he declared to have stolen his
property, that he might hold him as a hostage of his love? <span
id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494.md)

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p21"></span>85. Whence it was deservedly said to
him by his father: “My son Joseph is enlarged, my son is enlarged, my
younger son, my beloved. My God hath helped thee and blessed thee with
the blessing of heaven above and the blessing of the earth, the earth
that hath all things, on account of the blessings of thy father and thy
mother. It hath prevailed over the blessings of the everlasting hills
and the desires of the eternal hills.” <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495.md) And in Deuteronomy: “Thou Who wast
seen in the bush, that Thou mayest come upon the head of Joseph, upon
his pate. Honoured among his brethren, his glory is as the firstling of
his bullocks; his horns are like the horns of unicorns. With his horn he
shall push the nations even to the ends of the earth. They are the ten
thousands of Ephraim and the thousands of Manasseh.” <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_485"></span>[55:486](2100079.htm#fr_485.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p3"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 15, § 55.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[55:487](2100079.htm#fr_486.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p6"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 15, § 54.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[56:488](2100079.htm#fr_487.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p9"></span> [Gen. xlvii.
14-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[56:489](2100079.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p10"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 21.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[56:490](2100079.htm#fr_489.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p11"></span> [Gen. xlvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[56:491](2100079.htm#fr_490.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p13"></span> Cic. *de Off.* II. 23, 83.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[56:492](2100079.htm#fr_491.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p15"></span> [Gen. xli.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p15.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[56:493](2100079.htm#fr_492.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p16"></span> [Gen. xli.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p16.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[56:494](2100079.htm#fr_493.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p19"></span> [Gen. xxxvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[56:495](2100079.htm#fr_494.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p20"></span> [Gen. xliv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p20.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[56:496](2100079.htm#fr_495.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p22"></span> [Gen.
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[56:497](2100079.htm#fr_496.md) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p23"></span> [Deut.
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xvi-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. What virtues ought to exist in him whom we consult.
How Joseph and Paul were equipped with them.](2100080.md)
