[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100232)  [Next](2100234) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi"></span> <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-Page_254"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p1"></span>St. Ambrose returns to the main
question, and shows that whenever Christ is said to have “been made” (or
“become”), this must be understood with reference to His Incarnation, or
to certain limitations. In this sense several passages of
Scripture—especially of St. Paul—are expounded. The eternal Priesthood
of Christ, prefigured in Melchizedek. Christ possesses not only
likeness, but oneness with the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p2"></span>76. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p2.1"></span>When</span>, therefore, Christ is said to
have been “made,” to have “become,” the phrase relates, not to the
substance of the Godhead, but often to the Incarnation—sometimes indeed
to a particular office; for if you understand it of His Godhead, then
God was made into an object of insult and derision inasmuch as it is
written: “But thou hast rejected thy Christ, <span
id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240) and brought Him to nought; thou
hast driven Him to wander;” and again: “And He was made the derision of
His neighbours.” <span id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241) Of His
neighbours, mark you—not of them of His household, not of them who clave
to Him, for “he who cleaveth to the Lord is one Spirit;” <span
id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) he who is neighbour doth not cleave
to Him. Again, “He was made a derision,” because the Lord’s Cross is to
Jews a stumbling-block, and to Greeks is foolishness: <span
id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243) for to them that are wise He is, by
that same Cross, *made* higher than the heavens, higher than angels, and
is made the Mediator of the better covenant, even as He was Mediator of
the former.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p7"></span>77. Mark how I repeat the phrase; so far
am I from seeking to avoid it. Yet take notice in what sense He is
“made.”

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p8"></span>78. In the first place, “having made
purification, He sitteth on the right hand of Majesty on high, being
made so much better than the angels.” <span
id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244) Now where purification is, there is
a victim; where there is a victim, there is also a body; where a body
is, there is oblation; where there is the office of oblation, there also
is sacrifice made with suffering.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p10"></span>79. In the next place, He is the
Mediator of a better covenant. But where there is testamentary
disposition, the death of the testator must first come to pass, <span
id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) as it is written a little further
on. Howbeit, the death is not the death of His eternal Godhead, but of
His weak human frame.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p12"></span>80. Furthermore, we are taught how He
is made “higher than the heavens.” “Unspotted,” saith the
Scripture, <span id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246) “separate from
sinners, and made higher than the heavens; not having daily need, as the
priests have need, to offer a victim first for his own sins, and then
for those of the people. For this He did by sacrificing Himself once and
for all.” None is said to be made higher, save he who has in some
respect been lower; Christ, then, is, by His sitting at the right hand
of the Father, made higher in regard of that wherein, being made lower
than the angels, He offered Himself to suffer.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p14"></span>81. Finally, the Apostle himself saith
to the Philippians, that “being made in the likeness of man, and found
in outward appearance as a man, He humbled Himself, being made obedient
even unto death.” <span id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247) Mark that,
in regard whereof He is “made,” He is made, the Apostle saith, in the
likeness of man, not in respect of Divine Sovereignty, and He was made
obedient unto death, so that He displayed the obedience proper to man,
and obtained the kingdom appertaining of right to Godhead.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p16"></span>82. How many passages need we cite
further in evidence that His “being made” must be understood with
reference to His Incarnation, or to some particular dispensation? Now
whatsoever is made, the same is also created, for “He spake and they
were made; He gave also the word, and they were created.” <span
id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248) “The Lord created me.” These words
are spoken with regard to His Manhood; and we have also shown, in our
First Book, that the word “created” appears to have reference to the
Incarnation.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p18"></span>83. Again, the Apostle himself, by
declaring that no worship is to be rendered to a created existence, has
shown that the Son has not been created, but begotten, of God. <span
id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) At the same time he shows in other
places what there was in Christ that was created, in order to make plain
in what sense he has read in Solomon’s book: “The Lord created Me.”

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p20"></span>84. Let us now review a whole
passage <span id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250) in order. “Seeing,
then, that the sons have parts of flesh and blood, He too likewise was
made to have part in the same, to the end that by death He might
overthrow him who had the power of death.” <span
id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) Who, then, is He Who would have us
to be partakers in His own flesh and blood? Surely the Son of God. How,
save by means of the flesh, was He made partaker with us, <span
id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252) or by <span id="page_255">p.
255</span> <span id="iv.iv.v.xi-Page_255"></span>what, save by bodily
death, brake He the chains of death? For Christ’s endurance of death was
made the death of Death. <span id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253) This
text, then, speaks of the Incarnation.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p25"></span>85. Let us see what follows: “For He
did not indeed \[straightway\] put on Him the nature of angels, but that
of Abraham’s seed. And thus was He able to be made like to His brethren
in all things throughout, that He might become a compassionate and
faithful Prince, a Priest unto God, to make propitiation for the sins of
the people; for in that He Himself suffered He is able also to help them
that are tempted. Wherefore, brethren most holy, ye who have each his
share in a heavenly calling, look upon the Apostle and High Priest of
our confession, Jesus, regard His faithfulness to His Creator, even as
Moses was in his house.” <span id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254)
These, then, are the Apostle’s words.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p27"></span>86. You see what it is in respect
whereof the writer calls Him created: “In so far as He took upon Him the
seed of Abraham;” plainly asserting the begetting of a body. How,
indeed, but in His body did He expiate the sins of the people? In what
did He suffer, save in His body—even as we said above: “Christ having
suffered in the flesh”? In what is He a priest, save in that which He
took to Himself from the priestly nation? <span
id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255)

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p29"></span>87. It is a priest’s duty to offer
something, and, according to the Law, to enter into the holy places by
means of blood; seeing, then, that God had rejected the blood of bulls
and goats, this High Priest was indeed bound to make passage and entry
into the holy of holies in heaven through His own blood, in order that
He might be the everlasting propitiation for our sins. Priest and
victim, then, are one; the priesthood and sacrifice are, however,
exercised under the conditions of humanity, for He was led as a lamb to
the slaughter, and He is a priest after the order of Melchizedek. <span
id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256)

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p31"></span>88. Let no man, therefore, when he
beholds an order of human establishment, contend that in it resides the
claim of Divinity; <span id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) for even
that Melchizedek, by whose office Abraham offered sacrifice, the Church
doth certainly not hold to be an angel (as some Jewish triflers do), but
a holy man and priest of God, who, *prefiguring* our Lord, <span
id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258) is described as “without father or
mother, without history of his descent, without beginning and without
end,” <span id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) in order to show
beforehand the coming into this world of the eternal Son of God, Who
likewise was incarnate and then brought forth without any father,
begotten as God without mother, and was without history of descent, for
it is written: “His generation who shall declare?” <span
id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260)

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p36"></span>89. This Melchizedek, then, have we
received as a priest of God made upon the model of Christ, but the one
we regard as the type, the other as the original. Now a type is a shadow
of the truth, and we have accepted the royalty of the one in the name of
a single city, but that of the other as shown in the reconciliation of
the whole world; for it is written: “God was in Christ, reconciling the
world to Himself;” <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) that is to
say, \[in Christ was\] eternal Godhead: or, if the Father is in the Son,
even as the Son is in the Father, then Their unity in both nature <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262) and operation is plainly not
denied.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p39"></span>90. But how, indeed, could our
adversaries justly deny this, even if they would, when the Scripture
saith: “But the Father, Who abideth in Me, even He doeth the works;” and
“The works that I do, He Himself worketh”? <span
id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) Not “He *also* doeth the works,”
but one should regard it as similarity rather than unity of work; in
saying, “The things that I do, He Himself doeth,” the Apostle has left
it clear that we ought to believe that the work of the Father and the
work of the Son is one.

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p41"></span>91. On the other hand, when He would
have similarity, not unity, of works, to be understood, He said: “He
that believeth in Me, the works which I do, shall he do also.” <span
id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264) Skilfully inserting here the word
“also,” He hath allowed us similarity, and yet hath not ascribed natural
unity. One, therefore, is the work of the Father and the work of the
Son, whether the Arians please so to think or not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[254:2241](2100233.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p3"></span> Or, as E.V.—“Thine Anointed” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p3.1"></span>χριστὸς</span> from
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p3.2"></span>χρίω</span>=anoint).

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[254:2242](2100233.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p4"></span> [Ps.
89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#040)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[254:2243](2100233.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p5"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[254:2244](2100233.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[254:2245](2100233.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p9"></span> [Heb.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[254:2246](2100233.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p11"></span> [Heb.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022), [Heb.
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[254:2247](2100233.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p13"></span> [Heb.
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[254:2248](2100233.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p15"></span> [Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[254:2249](2100233.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p17"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[254:2250](2100233.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p19"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[254:2251](2100233.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p21"></span> Viz.: the complete section <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p21.1"></span>Heb. ii. 14–iii. 2.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[254:2252](2100233.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p22"></span> [Heb. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[254:2253](2100233.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p23"></span> *Particeps noster*—our partner,
companion, sharing all our labours (and taking the lion’s share, too).
[Isa. liii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[255:2254](2100233.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p24"></span> [1 Cor.
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054),
[55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[255:2255](2100233.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p26"></span> <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p26.1"></span>Heb. ii. 16–iii. 2.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[255:2256](2100233.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p28"></span> “Priestly nation.”—[Exod.
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005), [1 Pet.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p28.1"></span>. We must not understand especial reference
to the priestly tribe of Levi only, but to the whole people of Israel.
Cf. [Heb. vii](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p28.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[255:2257](2100233.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p30"></span> [Ps. cx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[255:2258](2100233.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p32"></span> [Gen. xiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p32.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[255:2259](2100233.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p33"></span> Orig. “*typum gerens Domini*”—“bearing
the stamp of our Lord,” marked with His mark, as a coin is stamped with
the image and superscription of the king or other authority who issues
it.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[255:2260](2100233.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p34"></span> [Heb. vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p34.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[255:2261](2100233.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p35"></span> [Isa. liii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[255:2262](2100233.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p37"></span> [2 Cor. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[255:2263](2100233.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p38"></span> Lat. *substantia.*

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[255:2264](2100233.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p40"></span> S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[255:2265](2100233.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="iv.iv.v.xi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p42"></span> S. [John xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="iv.iv.v.xi-p42.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. The kingdom of the Father and of the Son is one and
undivided, so likewise is the Godhead of each.](2100234)
