[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100147)  [Next](2100149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p1"></span>Being about to prove that the will,
the calling, and the commandment of the Trinity is one, St. Ambrose
shows that the Spirit called the Church exactly as the Father and the
Son did, and proves this by the selection of SS. Paul and Barnabas, and
especially by the mission of St. Peter to Cornelius. And by the way he
points out how in the Apostle’s vision the calling of the Gentiles was
shadowed forth, who having been before like wild beasts, now by the
operation of the Spirit lay aside that wildness. Then having quoted
other passages in support of this view, he shows that in the case of
Jeremiah cast into a pit by Jews, and rescued by Abdemelech, is a type
of the slighting of the Holy Spirit by the Jews, and of His being
honoured by the Gentiles.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p2"></span>101. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p2.1"></span>And</span> not only is the operation of
the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit everywhere one but also there is one
and the same will, calling, and giving of commands, which one may see in
the great and saving mystery of the Church. For as the Father called the
Gentiles to the Church, saying: “I will call her My people which was not
My people, and her beloved who was not beloved;” <span
id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) and elsewhere: “My house shall be
called a house of prayer for all nations,” <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) so, too, the Lord Jesus said that
Paul was chosen by Him to call forth and gather together the Church, as
you find it said by the Lord Jesus to Ananias: “Go, for he is a chosen
vessel unto Me to bear My name before all nations.” <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p6"></span>102. As, then, God the Father called
the Church, so, too, Christ called it, and so, too, the Spirit called
it, saying: “Separate Me Paul and Barnabas for the work to which I have
called them.” “So,” it is added, “having fasted and prayed, they laid
hands on them and sent them forth. And they, being sent forth by the
Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia.” <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) So Paul received the apostle<span
id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-Page_128"></span>ship
by the will not only of Christ, but also of the Holy Spirit, and
hastened to gather together the Gentiles.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p8"></span>103. And not only Paul, but also, as
we read in the Acts of the Apostles, Peter. For when he had seen in his
prayer heaven opened and a certain vessel tied at the four corners, as
it were a sheet in which were all kinds of four-footed beasts and wild
beasts and fowls of the air, “a voice came to him saying, Arise, Peter,
kill and eat. And Peter said, Be it far from me, Lord, I have never
eaten anything common or unclean. And again a voice came to him, saying,
What God hath cleansed call not thou common. And this was done three
times, and the vessel was received back into heaven.” <span
id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) And so when Peter was silently
thinking over this with himself, and the servants of Cornelius appointed
by the Angel had come to him, the Spirit said to him, “Lo, men are
seeking thee, rise therefore, and go down and go with them; doubt not,
for I have sent thee.” <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p11"></span>104. How clearly did the Holy Spirit
express His own power! First of all in that He inspired him who was
praying, and was present to him who was entreating; then when Peter,
being called, answered, “Lord,” and so was found worthy of a second
message, because he acknowledged the Lord. But the Scripture declares
Who that Lord was, for He Whom he had answered spoke to him when he
answered. And the following words show the Spirit clearly revealed, for
He Who formed the mystery made known the mystery.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p12"></span>105. Notice, also, that the
appearance of the mystery three times repeated expressed the operation
of the Trinity. And so in the mysteries <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) the threefold question is put, and
the threefold answer made, and no one can be cleansed but by a threefold
confession. For which reason, also, Peter in the Gospel is asked three
times whether he loves the Lord, that by the threefold answer the bonds
of the guilt he had contracted by denying the Lord might be loosed.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p14"></span>106. Then, again, because the Angel
is sent to Cornelius, the Holy Spirit speaks to Peter: “For the eyes of
the Lord are over the faithful of the earth.” <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159) Nor is it without a purpose that
when He had said before, “What God hath cleansed call not thou
common,” <span id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) the Holy Spirit came
upon the Gentiles to purify them, when it is manifest that the operation
of the Spirit is a divine operation. But Peter, when sent by the Spirit,
did not wait for the command of God the Father, but acknowledged that
that message was from the Spirit Himself, and the grace that of the
Spirit Himself, when he said: “If, then, God has granted them the same
grace as to us, who was I that I should resist God?”

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p17"></span>107. It is, then, the Holy Spirit Who
has delivered us from that Gentile impurity. For in those kinds of
four-footed creatures and wild beasts and birds there was a figure of
the condition of man, which appears clothed with the bestial ferocity of
wild beasts unless it grows gentle by the sanctification of the Spirit.
Excellent, then, is that grace which changes the rage of beasts into the
simplicity of the Spirit: “For we also were aforetime foolish,
unbelieving, erring, serving divers lusts and pleasures. But now by the
renewing of the Spirit we begin to be heirs of Christ, and joint-heirs
with the Angels.” <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p19"></span>108. Therefore the holy prophet
David, seeing in the Spirit that we should from wild beasts become like
the dwellers in heaven, says, “Rebuke the wild beasts of the
wood,” <span id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162) evidently signifying,
not the wood disturbed by the running of wild beasts, and shaken with
the roaring of animals, but that wood of which it is written: “We found
it in the fields of the wood.” <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) In which, as the prophet said: “The
righteous shall flourish as the palm-tree, and shall be multiplied as
the cedar which is in Libanus.” <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) That wood which, shaken in the tops
of the trees spoken of in prophecy, shed forth the nourishment of the
heavenly Word. That wood into which Paul entered indeed as a ravening
wolf, but went forth as a shepherd, for “their sound is gone out into
all the earth.” <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p24"></span>109. We then were wild beasts, and
therefore the Lord said: “Beware of false prophets, which come in
sheep’s clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.” <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166) But now, through the Holy Spirit,
the rage of lions, the spots of leopards, the craft of foxes, the
rapacity of wolves, have passed away from our feelings; great, then, is
the grace which has changed earth to heaven, that the conversation of
us, who once were wandering as wild beasts in the woods, might be in
heaven. <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167)

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p27"></span><span id="page_129">p. 129</span>
<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-Page_129"></span>110. And not only in this place,
but also elsewhere in the same book, the Apostle Peter declared that the
Church was built by the Holy Spirit. For you read that he said: “God,
Which knoweth the hearts of men, bare witness, giving them the Holy
Spirit, even as also to us; and He made no distinction between us and
them, purifying their hearts by faith.” <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) In which is to be considered, that
as Christ is the Cornerstone, Who joined together both peoples into one,
so, too, the Holy Spirit made no distinction between the hearts of each
people, but united them.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p29"></span>111. Do not, then, like a Jew,
despise the Son, Whom the prophets foretold; for you would despise also
the Holy Spirit, you would despise Isaiah, you would despise Jeremiah,
whom he who was chosen of the Lord raised with rags and cords from the
pit of that Jewish abode. <span id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) For
the people of the Jews, despising the word of prophecy, had cast him
into the pit. Nor was there found any one of the Jews to draw the
prophet out, but one Ethiopian Abdemelech, as the Scripture testifies.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p31"></span>112. In which account is a very
beautiful figure, that is to say, that we, sinners of the Gentiles,
black beforehand through our transgressions, and aforetime fruitless,
raised from the depth the word of prophecy which the Jews had thrust
down, as it were, into the mire of their mind and carnality. And
therefore it is written: “Ethiopia shall stretch out her hand unto
God.” <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) In which is signified
the appearance of holy Church, who says in the Song of Songs: “I am
black and comely, O daughters of Jerusalem;” <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) black through sin, comely through
grace; black by natural condition, comely through redemption, or
certainly, black with the dust of her labours. So she is black while
fighting, is comely when she is crowned with the ornaments of victory.

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p34"></span>113. And fittingly is the prophet
raised by cords, for the faithful writer said: “The lines are fallen
unto me in pleasant places.” <span id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172)
And fittingly with rags; for the Lord Himself, when those who had been
first invited to the marriage made excuse, sent to the partings of the
highways, that as many as were found, both bad and good, should be
invited to the marriage. With these rags, then, He lifted the word of
prophecy from the mire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[127:1153](2100148.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p3"></span> [Hos. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[127:1154](2100148.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p4"></span> [Isa. lvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[127:1155](2100148.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p5"></span> [Acts ix.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[127:1156](2100148.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p7"></span> [Acts xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p7.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[128:1157](2100148.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p9"></span> [Acts x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p9.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[128:1158](2100148.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p10"></span> [Acts
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[128:1159](2100148.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p13"></span> The “mysteries” are the sacrament of
baptism, and the “three-fold question” those which preceded baptism,
viz.: Dost thou believe in God the Father Almighty? Dost thou believe in
our Lord Jesus Christ, and in His cross? and Dost thou believe in the
Holy Spirit? with the answer, “I believe,” to each, as mentioned by the
author of *De Sacramentis,* II. 7 (written probably in the 5th or 6th
century).

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[128:1160](2100148.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p15"></span> [Psa.
101.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[128:1161](2100148.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p16"></span> [Acts x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[128:1162](2100148.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p18"></span> [Tit. iii.
3-7](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[128:1163](2100148.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p20"></span> [Psa.
68.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[128:1164](2100148.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p21"></span> [Psa.
132.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[128:1165](2100148.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p22"></span> [Psa.
92.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[128:1166](2100148.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p23"></span> [Psa.
19.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[128:1167](2100148.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p25"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[128:1168](2100148.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p26"></span> [Phil. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[129:1169](2100148.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p28"></span> [Acts
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[129:1170](2100148.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p30"></span> [Jer. xxxviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[129:1171](2100148.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p32"></span> [Psa.
68.31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[129:1172](2100148.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p33"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[129:1173](2100148.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p35"></span> [Psa.
16.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iii.xi-p35.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. We shall follow the example of Abdemelech, if we
believe that the Son and Holy Spirit know all things. This knowledge is
attributed in Scripture to the Spirit, and also to the Son. The Son is
glorified by the Spirit, as also the Spirit by the Son. Also, inasmuch
as we read that the Father, the Son, and the Spirit say and reveal the
same things, we must acknowledge in Them a oneness of nature and
knowledge. Lastly, that the Spirit searcheth the deep things of God is
not a mark of ignorance, since the Father and the Son are likewise said
to search, and Paul, although chosen by Christ, yet was taught by the
Spirit.](2100149)
