[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100007)  [Next](2100009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

## <span id="iii.vi-p0.1"></span>VI. Writings of St. Ambrose.

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span>The extant writings of St. Ambrose may be
divided under six heads. I. Dogmatic; II. Exegetic; III. Moral; IV.
Sermons; V. Letters; VI. A few Hymns.

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p2.1"></span>I. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p2.2"></span>Dogmatic and Controversial Works</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span>1. *De Fide.* The chief of these are the
Five Books on the Faith, of which the two first were written in
compliance with a request of the Emperor Gratian, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 378. Books III.–V. were written in
379 or 380, and seem to have been worked up from addresses delivered to
the people \[V. prol. 9, 11; III. 143; IV. 119\]. This treatise
vindicates the Divinity of Christ from the attacks of the Arians, and
has always enjoyed the highest reputation, being quoted and referred to
again and again.

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span>2. *De Spiritu Sancto.* The three books on
the Holy Spirit may be considered as a continuation of the above
treatise, and were also addressed to Gratian in compliance with his
request, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381.
In this treatise St. Ambrose shows that the Holy Spirit is God, and of
one nature and substance with the Father and the Son. He makes use of
the Greek writers, SS. Didymus, Basil the Great, and Athanasius, and was
on this ground attacked by St. Jerome. See Rufinus, *Apol. adv. Hieron.*
II. 23–25.

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span>3. *De Incarnationis Dominicæ Sacramento.*
The book on the Mystery of the Lord’s Incarnation owed its origin to a
challenge to dispute publicly given to St. Ambrose by two Arian
chamberlains of Gratian. On the day appointed they were, as Paulinus
relates in his life of St. Ambrose, thrown out of the chariot which was
conveying them and killed. On the next day, that the people might not be
disappointed, this discourse was delivered, but the reference made to
the absence of the challengers hardly suits the story of Paulinus. The
treatise is a very valuable argument in defence of our Lord’s Divinity
and Eternity, and that He is perfect God and perfect Man. In rewriting
the address the Bishop added a refutation of the argument that the
Begotten and the Unbegotten could <span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>
<span id="iii.vi-Page_xviii"></span>not be of one nature and substance.
The treatise may be considered as a supplement to that concerning the
Faith.

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span>4. *De Mysteriis.* A valuable treatise on
the Mysteries, under which title St. Ambrose includes Baptism, with its
complement, Confirmation, and the Eucharist. It is somewhat similar to
the *Catecheses Mystagogicæ* of St. Cyril of Jerusalem, expounding the
doctrine and ceremonies of these sacraments. On doctrinal grounds the
authenticity of the work has been impugned by some modern writers, but
there is no sufficient foundation for their arguments, as the teaching
may be paralleled in many other passages of St. Ambrose. The date is not
certain, but may be about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> 387.

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>5. *Libri duo de pœnitentia.* These books on
Penitence were written about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 384, against the Novatians. In the
first book the writer proves that the power of forgiving sins was left
by Christ to His Church. In the second book, insisting on the necessity
of repentance and confession, he also refutes the Novatian
interpretations of [Heb. 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004.md), [Matt.
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#031.md)<span id="iii.vi-p7.2"></span>.
This treatise has also undeservedly been questioned on doctrinal grounds
by some moderns.

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span>These treatises are all translated in this
volume.

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p9.1"></span>II. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p9.2"></span>Exegetical Works</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span>St. Ambrose was in the habit of explaining
various books of holy Scripture in courses of lectures, which he
subsequently worked up, often at the request of friends, into treatises
in the shape in which they have come down to us. Of the class we have:

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span>1. *Hexaëmeron.* This treatise, expounding
the literal and moral sense of the work of the six days of creation
\[[Gen. i. 1-26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)<span
id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>\], consists of nine addresses to the people of
Milan, delivered in the last week of Lent, probably <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p11.2"></span>a.d.</span> 389, and is now
divided into six books. The writer has studied Origen, but followed
rather the teaching of St. Hippolytus and Basil the Great, though he
expresses himself often quite in a different sense.

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span>2. *De Paradiso.* This is the earliest or
one of the earliest of the extant writings of St. Ambrose, though the
exact date is uncertain. In it he discusses what and where Paradise was,
and the question of the life of our first parents there, the temptation,
fall and its results, and answers certain cavils of the Gnostics and
Manichees. He also enters into an allegorical exposition comparing
Paradise with the human soul.

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span>3. *De Cain et Abel.* The treatise is now
divided into two books, but the division is too inartistic to have been
made by the writer. As to the date, it was later than the last treatise,
but probably not many months. The interpretations are very mystical, and
touch upon moral and dogmatic questions.

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>4. *De Noe et Arca.* This treatise has
reached us in a mutilated condition. It was written probably before the
*De Officiis* and *De Abraham,* but after the works on Paradise and Cain
and Abel, though the exact date cannot be determined. The exposition is
literal and allegorical.

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span>5. *De Patriarchis.* Seven books preached
and written at various dates about 387 or 388. The same kind of
interpretation is followed in these as in the former treatises.

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span>6. *De fuga sæculi.* Written probably about
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p16.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389–390. An
instructive treatise setting forth the desirability of avoiding the
dangers of the world, and for those who must live in the world, showing
how to pass through them most safely.

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span>7. *De Elia et jejunio.* A treatise
composed from addresses delivered during Lent, certainly after <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span> 386, possibly 389.

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span>8. *De Tobia.* A work quoted by St.
Augustine (*C. Jul. Pelag.* I. 3, 10), consisting of sermons on the
story of Tobias, and chiefly directed against the practice of usury.

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span>9. *De Nabuthe Jezraelita.* One or two
sermons against avarice, probably written about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span>a.d.</span> 395.

<span id="iii.vi-p20"></span>10. *Libri* iv. *de interpellatione Job et
David.* The first and third books have Job, the second and fourth David,
for their subject, and formed a course of sermons the date of which is
uncertain.

<span id="iii.vi-p21"></span>11. *Apologia prophetæ David ad Theodosium
Augustum.* A number of addresses delivered, it would seem, about <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p21.1"></span>a.d.</span> 384, quoted also
by St. Augustine.

<span id="iii.vi-p22"></span>12. *Enarrationes in* xii. *Psalmos
Davidicos.* Commentaries on [Ps. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#000.md),
[Ps. 35:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.vi-p22.1"></span>–40, 43, 45, 47, 48, 61 (according to St.
Ambrose’s numbering). These seem to have been partly preached, partly
dictated at various dates, and much in them is borrowed from St. Basil.

<span id="iii.vi-p23"></span>13. *Expositio Psalmi* cxviii. This
treatise is one of the most carefully worked out of <span
id="page_xix">p. xix</span> <span id="iii.vi-Page_xix"></span>all the
writings of St. Ambrose and consists of twenty-two addresses to the
faithful, each address comprising one division of the Psalm. From
various allusions, it would seem that the completed work dates from
about <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p23.1"></span>a.d.</span> 388.

<span id="iii.vi-p24"></span>14. *Expositio Evangelii secundum Lucam.*
The ten books of this commentary consist likewise of sermons in which
St. Ambrose explained the Gospel during a period of one or two years, in
386 and 387.

<span id="iii.vi-p25"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p25.1"></span>III. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p25.2"></span>Ethical Writings</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p26"></span>Among the ethical or moral writings of St.
Ambrose, the first place is deservedly assigned to:

<span id="iii.vi-p27"></span>1. *De Officiis Ministrorum.* In three
books, which are translated in this series.

<span id="iii.vi-p28"></span>2. *De Virginibus.* Three books concerning
Virgins, addressed to his sister Marcellina in the year 377, probably,
like most of the treatises of St. Ambrose, revised from addresses, the
first of which was delivered on the festival of St. Agnes, January 21.
This would seem to have been perhaps the very earliest of the writings
of St. Ambrose, judging from the opening chapter. The treatise is
referred to by St. Jerome, St. Augustine, Cassian, and others.

<span id="iii.vi-p29"></span>3. *De Viduis.* This shorter work,
concerning Widows, was probably written not very long after the last
mentioned treatise.

<span id="iii.vi-p30"></span>4. *De Virginitate.* A treatise on
Virginity, the date of which cannot certainly be fixed, but the writing
*De Viduis* is referred to in chapter 9.

<span id="iii.vi-p31"></span>5. *De Institutione Virginis.* A treatise
on the training and discipline of a Virgin, addressed to Eusebius,
either bishop or a noble of Bologna, after St. Ambrose had admitted his
niece to the rank of Virgins, probably about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p31.1"></span>a.d.</span> 391 or 392.

<span id="iii.vi-p32"></span>6. *Exhortatio Virginitatis.* A
commendation of Virginity preached on the occasion of the consecration
of a church at Florence by St. Ambrose, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p32.1"></span>a.d.</span> 393 or 394.

<span id="iii.vi-p33"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p33.1"></span>IV. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p33.2"></span>Sermons and Addresses</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p34"></span>1. *Contra Auxentium.* A sermon against
Auxentius, concerning giving up the basilicas to the Arians, usually
inserted between the twenty-first and twenty-second of the letters of
St. Ambrose.

<span id="iii.vi-p35"></span>2. *De Excessu fratris Satyri.* The two
addresses on the occasion of the death of St. Ambrose’s brother Satyrus,
translated in this volume.

<span id="iii.vi-p36"></span>3. *De obitu Valentiniani Consolatio.* The
Emperor Valentinian having been murdered by Arbogastes, Count of Vienne,
his body was brought to Milan, and remained two months unburied. At last
Theodosius sent the necessary rescript, and at the funeral solemnities
St. Ambrose delivered the address entitled the “Consolation.”

<span id="iii.vi-p37"></span>4. *De obitu Theodosii oratio.* A discourse
delivered forty days after the death of the Emperor Theodosius before
the Emperor Honorius at Milan.

<span id="iii.vi-p38"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p38.1"></span>V. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p38.2"></span>The Letters of St. Ambrose</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p39"></span>The Benedictine Editors of St. Ambrose have
divided his Epistles into two classes: the first comprising those to
which they thought it possible to assign dates; the second those which
afford no data for a conclusion. Probably in many cases the exact year
is not so certain as the editors have made it appear, but they seem
arranged in a fairly probable consecutive order.

<span id="iii.vi-p40"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p40.1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p40.2"></span>The Letters</span></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p41"></span>1. To the Emperor Gratian, in reply to his
request for a treatise on the Faith. Written <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p41.1"></span>a.d.</span> 379, before August, as Gratian came
to Milan in that month.

<span id="iii.vi-p42"></span>2. To Constantius, a bishop, on episcopal
duties, and commending to him the care of the vacant see of Forum
Cornelii, or Imola. Probably written about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p42.1"></span>a.d.</span> 379.

<span id="iii.vi-p43"></span>3, 4. To Cornelius, Bishop of Comum, the
first a friendly letter, the second containing also an invitation to the
consecration of a church by Bassianus, Bishop of Laus Pompeia, now Lodi
Vecchio, near Milan. Written probably after <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p43.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381.

<span id="iii.vi-p44"></span>5, 6. To Syagrius, Bishop of Verona. On a
charge falsely brought against the Virgin Indicia. They may have been
written <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p44.1"></span>a.d.</span> 380.

<span id="iii.vi-p45"></span><span id="page_xx">p. xx</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_xx"></span>7, 8. To Justus, perhaps Bishop of Lyons. On
holy Scripture. If the conjecture that Justus was the Bishop of Lyons is
correct, written about 380 or 381.

<span id="iii.vi-p46"></span>9–12. Letters concerning the Council of
Aquileia, held <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p46.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381, to the bishops of the
provinces of Gaul, to the Emperor Gratian and his colleagues. Two men,
Palladius and Secundianus, held Arian opinions, and the former appears
to have asked Gratian to convoke a General Council, pleading that he was
unjustly condemned. St. Ambrose pointed out to the Emperor that such a
question as the orthodoxy of two persons could be settled by a local
council in Italy; and as a result, by the Emperor’s mandate, a council
of Italian bishops met at Aquileia, other bishops having also permission
to attend. Palladius and Secundianus were condemned, and these letters
have reference to the proceedings at the council. They were probably
written by St. Ambrose in the name of the council, <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p46.2"></span>a.d.</span> 381.

<span id="iii.vi-p47"></span>13, 14. Two letters addressed to
Theodosius, the former relating the decisions of a council, probably
held at Milan, on the Meletian schism at Antioch, and the latter further
expressing the desire of the bishops for a council on this subject, and
also on the opinions of Apollinaris. Written <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p47.1"></span>a.d.</span> 381 or 382.

<span id="iii.vi-p48"></span>15. To the Bishops of Macedonia, in reply
to their notification of the death of Acholius, Bishop of Thessalonica,
who baptized Theodosius, and had met St. Ambrose at a council in Rome.
Written <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p48.1"></span>a.d.</span> 383.

<span id="iii.vi-p49"></span>16. To Anicius, on his election to succeed
Acholius, whose labours and life are commended by St. Ambrose. Written
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p49.1"></span>a.d.</span> 383.

<span id="iii.vi-p50"></span>17, 18. On the occasion of the attempt of
Symmachus and the heathen senators to procure the restitution of the
image and Altar of Victory in the Roman Senate-house, frustrated by St.
Ambrose, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p50.1"></span>a.d.</span>
384.

<span id="iii.vi-p51"></span>19. To Vigilius, Bishop of Trent,
subsequently martyred, written probably about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p51.1"></span>a.d.</span> 385.

<span id="iii.vi-p52"></span>20. To his sister, Marcellina, giving an
account of the frustrated attempts of the Arian and imperial party to
gain possession of a basilica at Milan, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p52.1"></span>a.d.</span> 385,

<span id="iii.vi-p53"></span>21. To the Emperor Valentinian II.,
declining the challenge to dispute with the Arian Auxentius before lay
judges. <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p53.1"></span>a.d.</span> 386.

<span id="iii.vi-p54"></span>22. To his sister Marcellina, giving an
account of the finding of the bodies of SS. Gervasius and Protasius, and
of the consequent miracles. Written <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p54.1"></span>a.d.</span> 386.

<span id="iii.vi-p55"></span>23. To the bishops of the province of
Æmilia, on the proper date for the observance of Easter, in 387. Written
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p55.1"></span>a.d.</span> 386.

<span id="iii.vi-p56"></span>24. To Valentinian II., with an account of
St. Ambrose’s second mission to Maximus on his behalf. Written probably
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p56.1"></span>a.d.</span> 387.

<span id="iii.vi-p57"></span>25, 26. Inscribed the former to Studius,
the second to Irenæus, but from internal evidence these appear to be the
same person. It deals with the question, how far a judge being a
Christian may lawfully sentence any one to death. Written probably about
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p57.1"></span>a.d.</span> 388.

<span id="iii.vi-p58"></span>27–33. Addressed to Irenæus, on various
questions. Written about <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p58.1"></span>a.d.</span> 387.

<span id="iii.vi-p59"></span>34–36. To Orontianus, a cleric, on the soul
and other questions. Written after 386.

<span id="iii.vi-p60"></span>37, 38. To Simplicianus, who became the
successor of St. Ambrose in the see of Milan, setting forth that
holiness is perfect freedom.

<span id="iii.vi-p61"></span>39. To Faustinus, on the occasion of the
death of a sister. Written probably after <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p61.1"></span>a.d.</span> 387.

<span id="iii.vi-p62"></span>40. To Theodosius. The Jewish synagogue at
Callinicum in Mesopotamia having been destroyed by the Christians, and a
meeting-house of the Valentinian heretics also burnt by the Catholics,
Theodosius ordered that the bishop should rebuild the synagogue at his
own expense, and the monks be punished. St. Ambrose remonstrates with
the Emperor, and it would seem, from the following letter to his sister,
at first unsuccessfully.

<span id="iii.vi-p63"></span>41. To his sister Marcellina, relating the
circumstances alluded to above, and telling her of his sermon before the
Emperor, and of his subsequent refusal to celebrate the Eucharist, until
the Emperor had promised to rescind the order. The date of the two
letters is <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p63.1"></span>a.d.</span>
388.

<span id="iii.vi-p64"></span>42. Reply of St. Ambrose and a synod at
Milan to the notification of Pope Siricius announcing the sentence of
excommunication passed upon Jovinian and his followers.

<span id="iii.vi-p65"></span>43, 44. To Horontianus, in reply to his
inquiries on some points connected with the Creation.

<span id="iii.vi-p66"></span><span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_xxi"></span>45. To Sabinus, Bishop of Placentia, in
answer to questions concerning Paradise.

<span id="iii.vi-p67"></span>46. To the same, on the subject of an
Apollinarian heretic.

<span id="iii.vi-p68"></span>47–49. To the same, with books and on
private matters.

<span id="iii.vi-p69"></span>50. To Chromatius, probably Bishop of
Aquileia, explaining how evil men may be used to utter true prophecies.

<span id="iii.vi-p70"></span>51. To Theodosius, after the massacre at
Thessalonica. Written <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p70.1"></span>a.d.</span> 390.

<span id="iii.vi-p71"></span>52. A private letter to Titianus.

<span id="iii.vi-p72"></span>53. To Theodosius, to express the sorrow of
St. Ambrose at the death of Valentinian II., slain by Arbogastes.

<span id="iii.vi-p73"></span>54, 55. To Eusebius, not, it would seem,
the Bishop of Bologna who was present at the Council of Aquileia, but
rather a lay friend to whom St. Ambrose wrote his treatise on the
training of a virgin. Probably written <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p73.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392 or 393.

<span id="iii.vi-p74"></span>56. To Theophilus. The troubles of the
church of Antioch through the Meletian schism might have terminated on
the death of Paulinus, had he not on his deathbed consecrated Evagrius
as his successor in violation of the canons. Theodosius, being pressed
by the Western bishops, now summoned a council at Capua, commanding
Flavian to attend, which command he however disobeyed. The council
referred the matter to Theophilus of Alexandria and the bishops of
Egypt. But Flavian, as Theophilus had informed St. Ambrose, refused to
submit to their decision. This is the reply of St. Ambrose advising
Theophilus to summon Flavian once more, and communicate the result to
Pope Siricius. The letter must have been written quite at the end of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p74.1"></span>a.d.</span> 391, or the
beginning of 392.

<span id="iii.vi-p75"></span>57. To Eugenius the usurper, to avoid whom
St. Ambrose had left Milan, and to whose letters he had sent no reply.
Written <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p75.1"></span>a.d.</span> 393.

<span id="iii.vi-p76"></span>58. To Sabinus, Bishop, on the resolution
of Paulinus and Therasia to forsake the world. Written probably <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p76.1"></span>a.d.</span> 393.

<span id="iii.vi-p77"></span>59. To Severus, Bishop probably of Naples,
telling him of James, a Persian priest, who had resolved to retire from
the world into Campania, and contrasting this with his own troubles,
owing to the invasion of Eugenius, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p77.1"></span>a.d.</span> 393 or 394.

<span id="iii.vi-p78"></span>60. To Paternus, against a proposed
incestuous marriage.

<span id="iii.vi-p79"></span>61. To Theodosius, after his victory over
Eugenius. Written <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p79.1"></span>a.d.</span> 394.

<span id="iii.vi-p80"></span>62. To the same, urging him to be merciful
to the followers of Eugenius. Written in the same year.

<span id="iii.vi-p81"></span>63. To the Church at Vercellæ.

<span id="iii.vi-p82"></span>The second division of the letters, being
those which cannot be dated, begins here in the Benediction Edition.

<span id="iii.vi-p83"></span>64. To Irenæus, on the Manna.

<span id="iii.vi-p84"></span>65. To Simplicianus, on [Exodus xxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.vi-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.vi-p85"></span>66. To Romulus, on Aaron’s making the calf
of the golden earrings.

<span id="iii.vi-p86"></span>67. To Simplicianus, showing how Moses
yielded to Aaron in matters relating to his priestly character.

<span id="iii.vi-p87"></span>68. To Romulus. Explanation of the text
[Deut. xxviii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023.md)<span
id="iii.vi-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.vi-p88"></span>69. To Irenæus, answering a question as to
the prohibition under severe penalties in the Mosaic law, of disguising
the sex by dress.

<span id="iii.vi-p89"></span>70, 71. To Horontianus, on part of the
prophecy of Micah.

<span id="iii.vi-p90"></span>72. To Constantius, on the rite of
circumcision.

<span id="iii.vi-p91"></span>73–76. To Irenæus. Why the law was given,
and the scope of the Epistle to the Ephesians. The letter numbered 75 is
plainly a continuation of 74, although inscribed to Clementianus, a
difficulty similar to that about letter 26.

<span id="iii.vi-p92"></span>77, 78. To Horontianus, contrasting the
condition of the Jew and the Christian.

<span id="iii.vi-p93"></span>79, 80. To Bellicius, on recovery from
sickness, and on the miracle of healing the man blind from his birth.

<span id="iii.vi-p94"></span>81. To certain clergy, against despondency.

<span id="iii.vi-p95"></span>82. To Marcellus, concerning a lawsuit.

<span id="iii.vi-p96"></span>83. To Sisinnius, commending him for
forgiving his son, who had married without consulting him.

<span id="iii.vi-p97"></span>84. To Cynegius.

<span id="iii.vi-p98"></span>85, 86. To Siricius, with thanks for
letters, and commending Priscus.

<span id="iii.vi-p99"></span><span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span> <span
id="iii.vi-Page_xxii"></span>87. To Segatius \[more probably
Phæbadius\], Bishop of Agens, and Delphinus, Bishop of Bordeaux.
Polybius, mentioned in the letter, was proconsul of Africa between the
years 380 and 390.

<span id="iii.vi-p100"></span>88. To Atticus. Commendation of Priscus.

<span id="iii.vi-p101"></span>89. To Alypius. Acknowledgment of letters.

<span id="iii.vi-p102"></span>90. To Antonius. On the mutual affection
of himself and St. Ambrose.

<span id="iii.vi-p103"></span>91. To Candidianus, probably a
fellow-bishop. A letter of affection.

<span id="iii.vi-p104"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p104.1"></span>VI. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p104.2"></span>Hymns</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p105"></span>During the persecutions stirred up by the
Arian Empress Justina, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p105.1"></span>a.d.</span> 385–6, referred to in his 20th
letter, St. Ambrose and the faithful spent the whole night in the
basilica, and the holy Bishop employed the people in singing psalms and
hymns. A large number of hymns have been attributed to St. Ambrose, the
number having by some editors been brought down to twelve, of which,
however, only four are certainly his compositions.

<span id="iii.vi-p106"></span>1. *Eterne rerum Conditor,* referred to by
St. Augustine, *Retract.* I. 21, and by St. Ambrose himself, *Hexaëm.*
V. 24, 88. The hymn is still in use at Lauds on Sunday.

<span id="iii.vi-p107"></span>2. *Deus Creator omnium.* Quoted by St.
Augustine, *Conf.* IX. 12, 32.

<span id="iii.vi-p108"></span>3. *Jam surigit hora tertia.* Also quoted
by St. Augustine.

<span id="iii.vi-p109"></span>4. *Veni Redemptor gentium.* A Christmas
hymn, quoted by Pope Celestine, <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p109.1"></span>a.d.</span> 430, in a sermon against the
Nestorians, preached before a synod at Rome, and also by other writers.

<span id="iii.vi-p110"></span>Of other hymns one commencing, *Illuminans
Altissimus,* is quoted by Cassiodorus as an Epiphany hymn by St.
Ambrose, and the same author refers to another, *Orabo mente Dominum.*
The Benedictine Editors admit six other hymns, but they are supported by
no authority anterior to Venerable Bede.

<span id="iii.vi-p111"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p111.1"></span>VII. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p111.2"></span>Doubtful and Spurious Works</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p112"></span>This volume cannot of course comprehend
the arguments and discussions necessary for any critical examination of
certain works whether doubtful or certainly spurious, but their names
may be given and certain conclusions stated.

<span id="iii.vi-p113"></span>1. Five books on the Jewish war,
ordinarily attributed to Hegisippus. This is a translation into Latin
and a condensation in part of the well-known work of Josephus. Ihm, a
very thorough student of St. Ambrose, seems quite disposed to maintain
after careful examination that this is the work of St. Ambrose.

<span id="iii.vi-p114"></span>2. *De lege Dei.* This treatise, a sort of
compendium of Roman law in the fourth century, and comparison of it with
the law of Moses, is ascribed, in a translation published by Mai, <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) to St. Ambrose, who is said to have
undertaken the work at the command of Theodosius. On the authenticity,
however, of this treatise there probably will always remain much doubt.

<span id="iii.vi-p116"></span>3. Among works more or less doubtful are
*De Sacramentis,* admitted by the Benedictines, but rejected, and
apparently on sufficient grounds, by Ihm.

<span id="iii.vi-p117"></span>4. *Apologia David altera.* Suspected by
Erasmus, Tillemont, and Ihm.

<span id="iii.vi-p118"></span>5. *De lapsu Virginis consecratæ.* A
severe castigation of a fallen virgin and of her seducer. The treatise
seems to have been written by a certain Bishop of Nicetas, and a <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p118.1"></span>ms.</span> at speaks of it as
having been revised by St. Ambrose.

<span id="iii.vi-p119"></span>6. There are further three brief addresses
ascribed by some persons to St. Ambrose, touching on the question of
selling all and giving to the poor. Some of the matter is like St.
Ambrose, but the same cannot be said of the diction and style.

<span id="iii.vi-p120"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.vi-p120.1"></span>VIII. <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi-p120.2"></span>Lost Writings of St. Ambrose</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.vi-p121"></span>1. *Expositio Isaiæ prophetiæ*, referred
to by St. Augustine as well as by St. Ambrose himself.

<span id="iii.vi-p122"></span>2. *Liber de Sacramento regenerationis
sive de philosophia,* referred to by St. Augustine.

<span id="iii.vi-p123"></span>3. *Libellus ad Pansophium puerum,*
written <span class="sc"><span id="iii.vi-p123.1"></span>a.d.</span>
393–4, according to Paulinus in his life of St. Ambrose.

<span id="iii.vi-p124"></span>4. *Libri quatuor regnorum,* referred to
in the introduction to the work on the Jewish war.

<span id="iii.vi-p125"></span>5. *Expositio fidei,* quoted by Theodoret
and others as a writing of St. Ambrose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[xxii:24](2100008.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iii.vi-p114.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p115"></span> *Scriptorum veterum nova Collectio,* Vol.
X.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dogmatic Treatises, Ethical Works, and Sermons.](2100009.md)
