[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100212)  [Next](2100214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p1"></span>Christ’s saying, “The Father is greater
than I,” is explained in accordance with the principle just established.
Other like sayings are expounded in like fashion. Our Lord cannot, as
touching His Godhead, be called inferior to the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>59. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p2.1"></span>It</span> was due to His humanity,
therefore, that our Lord doubted and was sore distressed, and rose from
the dead, for that which fell doth also rise again. Again, it was by
reason of His humanity that He said those words, which our adversaries
use to maliciously turn against Him: “Because the Father is greater than
I.” <span id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p4"></span>60. But when in another passage we
read: “I came out from the Father, and am come into the world; again, I
leave the world, and go to the Father,” <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980) how doth He go, except through
death, and how comes He, save by rising again? Furthermore, He added, in
order to show that He spake concerning His Ascension: “Therefore have I
told you before it come to pass, in order that, when it shall have come
to pass, ye may believe.” <span id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981) For
He was speaking of the sufferings and resurrection of His body, and by
that resurrection they who before doubted were led to believe—for,
indeed, God, Who is always present in every place, passes not from place
to place. As it is a man who goes, so it is He Himself Who comes.
Furthermore, He says in another place: “Rise, let us go hence.” <span
id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982) In that, therefore, doth He go and
come, which is common to Him and to us.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p8"></span>61. How, indeed, can He be a lesser God
when He is perfect and true God? Yet in respect of His humanity He is
less—and still you wonder that speaking in the person of a man He called
the Father greater than Himself, when in the person of a man He called
Himself a worm, and not a man, saying: “But I am a worm, and no
man;” <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983) and again: “He was led
as a sheep to the slaughter.” <span id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p11"></span>62. If you pronounce Him less than the
Father in this respect, I cannot deny it; nevertheless, to speak in the
words of Scripture, He was not begotten inferior, but “made
lower,” <span id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985) that is, *made*
inferior. And how was He “made lower,” except that, “being in the form
of God, He thought it not a prey that He should be equal with God, but
emptied Himself;” <span id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986) not,
indeed, parting with what He was, but taking up what He was not, for “He
took the form of a servant.” <span id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p15"></span>63. Moreover, to the end that we might
know Him to have been “made lower,” by taking upon Him a body, David has
shown that he is prophesying of a man, saying: “What is man, that Thou
art mindful of him, or the son of man, but that Thou visitest him? Thou
hast made him a little lower than the angels.” <span
id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988) And in interpreting this same
passage the Apostle says: “For we see Jesus, made a little lower than
the angels, crowned with glory and honour because that He suffered
death, in order that apart from God <span id="page_232">p. 232</span>
<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-Page_232"></span>He might taste death for
all.” <span id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p18"></span>64. Thus, the Son of God was made
lower than, not only the Father, but angels also. And if you will turn
this to His dishonour; \[I ask\] is then the Son, in respect of His
Godhead, less than His angels who serve Him and minister to Him? Thus,
in your purpose to diminish His honour, you run into the blasphemy of
exalting the nature of angels above the Son of God. But “the servant is
not above his master.” <span id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990) Again,
angels ministered to Him even after His Incarnation, to the end that you
should acknowledge Him to have suffered no loss of majesty by reason of
His bodily nature, for God could not submit to any loss of
Himself, <span id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991) whilst that which He
has taken of the Virgin neither adds to nor takes away from His divine
power.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p21"></span>65. He, therefore, possessing the
fulness of Divinity and glory, <span
id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992) is not, in respect of His Divinity,
inferior. Greater and less are distinctions proper to corporeal
existences; one who is greater is so in respect of rank, or qualities,
or at any rate of age. These terms lose their meaning when we come to
treat of the things of God. He is commonly entitled the greater who
instructs and informs another, but it is not the case with God’s Wisdom
that it has been built up by teaching received from another, forasmuch
as Itself hath laid the foundation of all teaching. But how wisely wrote
the Apostle: “In order that apart from God He might taste death for
all,”—lest we should suppose the Godhead, not the flesh, to have endured
that Passion!

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p23"></span>66. If our opponents, then, have found
no means to prove \[the Father\] greater \[than the Son\], let them not
pervert words unto false reports, but seek out their meaning. I ask
them, therefore, as touching what do they esteem the Father the greater?
If it is because He is the Father, then \[I answer\] here we have no
question of age or of time—the Father is not distinguished by white
hairs, nor the Son by youthfulness—and it is on these conditions that
the greater dignity of a father depends. <span
id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993) But “father” and “son” are names,
the one of the parent, the other of the child—names which seem to join
rather than separate; for dutifulness inspires no loss of personal
worth, inasmuch as kinship binds men together, and does not rend them
asunder.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p25"></span>67. If, then, they cannot make the
order of nature a support for any questioning, let them now believe the
witness \[of Scripture\]. Now the Evangelist testifies that the Son is
not lower \[than the Father\] by reason of being the Son; nay, he even
declares that, in being the Son, He is equal, saying, “For the Jews
sought to kill Him for this cause, that not only did He break the
Sabbath, but even called God His own Father, making Himself equal to
God.” <span id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994)

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p27"></span>68. This is not what the Jews said—it
is the Evangelist who testifies that, in calling Himself God’s own Son,
He made Himself equal to God, for the Jews are not presented as saying,
“For this cause we sought to kill Him;” the Evangelist, speaking for
himself, says, “For the Jews sought to kill Him for this cause.” <span
id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995) Moreover, he has discovered the
cause, \[in saying\] that the Jews were stirred with desire to slay Him
because, when as God He broke the Sabbath, and also claimed God as His
own Father, He ascribed to Himself not only the majesty of divine
authority in breaking the Sabbath, but also, in speaking of His Father,
the right appertaining to eternal equality.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p29"></span>69. Most fitting was the answer which
the Son of God made to these Jews, proving Himself the Son and equal of
God. “Whatsoever things,” He said, “the Father hath done, the Son doeth
also in like wise.” <span id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996) The Son,
therefore, is both entitled and proved the equal of the Father—a true
equality, which both excludes difference of Godhead, and discovers,
together with the Son, the Father also, to Whom the Son is equal; for
there is no equality where there is difference, nor again where there is
but one person, inasmuch as none is by himself equal to himself. Thus
hath the Evangelist shown why it is fitting that Christ should call
Himself the Son of God, that is, make Himself equal with God.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p31"></span>70. Hence the Apostle, following this
revelation, hath said: “He thought it not a prey that He should be equal
with God.” <span id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997) For that which a
man has not he seeks to carry off as a prey. Equality with the Father,
therefore, which, as God and Lord, He possessed in His own substance, He
had not as a spoil wrongfully seized. Wherefore the Apostle added \[the
words\]: “He took the form of a servant.” Now surely a servant is the
opposite of an equal. Equal, therefore, is the Son, in the form of God,
but inferior in taking upon Him of the flesh and in His sufferings as a
man. For how could *the same* nature be both lower and equal? And how,
if \[the Son\] be inferior, can He do the same things, in like manner,
as the Father doeth? How, indeed, can there be sameness of operation
with diversity of power? Can the inferior ever work such effects as the
greater, or can there be unity of operation where there is diversity of
substance?

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p33"></span>71. Admit, therefore, that Christ, as
touching His Godhead, cannot be called inferior \[to the Father\]. <span
id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998) Christ speaks to Abraham: “By
Myself have I sworn.” <span id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999) Now the
Apostle shows that He Who swears by Himself cannot be lower than any.
Thus he saith, “When God rewarded Abraham with His promise, He swore by
Himself, forasmuch as He had none other that was greater, saying, Surely
with blessing will I bless thee, and with multiplying will I multiply
thee.” <span id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000) Christ had, therefore,
none greater, and for that cause sware He by Himself. Moreover, the
Apostle has <span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-Page_233"></span>rightly added, “for men swear by one
greater than themselves,” forasmuch as men have one who is greater than
themselves, but God hath none.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p37"></span>72. Otherwise, if our adversaries will
understand this passage as referred to the Father, then the rest of the
record does not agree with it. For the Father did not appear to Abraham,
nor did Abraham wash the feet of God the Father, but the feet of Him in
Whom is the image of the man that shall be. <span
id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001) Moreover, the Son of God saith,
“Abraham saw My day, and rejoiced.” <span
id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002) It is He, therefore, Who sware by
Himself, \[and\] Whom Abraham saw.

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p40"></span>73. And how, indeed, hath He any
greater than Himself Who is one with the Father in Godhead? <span
id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003) Where there is unity, there is no
dissimilarity, whereas between greater and less there is a distinction.
The teaching, therefore, of the instance from Scripture before us, with
regard to the Father and the Son, is that neither is the Father greater,
nor hath the Son any that is above Him, inasmuch as in Father and Son
there is no difference of Godhead parting them, but one majesty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[231:1980](2100213.htm#fr_1979) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p3"></span> S. [John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[231:1981](2100213.htm#fr_1980) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p5"></span> S. [John xvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[231:1982](2100213.htm#fr_1981) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p6"></span> S. [John xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[231:1983](2100213.htm#fr_1982) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p7"></span> S. [John xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[231:1984](2100213.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p9"></span> [Ps. xxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[231:1985](2100213.htm#fr_1984) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p10"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[231:1986](2100213.htm#fr_1985) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p12"></span> [Heb. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[231:1987](2100213.htm#fr_1986) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p13"></span> [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[231:1988](2100213.htm#fr_1987) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p14"></span> [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[231:1989](2100213.htm#fr_1988) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p16"></span> [Ps.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[232:1990](2100213.htm#fr_1989) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p17"></span> [Heb. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[232:1991](2100213.htm#fr_1990) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p19"></span> S. [Matt. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[232:1992](2100213.htm#fr_1991) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p20"></span> For if that were so, God might cease
to be God.

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[232:1993](2100213.htm#fr_1992) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p22"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[232:1994](2100213.htm#fr_1993) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p24"></span> “In respect of age only does a father
take precedence of his son amongst men, for in regard to generic nature
the father is on a level with the son, and in other respects the son may
even excel his father. But where the Persons are eternal, there is no
difference constituted by age. Still, as St. Ambrose acutely remarks,
the names ‘Father’ and ‘Son’ indicate indeed a distinction of Persons
and mutual relations of those Persons, yet not diversity of
nature—rather, in fact, suppose equality and unity of nature.”—Hurter
*in loc.*

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[232:1995](2100213.htm#fr_1994) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p26"></span> S. [John v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[232:1996](2100213.htm#fr_1995) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p28"></span> *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[232:1997](2100213.htm#fr_1996) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p30"></span> S. [John. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[232:1998](2100213.htm#fr_1997) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p32"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p32.1"></span>.
Here and in § 62 I have rendered “*rapinam*” in accordance with
Lightfoot’s rendering of the original “<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p32.2"></span>ἁρπαγμός</span>.”

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[232:1999](2100213.htm#fr_1998) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p34"></span> “Surely it is clear that the Son, in
respect of His Godhead, is not inferior to the Father, for there is, in
the Father and the Son, one and the same Godhead. Still, the Greek
Fathers allow that the Father is not only greater than the Son in
respect of the latter’s human nature, but also in regard to personal
properties, or a certain ‘personal dignity’—(<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p34.1"></span>ἀξ ωμα ὑποστατικόν</span>).”—Hurter *in
loc.* Canon Mason, in his *Faith of the Gospel,* remarks that whilst it
is quite right to speak of “God and His Son” or “God’s Son,” the
converse language, “God and His Father,” “God’s Father,” is *not* right.
Yet S. Ambrose says, “Dubitat de Patre Deus.” See § 43.

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[232:2000](2100213.htm#fr_1999) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p35"></span> [Gen. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[232:2001](2100213.htm#fr_2000) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p36"></span> [Heb.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[233:2002](2100213.htm#fr_2001) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p38"></span> [1 John
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003), [Gen.
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[233:2003](2100213.htm#fr_2002) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p39"></span> S. [John viii.
56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[233:2004](2100213.htm#fr_2003) <span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p41"></span> S. [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.iv.ix-p41.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The objection that the Son, being sent by the Father,
is, in that regard at least, inferior, is met by the answer that He was
also sent by the Spirit, Who is yet not considered greater than the Son.
Furthermore, the Spirit, in His turn, is sent by the Father to the Son,
in order that Their unity in action might be shown forth. It is our
duty, therefore, carefully to distinguish what utterances are to be
fitly ascribed to Christ as God, and what to be ascribed to Him as
man.](2100214)
