[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100353)  [Next](2100355.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.vi"></span>

### <span id="iv.viii.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p1"></span>Liberality to the poor is recommended by
the example of the widow the Gospel, whose two mites were preferred to
the large gifts of the rich. The two mites are treated as mystically
representing the two Testaments. What that treasure is for which we are
taught to offer, after the example of the wise men, three gifts, or
after that of the widow, two. St. Ambrose concludes the chapter by an
exhortation to widows to be zealous in good works.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p2"></span>27. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.vi-p2.1"></span>In</span> the same book, too, but in another
place, we are taught how fitting it is to be merciful and liberal
towards the poor, and that this feeling should not be checked by the
consideration of our poverty, since liberality is determined not by the
amount of our possessions, but by the disposition of giving. For by the
voice of the Lord that widow is preferred to all of whom it was said:
“This widow hath cast in more than all.” <span
id="fr_3337"></span>[3338](#fn_3337.md) In which instance the Lord
characteristically teaches all, that none should be held back from
giving assistance through shame at his own poverty, and that the rich
should not flatter themselves that they seem to give more than the poor.
For the piece of money out of a small stock is richer than treasures out
of abundance, because it is not the <span id="page_396">p. 396</span>
<span id="iv.viii.vi-Page_396"></span>amount that is given but the
amount that remains which is considered. No one gives more than she who
has left nothing for herself.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p4"></span>28. Why do you, rich woman, boast
yourself by comparison with the poor, and when you are all loaded with
gold, and drag along the ground a costly robe, desire to be honoured as
though she were inferior and small in comparison with your riches,
because you have surpassed the needy with your gifts? Rivers too
overflow, when they are too full, but a draught from a brook is more
pleasant. New wine foams while fermenting, and the husbandman does not
consider as lost that which runs over. While the harvest is being
threshed out, grains of corn fall from the groaning floor; but though
the harvests fail, the barrel of meal wastes not, and the cruse full of
oil gives forth. <span id="fr_3338"></span>[3339](#fn_3338.md) But the
draught emptied the casks of the rich, while the tiny cruse of oil of
the widow gave abundance. That, then, is to be reckoned which you give
for devotion, not what you cast forth disdainfully. For in fine, no one
gave more than she who fed the prophet with her children’s nourishment.
And so since no one gave more, no one had greater merit. This has a
moral application.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p6"></span>29. And considering the mystical sense,
one must not despise this woman casting in two mites into the treasury.
Plainly the woman was noble who in the divine judgment was found worthy
to be preferred to all. Perchance it is she who of her faith has given
two testaments for the help of man, and so no one has done more. Nor
could any one equal the amount of her gift, who joined faith with mercy.
Do you, then, whoever you are, who exercise your life the practice of
widowhood, not hesitate to cast into the treasury the two mites, full of
faith and grace.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p7"></span>30. Happy is she who out of her treasure
brings forth the perfect image of the King. Your treasure is wisdom,
your treasure is chastity and righteousness, your treasure is a good
understanding, such as was that treasure from which the Magi, when they
worshipped the Lord, brought forth gold, frankincense, and myrrh; <span
id="fr_3339"></span>[3340](#fn_3339.md) setting forth by gold the power of
a king, venerating God by the frankincense, and by myrrh acknowledging
the resurrection of the body. You too have this treasure if you look
into yourself: “For we have this treasure in earthen vessels.” <span
id="fr_3340"></span>[3341](#fn_3340.md) You have gold which you can give,
for God does not exact of you the precious gift of shining metal, but
that gold which at the day of judgment the fire shall be unable to
consume. Nor does He require precious gifts, but the good odour of
faith, which the altars of your heart send forth and the disposition of
a religious mind exhales.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p10"></span>31. From this treasure, then, not only
the three gifts of the Magi but also the two mites of the widow are
taken, on which the perfect image of the heavenly King shines forth, the
brightness of His glory and the image of His substance. Precious, too,
are those hardly earned gains of chastity which the widow gives of her
labour and daily task, continually night and day working at her task,
and by the wakeful labour of her profitable chastity gathering treasure;
that she may preserve the couch of her deceased husband unviolated, be
able to support her dear children, and to minister to the poor. She is
to be preferred to the rich, she it is who shall not fear the judgment
of Christ.

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p11"></span>32. Strive to equal her, my daughters:
“It is good to be zealously affected in a good thing.” <span
id="fr_3341"></span>[3342](#fn_3341.md) “Covet earnestly the best
gifts.” <span id="fr_3342"></span>[3343](#fn_3342.md) The Lord is ever
looking upon you, Jesus looks upon you when He goes to the treasury, and
you think that of the gain of your good works assistance is to be given
to those in need. What is it, then, that you should give your two mites
and gain in return the Lord’s Body? Go not, then, empty into the sight
of the Lord your God, <span id="fr_3343"></span>[3344](#fn_3343.md) empty
of mercy, empty of faith, empty of chastity; for the Lord Jesus is wont
to look upon and to commend not the empty, but those who are rich in
virtues. Let the maiden see you at work, let her see you ministering to
others. For this is the return which you owe to God, that you should
make your return to God from the progress of others. No return is more
acceptable to God than the offerings of piety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3337"></span>[395:3338](2100354.htm#fr_3337.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p3"></span> S. [Luke xxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3338"></span>[396:3339](2100354.htm#fr_3338.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p5"></span> [1 Kings
17.16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.viii.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3339"></span>[396:3340](2100354.htm#fr_3339.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p8"></span> S. [Matt. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3340"></span>[396:3341](2100354.htm#fr_3340.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p9"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3341"></span>[396:3342](2100354.htm#fr_3341.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p12"></span> [Gal. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3342"></span>[396:3343](2100354.htm#fr_3342.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p13"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3343"></span>[396:3344](2100354.htm#fr_3343.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vi-p14"></span> [Exod. xxxiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#020.md)<span id="iv.viii.vi-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Naomi is an instance of a widow receiving back from
her daughter-in-law the fruits of her own good training, and is a token
that necessary support will never fail the good widow. And if her life
appears sad, she is happy, since the promises of the Lord are made to
her. St. Ambrose then touches upon the benefits of weeping.](2100355.md)
