[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100313)  [Next](2100315.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p1"></span>In what way faith is necessary for
repentance. Means for paying our debts, in which work, prayer, tears,
and fasting are of more value than money. Some instances are adduced,
and St. Ambrose declares that generosity is profitable, but only when
joined with faith; it is, moreover, liable to certain defects. He goes
on to speak of some defects in repentance, such as too great haste in
seeking reconciliation, considering abstinence from sacraments all that
is needed, of committing sin in hope of repenting later.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p2"></span>80. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p2.1"></span>So</span>, then, it is fitting for us to
believe both that sinners must repent and that forgiveness is to be
given on repentance, yet still as hoping for forgiveness as granted upon
faith, not as a debt, for it is one thing to earn, and another
presumptuously to claim a right. Faith asks for forgiveness, as it were,
by covenant, but presumption is more akin to demand than to request. Pay
first that which you owe, that you may be in a position to ask for what
you have hoped. Come with the disposition of an honest debtor, that you
may not contract a fresh liability, but may pay that which is due of the
existing debt with the possessions of your faith.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p3"></span>81. He who owes a debt to God has more
help towards payment than he who is indebted to man. Man requires money
for money, and this is not always at the debtor’s command. God demands
the affection of the heart, which is in our own power. No one who owes a
debt to God is poor, except one who has made himself poor. And even if
he have nothing to sell, yet has he wherewith to pay. Prayer, fasting,
and tears are the resources of an honest debtor, and much more abundant
than if one from the price of his estate offered money without faith.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p4"></span>82. Ananias was poor, when after
selling his land he brought the money to the <span id="page_356">p.
356</span> <span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-Page_356"></span>apostles, and was not
able with it to pay his debt, but involved himself the more. <span
id="fr_3135"></span>[3136](#fn_3135.md) That widow was rich who cast her
two small pieces into the treasury, of whom Christ said: “This poor
widow hath cast in more than they all.” <span
id="fr_3136"></span>[3137](#fn_3136.md) For God requires not money but
faith.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p7"></span>83. And I do not deny that sins may be
diminished by liberal gifts to the poor, but only if faith commend what
is spent. For what would the giving of one’s whole property benefit
without charity?

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p8"></span>84. There are some who aim at the
credit of generosity for pride alone, because they wish thereby to gain
the good opinion of the multitude for leaving nothing to themselves; but
whilst they are seeking rewards in this life, they are laying up none
for the life to come, and having received their reward here they cannot
hope for it there.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p9"></span>85. Some again, having, through
impulsive excitement and not after long consideration, given their
possessions to the Church, think that they can claim them back. These
gain neither the first nor the second reward, for the gift was made
thoughtlessly, its recall sacrilegiously.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p10"></span>86. Some repent of having distributed
their property to the poor. But they who are doing penance must not
repent of this, lest they repent of their own repentance. For many seek
for penance through fear of future punishment, being conscious of their
sins, and having received their penance are held back by fear of the
public entreaties. These persons seem to have sought for repentance for
their evil deeds, but to exercise it for their good ones.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p11"></span>87. Some seek penance because they
wish to be at once restored to communion. These wish not so much to
loose themselves as to bind the priest, for they do not put off the
guilt from their own conscience, but lay it on that of the priest, to
whom the command is given: “Give not that which is holy to the dogs,
neither cast your pearls before the swine;” <span
id="fr_3137"></span>[3138](#fn_3137.md) that is to say, that partaking of
the holy Communion is not to be allowed to those polluted with impurity.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p13"></span>88. And so one may see those walking
in other attire, who ought to be weeping and groaning because they had
defiled the robe of sanctification and grace; and women loading their
ears with pearls, and weighing down their necks, who had better have
bent to Christ than to gold, and who ought to be weeping for themselves,
because they have lost the pearl from heaven.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p14"></span>89. There are, again, some who think
that it is penitence to abstain from the heavenly sacraments. These are
too cruel judges of themselves, who prescribe a penalty for themselves
but refuse the remedy, who ought to be mourning over their self-imposed
penalty, because it deprives them of heavenly grace.

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p15"></span>90. Others think that licence is
granted them to sin, because the hope of penitence is before them,
whereas penitence is the remedy, not an incentive to sin. For the salve
is necessary for the wound, not the wound for the salve, since a salve
is sought because of the wound, the wound is not wished for on account
of the salve. The hope which is put off to a future season is but
feeble, for every season is uncertain, and hope does not outlive all
time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3135"></span>[356:3136](2100314.htm#fr_3135.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p5"></span> [Acts
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3136"></span>[356:3137](2100314.htm#fr_3136.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p6"></span> S. [Luke xxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3137"></span>[356:3138](2100314.htm#fr_3137.md) <span
id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p12"></span> S. [Matt. vii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.vi.iii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. In order to do away with the feeling of shame which
holds back the guilty from public penance, St. Ambrose points out the
advantage of prayers offered by the whole Church, and sets forth the
example of saints who have sorrowed. Then, after reproving those who
imagine that penance may be often repeated, he points out the difficulty
of repentance, and how it is to be carried out.](2100315.md)
