[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100345)  [Next](2100347.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p1"></span>Having mentioned the Baptist, St.
Ambrose enters into a description of the events concerning his death,
and speaks against dancing and the festivities of the wicked.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p2"></span>26. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>And</span> since we must not cursorily
pass by the mention of so great a man, let us consider who he was, by
whom, on what account, how, and at what time he was slain. A just man,
he is put to death by adulterers, and the penalty of a capital crime is
turned off by the guilty on to the judge. Again the reward of the dancer
is the death of the prophet. Lastly (a matter of honour even to all
barbarians), the cruel sentence is given in the midst of banqueting and
festivities, and the news of the deadly crime is carried from the
banquet to the prison, and then from the prison to the banquet. How many
crimes are there in one wicked act!

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p3"></span>27. A banquet of death is set out with
royal luxury, <span id="fr_3294"></span>[3295](#fn_3294.md) and when a
larger concourse than usual had come together, the daughter of the
queen, sent for from within the private apartments, is brought forth to
dance in the sight of men. What could she have learnt from an adulteress
but loss of modesty? Is anything so conducive to lust as with unseemly
movements thus to expose in nakedness those parts of the body which
either nature has hidden or custom has veiled, to sport with the looks,
to turn the neck, to loosen the hair? Fitly was the next step an offence
against God. For what modesty can there be where there is dancing and
noise and clapping of hands?

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p5"></span>28. “Then,” it is said, “the king
being pleased, said unto the damsel, that she should ask of the king
whatsoever she would. Then he swore that if she asked he would give her
even the half of his kingdom.” <span
id="fr_3295"></span>[3296](#fn_3295.md) See how worldly men themselves
judge of their worldly power, so as to give even kingdoms for dancing.
But the damsel, being taught by her mother, demanded that the head of
John should be brought to her on a dish. That which is said that “the
king was sorry,” <span id="fr_3296"></span>[3297](#fn_3296.md) is not
repentance on the part of the king, but a confession of guilt, which is,
according to the wont of the divine rule, that they who have done evil
condemn themselves by their own confession. “But for their sakes which
sat with him,” it is said. What is more base than that a murder should
be committed in order <span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-Page_386"></span>not to displease those who sat at
meat? “And,” it follows, “for his oath’s sake.” What a new religion! He
had better have forsworn himself. The Lord therefore in the Gospel bids
us not to swear at all, <span id="fr_3297"></span>[3298](#fn_3297.md) that
there be no cause for perjury, and no need of offending. And so an
innocent man is slain that an oath be not violated. I know which to have
in the greatest horror. Perjury is more endurable than are the oaths of
tyrants.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p9"></span>29. Who would not think when he saw
some one running from the banquet to the prison, <span
id="fr_3298"></span>[3299](#fn_3298.md) that orders had been given to set
the prophet free? Who, I say, having heard that it was Herod’s birthday,
and of the state banquet, and the choice given to the damsel of choosing
whatever she wished, would not think that the man was sent to set John
free? What has cruelty in common with delicacies? What have death and
pleasure in common? The prophet is hurried to suffer at a festal time by
a festal order, by which he would even wish to be set free; he is slain
by the sword, and his head is brought on a platter. This dish was well
suited to their cruelty, in order that their insatiate savageness might
be feasted.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p11"></span>30. Look, most savage king, at the
sights worthy of thy feast. Stretch forth thy right hand, that nothing
be wanting to thy cruelty, that streams of holy blood may pour down
between thy fingers. And since the hunger for such unheard-of cruelty
could not be satisfied by banquets, nor the thirst by goblets, drink the
blood pouring from the still flowing veins of the cut-off head. Behold
those eyes, even in death, the witnesses of thy crime, turning away from
the sight of the delicacies. The eyes are closing, not so much owing to
death, as to horror of luxury. That bloodless golden mouth, whose
sentence thou couldst not endure, is silent, and yet thou fearest. Yet
the tongue, which even after death is wont to observe its duty as when
living, condemned, though with trembling motion, the incest. This head
is borne to Herodias: she rejoices, she exults as though she had escaped
from the crime, because she has slain her judge.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p12"></span>31. What say you, holy women? Do you
see what you ought to teach, and what also to unteach your daughters?
She dances, but she is the daughter of an adulteress. But she who is
modest, she who is chaste, let her teach her daughter religion, not
dancing. And do you, grave and prudent men, learn to avoid the banquets
of hateful men. If such are the banquets, what will be the judgment of
the impious?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3294"></span>[385:3295](2100346.htm#fr_3294.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p4"></span> S. [Mark vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p4.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_3295"></span>[385:3296](2100346.htm#fr_3295.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p6"></span> S. [Mark
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3296"></span>[385:3297](2100346.htm#fr_3296.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p7"></span> S. [Mark vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>
ff.

<span id="fn_3297"></span>[386:3298](2100346.htm#fr_3297.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p8"></span> S. [Matt. v.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3298"></span>[386:3299](2100346.htm#fr_3298.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p10"></span> S. [Mark vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.vi-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. In reply to Marcellina, who had asked what should be
thought of those who to escape violence killed themselves, St. Ambrose
replies by narrating the history of Pelagia, a virgin, with her mother
and sister, and goes on to speak of the martyrdom of the blessed
Sotheris, one of their own ancestors.](2100347.md)
