[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100354)  [Next](2100356.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.viii.vii"></span>

### <span id="iv.viii.vii-p0.1"></span>Chapter VI.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p1"></span>Naomi is an instance of a widow
receiving back from her daughter-in-law the fruits of her own good
training, and is a token that necessary support will never fail the good
widow. And if her life appears sad, she is happy, since the promises of
the Lord are made to her. St. Ambrose then touches upon the benefits of
weeping.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p2"></span>33. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.viii.vii-p2.1"></span>Does</span> the widow Naomi seem to you of
small account, who supported her widowhood on the gleanings from
another’s har<span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="iv.viii.vii-Page_397"></span>vest, and who, when heavy with age, was
supported by her daughter-in-law? <span
id="fr_3344"></span>[3345](#fn_3344.md) It is a great benefit both for the
support and for the advantage of widows, that they so train their
daughters-in-law as to have in them a support in full old age, and, as
it were, payment for their teaching and reward for their training. For
to her who has well taught and well instructed her daughter-in-law a
Ruth will never be wanting who will prefer the widowed life of her
mother-in-law to her father’s house, and if her husband also be dead,
will not leave her, will support her in need, comfort her in sorrow, and
not leave her if sent away; for good instruction will never know want.
So that Naomi, deprived of her husband and her two sons, having lost the
offspring of her fruitfulness, lost not the reward of her pious care,
for she found both a comfort in sorrow and a support in poverty.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p4"></span>34. You see, then, holy women, how
fruitful a widow is in the offspring of virtues, and the results of her
own merits, which cannot come to an end. A good widow, then, knows no
want, and if she be weary through age, in extreme poverty, yet she has
as a rule the reward of the training she has given. Though the nearest
to herself have failed, she finds those not so near akin to cherish
their mother, revere their parent, and by the trifling gifts for her
support desire to gain the fruit of their own kindness, for richly are
gifts to a widow repaid. She asks food and pays back treasures.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p5"></span>35. But she seems to spend sad days,
and to pass her time in tears. And she is the more blessed in this, for
by a little weeping she purchases for herself everlasting joys, and at
the cost of a few moments gains eternity. To such it is well said:
“Blessed are ye that weep, for ye shall laugh.” <span
id="fr_3345"></span>[3346](#fn_3345.md) Who then would prefer the deceitful
appearances of present joys to the pleasure of future freedom from
anxiety? Does he seem to us an insignificant authority, the elect
forefather of the Lord after the flesh, who ate ashes as it were bread,
and mingled his drink with weeping, <span
id="fr_3346"></span>[3347](#fn_3346.md) and by his tears at night gained
for himself the joy of redemption in the morning? Whence did he gain
that great joy except that he greatly wept, and, as it were, at the
price of his tears obtained the grace of future glory for himself.

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p8"></span>36. The widow has, then, this excellent
recommendation, that while she mourns her husband she also weeps for the
world, and the redeeming tears are ready, which shed for the dead will
benefit the living. The weeping of the eyes is fitted to the sadness of
the mind, it arouses pity, lessens labour, relieves grief, and preserves
modesty, and she no longer seems to herself so wretched, finding comfort
in tears which are the pay of love and proofs of pious memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3344"></span>[397:3345](2100355.htm#fr_3344.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p3"></span> [Ruth ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.viii.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3345"></span>[397:3346](2100355.htm#fr_3345.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p6"></span> S. [Luke vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.viii.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3346"></span>[397:3347](2100355.htm#fr_3346.md) <span
id="iv.viii.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.viii.vii-p7"></span> [Psa.
102.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.viii.vii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. By the example of Judith is shown that courage is
not wanting in widows; her preparation for her visit to Holofernes is
dwelt upon, as also her chastity and her wisdom, her sobriety and
moderation. Lastly, St. Ambrose, after demonstrating that she was no
less brave than prudent, sets forth her modesty after her
success.](2100356.md)
