[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100169)  [Next](2100171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XVIII.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p1"></span>As he purposes to establish the
Godhead of the Holy Spirit by the points already discussed, St. Ambrose
touches again on some of them; for instance, that He does not commit but
forgives sin; that He is not a creature but the Creator; and lastly,
that He does not offer but receives worship.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p2"></span>132. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>But</span> to sum up, in order at the
end more distinctly to gather up the arguments which have been used here
and there, the evident glory of the Godhead is proved both by other
arguments, and most especially by these four. God is known by these
marks: either that He is without sin; or that He forgives sin; or that
He is not a creature but the Creator; or that He does not give but
receives worship.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p3"></span>133. So, then, no one is without sin
except God alone, for no one is without sin except God. <span
id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401) Also, no one forgives sins except
God alone, for it is also written: “Who can forgive sins but God
alone?” <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402) And one cannot be the
Creator of all except he be not a creature, and he who is not a creature
is without doubt God; for it is written: “They worshipped the creature
rather than the Creator, Who is God blessed for ever.” <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) God also does not worship, but is
worshipped, for it is written: “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and
Him only shalt thou serve.” <span id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404)

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p8"></span>134. Let us therefore consider
whether the Holy Spirit have any of these marks which may bear witness
to His Godhead. And first let us treat of the point that none is without
sin except God alone, and demand that they prove that the Holy Spirit
has sin.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p9"></span>135. But they are unable to show us
this, and demand our authority from us, namely, that we should show by
texts that the Holy Spirit has not sinned, as it is said of the Son that
He did no sin. <span id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405) Let them learn
that we teach by authority of the Scriptures; for it is written: “For in
Wisdom is a Spirit of understanding, holy, one only, manifold, subtle,
easy to move, eloquent, undefiled.” <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406) The Scripture says He is undefiled,
has it lied concerning the Son, that you should believe it to have lied
concerning the Spirit? For the prophet said in the same place concerning
Wisdom, that nothing that defiles enters into her. She herself is
undefiled, and her Spirit is undefiled. Therefore if the Spirit have not
sin, He is God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p12"></span>136. But how can He be guilty of
sin Who Himself forgives sins? Therefore He has not committed sin, and
if He be without sin He is not a creature. For every creature is exposed
to the capability of sin, and the eternal Godhead alone is free from sin
and undefiled.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p13"></span>137. Let us now see whether the
Spirit forgives sins. But on this point there can be no doubt, since the
Lord Himself said: “Receive ye the Holy Spirit. Whosesoever sins ye
forgive they shall be forgiven.” <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407) See that sins are forgiven through
the Holy Spirit. But men make use of their ministry for the forgiveness
of sins, they do not exercise the right of any power of their own. For
they forgive sins not in their own name but in that of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Spirit. They ask, the Godhead gives, the service
is of man, the gift is of the Power on high.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p15"></span>138. And it is not doubtful that
sin is forgiven by means of baptism, but in baptism the operation is
that of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. If, therefore,
the Spirit forgives sin, since it is written, “Who can forgive sins
except God alone?” <span id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) certainly
He Who cannot be separated from the oneness of the name of the Nature is
also incapable of being severed from the power of God. Now if He is not
severed from the power of God, how is He severed from the name of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p17"></span>139. Let us now see whether He be a
creature or the Creator. But since we have above <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409) most clearly proved Him to be the
Creator, as it is written: “The Spirit of God Who hath made me;” <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410) and it has been declared that the
face of the earth is renewed by the Spirit, and that all things languish
without the Spirit, <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411) it is
clear that the Spirit is the Creator. But who can doubt this, since, as
we have shown above, not even the generation of the Lord from the
Virgin, which is more excellent than all creatures, is without the
operation of the Spirit?

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p21"></span>140. Therefore the Spirit is not a
creature, but the Creator, and He Who is Creator is certainly not a
creature. And because He is not a creature, without doubt He is the
<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-Page_155"></span>Creator Who produces all things
together with the Father and the Son. But if He be the Creator,
certainly the Apostle, by saying in condemnation of the Gentiles, “Who
served the creature rather than the Creator, Who is God blessed for
ever,” <span id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412) and by warning men, as
I said above, that the Holy Spirit is to be served, both showed Him to
be the Creator, and because He is the Creator demonstrated that He ought
to be called God. Which he also sums up in the Epistle written to the
Hebrews, saying: “For He that created all things is God.” <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) Let them, therefore, either say
what it is which has been created without the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, or let them confess that the Spirit also is of one Godhead with
the Father and the Son.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p24"></span>141. The writer taught also that He
was to be worshipped, Whom he called Lord and God. For He Who is the God
and Lord of the Universe is certainly to be worshipped by all, for it is
thus written: “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt
thou serve.” <span id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414)

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p26"></span>142. Or let them say where they
have read that the Spirit worships. For it is said of the Son of God:
“Let all the Angels of God worship Him;” <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) we do not read, Let the Spirit
worship Him. For how can He worship Who is not amongst servants and
ministers, but, together with the Father and the Son, has the service of
the just under Him, for it is written: “We serve the Spirit of
God.” <span id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) He is, therefore, to be
worshipped by us, Whom the Apostle taught that we must serve, and Whom
we serve we also adore, according to that which is written, to repeat
the same words again: “Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
shalt thou serve.”

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p29"></span>143. Although the Apostle has not
omitted even this point, so as to omit to teach us that the Spirit is to
be worshipped. For since we have demonstrated that the Spirit is in the
prophets, no one can doubt that prophecy is given by the Spirit, and
plainly when He Who is in the prophets is worshipped, the same Spirit is
worshipped. And so you find: “If the whole Church be assembled together,
and all speak with tongues, and there come in one unlearned or
unbelieving, will he not say that ye are mad? But if all prophesy, and
there come in one unlearned and unbelieving, he is convicted by all, he
is judged by all. For the secrets of his heart are made manifest, and so
falling down on his face he will worship God, declaring that God is in
truth among you.” <span id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) It is,
therefore, God Who is worshipped, God Who abides and Who speaks in the
prophets; but the Spirit thus abides and speaks, therefore, also, the
Spirit is worshipped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[154:1402](2100170.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p4"></span> S. [Matt. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[154:1403](2100170.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p5"></span> S. [Luke v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[154:1404](2100170.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p6"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[154:1405](2100170.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p7"></span> [Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[154:1406](2100170.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p10"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[154:1407](2100170.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p11"></span> [Wisd. vii.
22](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[154:1408](2100170.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p14"></span> S. [John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[154:1409](2100170.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p16"></span> S. [Mark ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[154:1410](2100170.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p18"></span> Cp. B. II. 5, 6.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[154:1411](2100170.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p19"></span> [Job xxxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[154:1412](2100170.htm#fr_1411) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p20"></span> [Ps.
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[155:1413](2100170.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p22"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[155:1414](2100170.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p23"></span> [Heb. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[155:1415](2100170.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p25"></span> [Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[155:1416](2100170.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p27"></span> [Heb. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[155:1417](2100170.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p28"></span> [Phil. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[155:1418](2100170.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p30"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xviii-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Having proved above that the Spirit abides and
speaks in the prophets, St. Ambrose infers that He knows all things
which are of God, and therefore is One with the Father and the Son. This
same point he establishes again from the fact that He possesses all that
God possesses, namely, Godhead, knowledge of the heart, truth, a Name
above every name, and power to raise the dead, as is proved from
Ezekiel, and in this He is equal to the Son.](2100171)
