[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100120)  [Next](2100122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p1"></span>St. Ambrose commences his argument by
complimenting the Emperor, both for his faith and for the restitution of
the Basilica to the Church; then having urged that his opponents, if
they affirm that the Holy Spirit is not a servant, cannot deny Him to be
above all, adds that the same Spirit, when He said, “All things serve
Thee,” showed plainly that He was distinct from creatures; which point
he also establishes by other evidence.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p2"></span>19. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>The</span> Holy Spirit, then, is not
amongst but above all things. For (since you, most merciful Emperor, are
so fully instructed concerning the Son of God as to be able yourself to
teach others) I will not detain you longer, as you desire and claim to
be told something more exactly \[concerning Him\], especially since you
lately showed yourself to be so pleased by an argument of this nature,
as to command the Basilica to be restored to the Church without any one
urging you.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p3"></span>20. So, then, we have received the
grace of your faith and the reward of our own; for we cannot say
otherwise than that it was of the grace of the Holy Spirit, that when
all were unconscious of it, you suddenly restored the Basilica. This is
the gift, I say, this the work of the Holy Spirit, Who indeed was at
that time preached by us, but was working in you.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p4"></span>21. And I do not regret the losses of
the previous time, since the sequestration of that Basilica resulted in
the gain of a sort of usury. For you sequestrated the Basilica, that you
might give proof of your faith. And so your piety fulfilled its
intention, which had sequestered that it might give proof, and so gave
proof as to restore. I did not lose the fruit, and I have your judgment,
and it has been made clear to all that, with a certain diversity of
action, there was in you no diversity of opinion. It was made clear, I
say, to all, that it was not of yourself that you sequestrated, that it
was of yourself when you restored it.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p5"></span>22. Now let us establish by evidence
what we have said. The first point in the discussion is that all things
serve. Now it is clear that all things serve, since it is written: “All
things serve Thee.” <span id="fr_819"></span>[820](#fn_819) This the
Spirit said through the prophet. He did not say, We serve, but, “serve
Thee,” that you might believe that He Himself is excepted from serving.
So, then, since all things serve, and the Spirit does not serve, the
Holy Spirit is certainly not included amongst all things.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p7"></span>23. For if we say that the Holy Spirit
is included amongst all things, certainly when we read that the Spirit
searches the deep things of God, <span id="fr_820"></span>[821](#fn_820)
we deny that God the Father is over all. For since the Spirit is of God,
and is the Spirit of His mouth, how can we say that the Holy Spirit is
included amongst all things, seeing that God, Whose is the Spirit, is
over all, possessing certainly fulness of perfection and perfect power.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p9"></span>25. But lest the objectors should think
that the Apostle was in error, let them learn whom he followed as his
authority for his belief. The Lord said in the Gospel: “When the
Paraclete is come, Whom I will send to you from My Father, even the
Spirit of Truth which proceedeth from the Father, He shall bear witness
of Me.” <span id="fr_821"></span>[822](#fn_821) So the Holy Spirit both
proceeds from the Father, and bears witness of the Son. For the witness
Who is both faithful and true bears witness of the Father, than which
witness nothing is more full for the expression of the Divine Majesty,
nothing more clear as to the Unity of the Divine Power, <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-Page_97"></span>since
the Spirit has the same knowledge as the Son, Who is the witness and
inseparable sharer of the Father’s secrets.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p11"></span>26. He excludes, then, the fellowship
and number of creatures from the knowledge of God, but by not excluding
the Holy Spirit, He shows that He is not of the fellowship of creatures.
So that the passage which is read in the Gospel: “For no man hath seen
God at any time, save the Only-begotten Son Who is in the bosom of the
Father He hath declared Him,” also pertains to the exclusion of the Holy
Spirit. For how has He not seen God Who searches even the deep things of
God? How has He not seen God Who knows the things which are of God? How
has He not seen God Who is of God? So, since it is laid down that no one
has seen God at any time, whereas the Holy Spirit has seen Him, clearly
the Holy Spirit is excepted. He, then, is above all Who is excluded from
all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_819"></span>[96:820](2100121.htm#fr_819) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p6"></span> [Psa.
119.91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_820"></span>[96:821](2100121.htm#fr_820) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p8"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_821"></span>[96:822](2100121.htm#fr_821) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p10"></span> S. [John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The words, “All things were made by Him,” are not a
proof that the Holy Spirit is included amongst all things, since He was
not made. For otherwise it could be proved by other passages that the
Son, and even the Father Himself, must be numbered amongst all things,
which would be similar irreverence.](2100122)
