[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100000)  [Next](2100002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span> <span id="page_ix">p. ix</span> <span
id="ii-Page_ix"></span>

# <span id="ii-p0.1"></span>Translator’s Preface.

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Although,</span> according to the plan of this
“Library,” Commentaries on Holy Scripture are omitted, and the field of
selection is thus somewhat lessened, it has been no easy matter to
decide which of St. Ambrose’s many treatises should be chosen and which
omitted.

<span id="ii-p2"></span>Obviously the great work on the Faith, *De
Fide,* must be included, and this implied the addition of that on the
Holy Spirit. Then the treatise on the Duties of the Clergy, as throwing
much light on the ideas of the Fourth Century as to what was expected of
ecclesiastics, seemed to claim a place. And after these the difficulty
becomes very great. It is unfortunate that the limitations of space do
not admit of the inclusion of all the dogmatic and ascetic treatises.
Similarly, one would have been glad to insert the addresses on the
deaths of the two Emperors Valentinian and Theodosius. More, also, of
his letters might well have been added, though, as they have appeared in
full in the Oxford “Library of the Fathers,” this is a matter for less
regret.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>As will be seen, I have availed myself of the
assistance of my son, the Rev. E. de Romestin, of New College, and of
the Rev. H. T. F. Duckworth, of Merton College, each of whom took high
honours in the Theological School at Oxford.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The work has been carried out under some
difficulties, and not the least has been the loss in travelling of a
considerable portion of the manuscript, the whole of which had to be
translated anew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prolegomena.](2100002)
