[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100162)  [Next](2100164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi"></span> <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-Page_145"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p1"></span>The objection has been made, that the
words of St. John, “The Spirit is God,” are to be referred to God the
Father; since Christ afterwards declares that God is to be worshipped in
Spirit and in truth. The answer is, first, that by the word Spirit is
sometimes meant spiritual grace; next, it is shown that, if they insist
that the Person of the Holy Spirit is signified by the words “in
Spirit,” and therefore deny that adoration is due to Him, the argument
tells equally against the Son; and since numberless passages prove that
He is to be worshipped, we understand from this that the same rule is to
be laid down as regards the Spirit. Why are we commanded to fall down
before His footstool? Because by this is signified the Lord’s Body, and
as the Spirit was the Maker of this, it follows that He is to be
worshipped, and yet it does not accordingly follow that Mary is to be
worshipped. Therefore the worship of the Spirit is not done away with,
but His union with the Father is expressed, when it is said that the
Father is to be worshipped in Spirit, and this point is supported by
similar expressions.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p2"></span>69. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p2.1"></span>But</span> perhaps reference may be made to
the fact that in a later passage of the same book, the Lord again said
that God is Spirit, but spoke of God the Father. For you have this
passage in the Gospel: “The hour now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in Spirit and truth, for such also doth the Father
seek. God is Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship in Spirit
and truth.” <span id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319.md) By this passage
you wish not only to deny the divinity of the Holy Spirit, but also,
from God being worshipped in Spirit, deduce a subjection of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p4"></span>70. To which point I will briefly
answer that Spirit is often put for the grace of the Spirit, as the
Apostle also said: “For the Spirit Himself intercedeth for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered;” <span
id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320.md) that is, the grace of the Spirit,
unless perchance you have been able to hear the groanings of the Holy
Spirit. Therefore here too God is worshipped, not in the wickedness of
the heart, but in the grace of the Spirit. “For into a malicious soul
wisdom does not enter,” <span id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321.md)
because “no one can call Jesus Lord but in the Holy Spirit.” <span
id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322.md) And immediately he adds: “Now there
are diversities of gifts.” <span id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p9"></span>71. Now this cannot pertain to the
fulness, nor to the dividing of the Spirit; for neither does the mind of
man grasp His fulness, nor is He divided into any portions of Himself;
but He pours into \[the soul\] the gift of spiritual grace, in which God
is worshipped as He is also worshipped in truth, for no one worships Him
except he who drinks in the truth of His Godhead with pious affection.
And he certainly does not apprehend Christ as it were personally, nor
the Holy Spirit personally.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p10"></span>72. Or if you think that this is said
as it were personally of Christ and of the Spirit, then God is
worshipped in truth in like manner as He is worshipped in Spirit. There
is therefore either a like subjection, which God forbid that you should
believe, and the Son is not worshipped; or, which is true, there is a
like grace of Unity, and the Spirit is worshipped.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p11"></span>73. Let us then here draw our
inferences and put an end to the impious questionings of the Arians. For
if they say that the Spirit is therefore not to be worshipped because
God is worshipped in Spirit, let them then say that the Truth is not to
be worshipped, because God is worshipped in truth. For although there be
many truths, since it is written: “Truths are minished from the sons of
men;” <span id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324.md) yet they are given by
the Divine Truth, which is Christ, Who says: “I am the Way, the Truth,
and the Life.” <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325.md) If therefore
they understand the truth in this passage from custom, let them also
understand the grace of the Spirit, and there is no stumbling; or if
they receive Christ as the Truth, let them deny that He is to be
worshipped.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p14"></span>74. But they are refuted by the acts
of the pious, and by the course of the Scriptures. For Mary worshipped
Christ, and therefore is appointed to be the messenger of the
Resurrection to the apostles, <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326.md)
loosening the hereditary bond, and the huge offence of womankind. For
this the Lord wrought mystically, “that where sin had exceedingly
abounded, grace might more exceedingly abound.” <span
id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327.md) And rightly is a woman appointed
\[as messenger\] to men; that she who first had brought the message of
sin to man should first bring the message of the grace of the Lord.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p17"></span>75. And the apostles worshipped; and
therefore they who bore the testimony of the faith received authority as
to the faith. And the angels worshipped, of whom it is written: “And let
all His angels worship Him.” <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p19"></span>76. But they worship not only His
Godhead but also His Footstool, as it is written: “And worship His
footstool, for it is holy.” <span id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329.md)
Or if they deny that in Christ the mysteries also of His Incarnation are
to be worshipped, <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-Page_146"></span>in which we observe as it were certain
express traces of His Godhead, and certain ways of the Heavenly Word;
let them read that even the apostles worshipped Him when He rose again
in the glory of His Flesh. <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p22"></span>77. Therefore if it do not at all
detract from Christ, that God is worshipped in Christ, for Christ too is
worshipped; <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331.md) it certainly also
detracts nothing from the Spirit that God is worshipped in the Spirit,
for the Spirit also is worshipped, as the Apostle has said: “We serve
the Spirit of God,” <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332.md) for he
who serves worships also, as it is said in an earlier passage: “Thou
shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.” <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p27"></span>78. But lest any one should perchance
seem to elude the instance we have adduced, let us consider in what
manner that which the prophet says, “Worship His Footstool,” appears to
refer to the mystery of the divine Incarnation, for we must not estimate
the footstool from the custom of men. For neither has God a body,
neither is He other than beyond measure, that we should think a
footstool was laid down as a support for His feet. And we read that
nothing besides God is to be worshipped, for it is written: “Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.” How, then,
should the prophet, brought up under the Law, and instructed in the Law,
give a precept against the Law? The question, then, is not unimportant,
and so let us more diligently consider what the footstool is. For we
read elsewhere: “The heaven is My throne, and the earth the footstool of
My feet.” <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334.md) But the earth is
not to be worshipped by us, for it is a creature of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p29"></span>79. Let us, however, see whether the
prophet does not say that that earth is to be worshipped which the Lord
Jesus took upon Him in assuming flesh. And so, by footstool is
understood earth, but by the earth the Flesh of Christ, which we this
day also adore <span id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335.md) in the
mysteries, and which the apostles, as we said above, adored in the Lord
Jesus; for Christ is not divided but is one; nor, when He is adored as
the Son of God, is He denied to have been born of the Virgin. Since,
then, the mystery of the Incarnation is to be adored, and the
Incarnation is the work of the Spirit, as it is written, “The Holy
Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall
overshadow thee, and that Holy Thing Which shall be born of thee shall
be called the Son of God,” <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336.md)
without doubt the Holy Spirit also is to be adored, since He Who
according to the flesh was born of the Holy Spirit is adored.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p32"></span>80. And let no one divert this to the
Virgin Mary; Mary was the temple of God, not the God of the temple. And
therefore He alone is to be worshipped Who was working in His temple.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p33"></span>81. It makes, then, nothing against
our argument that God is worshipped in Spirit, for the Spirit also is
worshipped. Although if we consider the words themselves, what else
ought we to understand in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, but
the unity of the same power. For what is “must worship in Spirit and in
truth”? If, however, you do not refer this to the grace of the Spirit,
nor the true faith of conscience; but, as we said, personally (if indeed
this word person is fit to express the Divine Majesty), you must take it
of Christ and of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p34"></span>82. What means, then, the Father is
worshipped in Christ, except that the Father is in Christ, and the
Father speaks in Christ, and the Father abides in Christ. Not, indeed,
as a body in a body, for God is not a body; nor as a confused mixture
\[*confusus in confuso*\], but as the true in the true, God in God,
Light in Light; as the eternal Father in the co-eternal Son. So not an
ingrafting of a body is meant, but unity of power. Therefore, by unity
of power, Christ is jointly worshipped in the Father when God the Father
is worshipped in Christ. In like manner, then, by unity of the same
power <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-Page_147"></span>the Spirit is jointly worshipped in
God, when God is worshipped in the Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p35"></span>83. Let us investigate the force of
that word and expression more diligently, and deduce its proper meaning
from other passages. “Thou hast,” it is said, “made them all in
wisdom.” <span id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337.md) Do we here
understand that Wisdom was without a share in the things that were made?
But “all things were made by Him.” <span
id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338.md) And David says: “By the Word of the
Lord were the heavens established.” <span
id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339.md) So, then, he himself who calls the
Son of God the maker even of heavenly things, has also plainly said that
all things were made in the Son, that in the renewal of His works He
might by no means separate the Son from the Father, but unite Him to the
Father.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p39"></span>84. Paul, too, says: “For in Him were
all things created in the heavens and in the earth, visible and
invisible.” <span id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340.md) Does he, then,
when he says, “in Him,” deny that they were made through Him? Certainly
he did not deny but affirmed it. And further he says in another place:
“One Lord Jesus, through Whom are all things.” <span
id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341.md) In saying, then, “through Him,” has
he denied that all things were made in Him, through Whom he says that
all things exist? These words, “in Him” and “with Him,” have this force,
that by them is understood one and like in all respects, not contrary.
Which he also made clear farther on, saying: “All things have been
created through Him and in Him;” <span
id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342.md) for, as we said above, Scripture
witnesses that these three expressions, “with Him,” and “through Him,”
and “in Him,” are equivalent in Christ. <span
id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343.md) For you read that all things were
made through Him and in Him.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p44"></span>85. Learn also that the Father was
with Him, and He with the Father, when all things were being made.
Wisdom says: “When He was preparing the heavens I was with Him, when He
was making the fountains of waters.” <span
id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344.md) And in the Old Testament the
Father, by saying, “Let Us make,” <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345.md) showed that the Son was to be
worshipped with Himself as the Maker of all things. As, then, those
things are said to have been created in the Son, of which the Son is
received as the Creator; so, too, when God is said to be worshipped in
truth by the proper meaning of the word itself often expressed after the
same manner it ought to be understood, that the Son too is worshipped.
So in like manner is the Spirit also worshipped because God is
worshipped in Spirit. Therefore the Father is worshipped both with the
Son and with the Spirit, because the Trinity is worshipped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[145:1320](2100163.htm#fr_1319.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p3"></span> S. [John
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[145:1321](2100163.htm#fr_1320.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p5"></span> [Rom. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[145:1322](2100163.htm#fr_1321.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p6"></span> [Wisd. i.
4](../../../bib/apo/wis001.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[145:1323](2100163.htm#fr_1322.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p7"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[145:1324](2100163.htm#fr_1323.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[145:1325](2100163.htm#fr_1324.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p12"></span> [Psa.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[145:1326](2100163.htm#fr_1325.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p13"></span> S. [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[145:1327](2100163.htm#fr_1326.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p15"></span> S. [John
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[145:1328](2100163.htm#fr_1327.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p16"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[145:1329](2100163.htm#fr_1328.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p18"></span> [Heb. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[145:1330](2100163.htm#fr_1329.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p20"></span> [Psa.
99.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[146:1331](2100163.htm#fr_1330.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p21"></span> S. [Matt. xxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[146:1332](2100163.htm#fr_1331.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p23"></span> St. Ambrose here argues against
Apollinarianism, who separated the two natures in Christ and taught that
He should not be adored except in His Godhead, giving to the orthodox
the nickname of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p23.1"></span>ἀνθρωπολάτραι</span>. The Apollinarians
held that Christ was <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p23.2"></span>Θεὸς σαρκοφόρος</span>, as Nestorians made
Him <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p23.3"></span>ἄνθρωπος
Θεοφόρος</span>, instead of the proper <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p23.4"></span>Θεάνθρωπος</span>. Apollinaris said Christ
is <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p23.5"></span>οὔτε ἄνθρωπος
ἅπλος, οὔτε Θεὸς, ἀλλὰ Θεοῦ καὶ ἀνθρώπου μίξις</span>. He denied the
complete human nature of our Lord, saying that the Logos supplied the
place of the *anima rationalis.* This stunted humanity could not be
accepted by the Church, as it would involve a merely partial redemption.
Christ must be a perfect man, in order to be a perfect Redeemer.

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p24"></span>The heresy was opposed by St.
Athanasius, St. Basil, and others, condemned in synods at Alexandria
362, Rome 373 and probably 382, Antioch 378 or 379, and decisively at
Constantinople in the second œcumenical council. See *Dict. Chr. Biog.*;
Blunt, *Dict. of Sects, etc.*; Hefele on Council of Constantinople; St.
Gregory of Nazianzus’ Letters on the Apollinarian controversy in this
series, p. 437 ff.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[146:1333](2100163.htm#fr_1332.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p25"></span> [Phil. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[146:1334](2100163.htm#fr_1333.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p26"></span> [Deut. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[146:1335](2100163.htm#fr_1334.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p28"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[146:1336](2100163.htm#fr_1335.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p30"></span> There can be no doubt that St.
Ambrose held what is known as the Real Presence in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, and is here asserting the custom of his day, viz., that
Christ was worshipped as indivisibly God and Man in that Sacrament.
Similar expressions are to be found in other Fathers, and in St. Ambrose
elsewhere; *e.g.* *De Fide,* V. 10; *De Mysteriis,* §§ 52–54, 58. Bishop
Andrewes, formerly of Winchester (ob. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p30.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1626), refers to St. Ambrose
as follows: “*Nos vero et in Mysteriis Carnem Christi adoramus cum
Ambrosio, et non id, sed eum qui super altare colitur. Nec Carnem
manducamus quin adoremus prius cum Augustino.…El Sacramentum tamen nulli
adoremus.*” *Resp. ad Bellarmin,* p. 195.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[146:1337](2100163.htm#fr_1336.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p31"></span> S. [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[147:1338](2100163.htm#fr_1337.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p36"></span> [Psa.
104.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[147:1339](2100163.htm#fr_1338.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p37"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[147:1340](2100163.htm#fr_1339.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p38"></span> [Psa.
33.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[147:1341](2100163.htm#fr_1340.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p40"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[147:1342](2100163.htm#fr_1341.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p41"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[147:1343](2100163.htm#fr_1342.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p42"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[147:1344](2100163.htm#fr_1343.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p43"></span> Bk. II. 8, 9.

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[147:1345](2100163.htm#fr_1344.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p45"></span> [Prov. viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[147:1346](2100163.htm#fr_1345.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p46"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iv.xi-p46.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. From the fact that St. Paul has shown that the light
of the Godhead which the three apostles worshipped in Christ is in the
Trinity, it is made clear that the Spirit also is to be worshipped. It
is shown from the words themselves that the Spirit is intended by the
apostles. The Godhead of the same Spirit is proved from the fact that He
has a temple wherein He dwells not as a priest, but as God: and is
worshipped with the Father and the Son; whence is understood the oneness
of nature in Them.](2100164.md)
