[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100337)  [Next](2100339.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p0.1"></span>Chapter V.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p1"></span>The story of the two Pythagorean
friends, Damon and Pythias, is related by St. Ambrose, who points out
that the case mentioned in the last chapter is more praiseworthy. A
comparison is instituted between the treatment of their gods by heathen
without any punishment, and Jeroboam’s irreverence with its punishment.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p2"></span>34. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p2.1"></span>And</span> the schools of the philosophers
laud Damon and Pythias—the Pythagoreans—to the skies, of whom one, when
condemned to death, asked for time to set his affairs in order,
whereupon, the tyrant, in his cunning, not supposing that such could be
found, asked for a bondsman who should suffer the penalty if the other
delayed his return. I do not know which act of the two was the more
noble. The one found the bondsman, the other offered himself. And so
while he who was condemned met with some delay, the bondsman with calm
countenance did not refuse death. As he was being led forth his friend
returned, and offered his neck to the axe. Then the tyrant, wondering
that friendship was dearer to philosophers than life, asked himself to
be received into friendship by those whom he had condemned. The grace of
Virtue was so great that it moved even a tyrant.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p3"></span>35. These things are worthy of praise;
but are inferior to our instance. For those two were men, with us one
was a virgin, who had first to be superior to her sex; those were
friends, these were unknown to each other; those offered themselves to
one tyrant, these to many tyrants; and these more cruel, for in the
former case the tyrant spared them, these slew them; with the former one
was bound by necessity, with these the will of each was free. In this,
too, the latter were the wiser, that with those the end of their zeal
was the pleasure of friendship, with these the crown of martyrdom, for
they strove for men, these for God.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p4"></span>36. And since we have mentioned that
man who was condemned, it is fitting to add what he thought of his gods,
that you may judge how weak they are whom their own followers deride.
For he, having come into the temple of Jupiter, bade them take off the
fillet of gold with which his image was crowned, and to put on one of
wool instead, saying that the golden fillet was cold in winter and heavy
in summer. So he derided his god as being unable to bear either a weight
or cold. He, too, when he saw the golden beard of Æsculapius, bade them
remove it, saying that it was not fit for the son to have a beard when
the father had none. Again, he took away the golden bowls from the
images which held them, saying that he ought to receive what the gods
gave. For, said he, men make prayers to receive good things from the
gods, and nothing is better than gold; if, however, gold be evil, the
gods ought not to have it; if it be good, it is better that men should
have it who know how to use it.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p5"></span>37. Such objects of ridicule were
they, that neither could Jupiter defend his garment, nor Æsculapius his
beard, for Apollo had not yet begun to grow one; nor could all those who
are esteemed gods keep the golden bowls which they were holding, not
fearing the charge of theft so much as not having any feeling. Who,
then, would worship them, who can neither defend themselves as gods nor
hide themselves as men?

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p6"></span>38. But when in the temple of our God,
that wicked king Jeroboam took away the gifts which his father had laid
up, and offered to idols upon the holy altar, did not his right hand,
which he stretched out, wither, and his idols, which he called upon,
<span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-Page_380"></span>were not able to help him? Then,
turning to the Lord, he asked for pardon, and at once his hand which had
withered by sacrilege was healed by true religion. So complete an
example was there set forth in one person, both of divine mercy and
wrath when he who was sacrificing suddenly lost his right hand, but when
penitent received forgiveness. <span
id="fr_3247"></span>[3248](#fn_3247.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3247"></span>[380:3248](2100338.htm#fr_3247.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iii.v-p7"></span> [1 Kings
13.4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iii.v-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. St. Ambrose, in concluding the second book, ascribes
any good there may be in it to the merits of the virgins, and sets forth
that it was right before laying down any severe precepts to encourage
them by examples, as is done both in human teaching and in holy
Scripture.](2100339.md)
