[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100193)  [Next](2100195.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p1"></span>It cannot be proved from Scripture
that the Father existed before the Son, nor yet can arguments taken from
human reproduction avail to this end, since they bring in absurdities
without end. To dare to affirm that Christ began to exist in the course
of time is the height of blasphemy.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p2"></span>68. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p2.1"></span>You</span> ask me whether it is possible
that He Who is the Father should not be prior in existence. I ask you to
tell me when the Father existed, the Son as yet being not; prove this,
gather it from argument or evidence of Scripture. If you lean upon
arguments, you have doubtless been taught that God’s power is eternal.
Again, you have read the Scripture that saith: “O Israel, if thou wilt
hearken unto Me, there shall be no new God in thee, neither shalt thou
worship a strange God.” <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808.md) The
first of these commands betokens \[the Son’s\] eternity, the second His
possession of an identical nature, so that we can neither believe Him to
have come into existence after the Father, nor suppose Him the Son of
another Divinity. For if He existed not always with the Father, He is a
“new” \[God\]; if He is not of one Divinity with the Father, He is a
“strange” \[God\]. But He <span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xii-Page_213"></span>is not after the Father, for He is
not “a new God;” nor is He “a strange God,” for He is begotten of the
Father, and because, as it is written, He is “God above all, blessed for
ever.” <span id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809.md)

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p5"></span>69. But if the Arians believe Him to
be a strange God, why do they worship Him, when it is written: “Thou
shalt worship no strange God”? Else, if they do not worship the Son, let
them confess thereto, and the case is at an end,—that they deceive no
one by their professions of religion. This, then, we see, is the witness
of the Scriptures. If you have any others to produce, it will be your
business to do so.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p6"></span>70. Let us now go further, and gather
the truth in conclusion from arguments. For although arguments usually
give place, even to human evidence, <span
id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810.md) still, heretic, argue as thou wilt.
“Experience teaches us,” you say, “that the being which generates is
prior to that which is generated.” I answer: Follow our customary
experience through all its departments, and if the rest agree herewith,
I oppose not your claim that your point be granted; but if there be no
such agreement, how can you claim assent on this one point, when in all
the rest you lack support? Seeing, then, that you call for what is
customary, it comes about that the Son, when He was begotten of the
Father, was a little child. You have seen Him an infant, crying in the
cradle. As the years passed, He has gone forward from strength to
strength—for if He was weak with the weakness of things begotten, He
must also have fallen under the weakness, not only of birth, but of life
also.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p8"></span>71. But perchance you run to such a
pitch of folly as not to flinch from asserting these things of the Son
of God, measuring Him, as you do, by the rule of human infirmity. What,
then, if, while you cannot refuse Him the name of God, you are bent to
prove Him, by reason of weakness, to be a man? What if, whilst you
examine the Person of the Son, you are calling the Father in question,
and whilst you hastily pass sentence upon the Former, you include the
Latter in the same condemnation!

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p9"></span>72. If the Divine Generation has been
subject to the limits of time,—if we suppose this, borrowing from the
custom of human generation, then it follows, further, that the Father
bare the Son in a bodily womb, and laboured under the burden whilst ten
months sped their courses. But how can generation, as it commonly takes
place, be brought about without the help of the other sex? You see that
the common order of generation was not the commencement, and you think
that the courses of generation, which are ruled by certain necessities
whereunto bodies are subject, have always prevailed. You require the
customary course, I ask for difference of sex: you demand the
supposition of time, I that of order: you enquire into the end, I into
the beginning. Now surely it is the end that depends on the beginning,
not the beginning on the end.

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p10"></span>73. “Everything,” say you, “that is
begotten has a beginning, and therefore because the Son is the Son, He
has a beginning, and came first into existence within limits of time.”
Let this be taken as the word of their own mouth; as for myself, I
confess that the Son is begotten, but the rest of their declaration
makes me shudder. Man, dost thou confess God, and diminish His honour by
such slander? From this madness may God deliver us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[212:1809](2100194.htm#fr_1808.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p3"></span> [Ps.
81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[213:1810](2100194.htm#fr_1809.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p4"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[213:1811](2100194.htm#fr_1810.md) <span
id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.iii.xii-p7"></span> *i.e. à priori* determinations
respecting any matter cannot be maintained if they are traversed by the
statements of eye-witnesses and participators in the affair.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Further objections to the Godhead of the Son are met
by the same answer--to wit, that they may equally be urged against the
Father also. The Father, then, being in no way confined by time, place,
or anything else created, no such limitation is to be imposed upon the
Son, Whose marvellous generation is not only of the Father, but of the
Virgin also, and therefore, since in His generation of the Father no
distinction of sex, or the like, was involved, neither was it in His
generation of the Virgin.](2100195.md)
