[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100301)  [Next](2100303.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XV.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p1"></span>Returning from this digression, St.
Ambrose explains what is the meaning of St. Paul where he speaks of
coming “with a rod or in the spirit of meekness.”  One who has
grievously fallen is to be separated, but to be again restored to
religious privileges when he has sufficiently repented. The old leaven
is purged out when the hardness of the letter is tempered by the meal of
a milder interpretation. All should be sprinkled with the Church’s meal
and fed with the food of charity, lest they become like that envious
elder brother, whose example is followed by the Novatians.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p2"></span>78. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>That</span> faithful teacher, having
promised one of two things, gave each. He came with a rod, for he
separated the guilty man from the holy fellowship. And well is he said
to be delivered to Satan who is separated from the body of Christ. But
he came in love and with the spirit of meekness, whether because he so
delivered him up as to save his soul, or because he afterwards restored
to the sacraments him whom he had before separated.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p3"></span>79. For it is needful to separate one
who has grievously fallen, lest a little leaven corrupt the whole lump.
And the old leaven must be purged out, or the old man in each person;
that is, the outward man and his deeds, he who among the people has
grown old in sin and hardened in vices. And well did he say purged, not
cast forth, for what is purged is not considered wholly valueless, for
to this end is it purged, that what is of value be separated from the
worthless, but that which is cast forth is considered to have in itself
nothing of value.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p4"></span>80. The Apostle then judged that the
sinner should then at once be restored to the heavenly sacraments if he
himself wished to be cleansed. And well is it said “Purge,” for he is
purged as by certain things done by the whole people, and is washed in
the tears of the multitude, and redeemed from sin by the weeping of the
multitude, and is purged in the inner man. For Christ granted to His
Church that one should be redeemed by means of all, as she herself was
found worthy of the coming of the Lord Jesus, in order that through One
all might be redeemed.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p5"></span>81. This is Paul’s meaning which the
words make more obscure. Let us consider the exact words of the Apostle:
“Purge out,” says he, “the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, even
as ye are unleavened.” <span id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033.md) Either
that the whole Church takes up the burden of the sinner, with whom she
has to suffer in weeping and prayer and pain, and, as it were, covers
herself with his leaven, in order that by means of all that which is to
be done away in the individual doing penance may be purged by a kind of
contribution and commixture of compassion and mercy offered with manly
vigor. <span id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034.md) Or one may understand
it as that woman in the Gospel teaches us, who is a type of the Church,
when she hid the leaven in her meal, till all was leavened, and the
whole could be used as pure.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p8"></span>82. The Lord taught me in the Gospel
what leaven is when He said: “Do ye not understand that I said not
concerning bread, Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadducees?” <span id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035.md) Then, it is said,
they understood that He spake not of bread, but that they should beware
of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees. This leaven, then—that
is, the doctrine of the Pharisees and the contentiousness of the
Sadducees—the Church hides in her meal, when she softened the hard
letter of the Law by a spiritual interpretation, and ground it as it
were in the mill of her explanations, bringing out as it were from the
husks of the letter the inner secrets of the mysteries, and setting
forth the belief in the Resurrection, wherein the mercy of God is
proclaimed, and wherein it is be<span id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-Page_343"></span>lieved that the life of those who are
dead is restored.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p10"></span>83. Now this comparison seems to be
not unfitly brought forward in this place, since the kingdom of heaven
is redemption from sin, and therefore we all, both bad and good, are
mingled with the meal of the Church that we all may be a new lump. But
that no one may be afraid that an admixture of evil leaven might injure
the lump, the Apostle said: “That ye may be a new lump, even as ye are
unleavened;” <span id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036.md) that is to say,
This mixture will render you again such, as in the pure integrity of
your innocence. If we thus have compassion, we are not stained with the
sins of others, but we gain the restoration of another to the increase
of our own grace, so that our integrity remains as it was. And therefore
he adds: “For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us; ” <span
id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037.md) that is, the Passion of the Lord
profited all, and gave redemption to sinners who repented of the sins
they had committed.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p13"></span>84. Let us then keep the feast on good
food, doing penance yet joyful in our redemption, for no food is sweeter
than kindness and gentleness. Let no envy towards the sinner who is
saved be mingled with our feasts and joy, lest that envious brother, as
is set forth in the Gospel, exclude himself from the house of his
Father, because he grieved at the reception of his brother, at whose
lasting exile he was wont to rejoice.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p14"></span>85. And you Novatians cannot deny that
you are like him, who, as you say, do not come together to the Church
because by penance a hope of return had been given to those who had
lapsed. But this is only a pretence, for Novatian contrived his schism
through grief at his loss of the episcopal office.

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p15"></span>86. But do you not understand that the
Apostle also prophesied of you and says to you: “And ye are puffed up
and did not rather mourn, that he who did this deed might be taken away
from among you”? <span id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038.md) He is, then,
wholly taken away when his sin is done away, but the Apostle does not
say that the sinner is to be shut out of the Church who counsels his
cleansing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[342:3034](2100302.htm#fr_3033.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p6"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[342:3035](2100302.htm#fr_3034.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p7"></span> There is probably here a reference to
a generous custom of antiquity, whereby if any one were visited by
calamity and loss of goods, his friends contributed according to their
power to present him with a gift which should help to re-establish him.
St. Ambrose seems to apply this to the bearing one another’s burdens by
mourning, fasting, and praying with the penitent, that God might be
moved by the entreaties of all, offered with great energy, and forgive
what might be lacking in the individual. It is an instructive commentary
on the doctrine of the communion of saints.

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[342:3036](2100302.htm#fr_3035.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p9"></span> S. [Matt. xvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[343:3037](2100302.htm#fr_3036.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p11"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[343:3038](2100302.htm#fr_3037.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p12"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[343:3039](2100302.htm#fr_3038.md) <span
id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p16"></span> [1 Cor. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.vi.ii.xv-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Comparison between the apostles and Novatians. The
fitness of the words, “Ye know not what spirit ye are of,” when applied
to them. The desire of penance is extinguished by them when they take
away its fruit. And thus are sinners deprived of the promises of Christ,
though, indeed, they ought not to be too soon admitted to the mysteries.
Some examples of repentance.](2100303.md)
