[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100318)  [Next](2100320.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.i"></span>

### <span id="iv.vii.i-p0.1"></span>Introduction.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p1"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.i-p1.1"></span>The</span> state of Virginity is undoubtedly
commended in holy Scripture, both by our Lord and St. Paul, but learned
men have differed in their opinions as to the original customs and rules
observed by virgins in the earliest ages. Some suppose that from the
very beginning it was the custom for them to make a solemn profession of
the virgin life, and to live together in common. Others consider that
their vows were private, and they lived sometimes together, sometimes in
the homes of their parents. Others, again, believing that there was no
more than a simple purpose on the part of the virgins signified by the
veil, and the simplicity of their dress, attribute the first
commencements of community life to St. Ambrose himself.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p2"></span>The first opinion is hardly tenable as
regards any profession which was notorious. Statements in the earlier
Acts of Martyrs are to be regarded with suspicion, as so much of this
class of writings is spurious. The utterances also of Fathers and
Councils hardly establish anything on this point more than on the second
mentioned above.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p3"></span>There would seem to have been some who
publicly, like Marcellina, the sister of St. Ambrose, made their
profession, and formally received the veil at the hands of the Bishop;
and others, equally steadfast in purpose, whose vow of virginity was
made in private. Of the former, those living in Milan hardly seem to
have led a life in common, but at Bologna \[I. 60\] they did. The terms,
vow, taking the veil, and profession, were in use in St. Ambrose’s day,
as at present.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p4"></span>It would appear, then, that from the days
of the apostles there were some who devoted themselves to God in a life
of chastity, and that later on the promise or vow was made in the
presence of others—the bishop, clergy, and friends. These virgins lived
at home with their parents, whilst the times of persecution endured,
making it practically impossible for them to live elsewhere. Common life
amongst them would seem to have commenced in the East, and St.
Athanasius, when, seeking refuge from the Arians, he came to Rome,
introduced the custom to the Western Church.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p5"></span>St. Ambrose worked vigorously in this
direction, not only in his own diocese, but in neighbouring provinces,
and even in Africa. Early in his episcopate he addressed his flock on
the subject, and at the request of his sister, Marcellina, gathered up
his teaching in the following three books.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p6"></span>In the first book he treats of the dignity
of Virginity, and states his reason for writing. As he commences his
addresses on the anniversary of the martyrdom of St. Agnes, he takes her
story as the subject of the earlier part of the treatise, and shows how,
amongst the Jews, and even amongst the heathen, the grace of virginity
was shadowed forth, and eventually proclaimed by the corning of our
Lord. He then warns parents, especially widows, not to prevent their
daughters from hearing addresses on this subject, and touches on the
number of those who came even from great distances to receive the veil
at Milan.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p7"></span>In the second book, speaking of the
character and manner of life of virgins, he does this, as he says, by
adducing examples and instances, preferably to laying down a code of
rules. He speaks of Thecla, patron saint of Milan, a disciple of St.
Paul, and of other virgins.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p8"></span>In the third book he goes through a
summary of the address given by Pope Liberius, when Marcellina received
the veil at his hands, before a large congregation. Some <span
id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span id="iv.vii.i-Page_362"></span>cautions
are introduced by St. Ambrose against excessive austerity, and instead
of some outward acts, prayer and the practice of interior virtues are
recommended. The subject of certain virgins who had committed suicide
rather than lose their chastity is dwelt upon in answer to a question of
Marcellina.

<span id="iv.vii.i-p9"></span>The writer himself states that this
treatise was composed in the third year of his episcopate, <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.vii.i-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 377, and it is
quoted with approval by St. Jerome, *Ep*. XXII. 22 and XLVIII. 14 \[Vol.
VI., pp. 31 and 75, of this series, and St. Augustine, *de doct.
Christ.* IV. 48, 50.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book I.](2100320.md)
