[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100250)  [Next](2100252) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p0.1"></span>Chapter XI.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p1"></span>The particular distinction which the
Arians endeavoured to prove upon the Apostle’s teaching that all things
are “of” the Father and “through” the Son, is overthrown, it being shown
that in the passage cited the same Omnipotence is ascribed both to
Father and to Son, as is proved from various texts, especially from the
words of St. Paul himself, in which heretics foolishly find a reference
to the Father only, though indeed there is no diminution or inferiority
of the Son’s sovereignty proved, even by such a reference. Finally, the
three phrases, “of Whom,” “through Whom,” “in Whom,” are shown to
suppose or imply no difference (of power), and each and all to hold true
of the Three Persons.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p2"></span>139. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p2.1"></span>Now</span> we come to that laughable
method, attempted by some, of showing a difference of Power to subsist
between Father and Son, on the strength of apostolic testimony, it being
written: “But for us there is One God, the Father, of Whom are all
things, and we in Him, and One Lord, Jesus Christ, through Whom are all
things, and we through Him.” <span id="fr_2461"></span>[2462](#fn_2461)
It is urged that no small difference in degree of Divine Majesty is
signified in the affirmation that all things are “of” the Father, and
“through” the Son. Whereas nothing is clearer than that here a plain
reason is given of the Omnipotence of the Son, inasmuch as whilst all
things are “of” the Father, none the less are they all “through” the
Son. <span id="fr_2462"></span>[2463](#fn_2462)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p5"></span>140. The Father is not “amongst” all
things, for to Him it is confessed that “all things serve Thee.” <span
id="fr_2463"></span>[2464](#fn_2463) Nor is the Son reckoned “amongst”
all things, for “all things were made by Him,” <span
id="fr_2464"></span>[2465](#fn_2464) and “all things exist
together <span id="fr_2465"></span>[2466](#fn_2465) in Him, and He is
above all the heavens.” <span id="fr_2466"></span>[2467](#fn_2466) The
Son, therefore, exists not “amongst” but *above* all things, being,
indeed, after the flesh, of the people, <span
id="fr_2467"></span>[2468](#fn_2467) of the Jews, but yet at the same
time God over all, blessed for ever, <span
id="fr_2468"></span>[2469](#fn_2468) having a Name which is above every
name, <span id="fr_2469"></span>[2470](#fn_2469) it being said of Him,
“Thou hast put all things in subjection under His feet.” <span
id="fr_2470"></span>[2471](#fn_2470) But in making *all things* subject
to Him, He left nothing that is not subject, even as the Apostle hath
said. <span id="fr_2471"></span>[2472](#fn_2471) But suppose that the
Apostle’s words were intended with reference to the Incarnate Lord; how
then can we doubt the incomparable majesty of His Divine Generation?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p15"></span>141. Certain it is, then, that between
Father and Son there can be no difference of Power. Nay, so far is such
difference from being present, that the same Apostle has said that all
things are “of” Him, by Whom are all things, as followeth: “For of Him
and through Him and in Him are all things.” <span
id="fr_2472"></span>[2473](#fn_2472)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p17"></span>142. Now if, as they suppose, it is
the Father alone Who is spoken of, it cannot be that He is at once
Omnipotent because all things are of Him, and not Omnipotent because all
things are through Him. <span id="fr_2473"></span>[2474](#fn_2473) On
<span id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-Page_281"></span>their own showing, then, they will
declare the Father lacking in Power, and not Omnipotent, or at the least
they will be confessing with their own mouth, all against their will
though it be, the Omnipotence of the Son as well as of the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p19"></span>143. Howbeit, let them decide whether
they will understand this affirmation as made concerning the Father. If
they do so decide then all things are “through” Him also. If they decide
that it is the Son Who is spoken of, then all things are “of” Him as
well as “of” the Father. But if all things are “through” the Father
also, then surely there is no argument for diminishing from the honour
due to the Son; and if all things are “of” the Son, the Son must be
honoured in like manner as the Father is.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p20"></span>144. In case our opponents should
suspect that we are taking advantage of some intrusion of a single
spurious verse into the text, let us review the whole passage. “O depth
of the riches of God’s wisdom and knowledge!” exclaims the Apostle, “how
unsearchable are His judgments, and His ways past finding out! For Who
hath known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been His counsellor? Or who
hath been first to give unto Him, and shall be recompensed? For of Him
and through Him and in Him are all things. To Him be glory for
ever!” <span id="fr_2474"></span>[2475](#fn_2474)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p22"></span>145. Who, then, think they, is here
spoken of—the Father or the Son? If it be the Father—then we answer that
the Father is not the Wisdom of God, for the Son is. But what is there
that is impossible to Wisdom, of Whom it is written: “Seeing that she is
almighty and abiding, she maketh all things new in herself”? <span
id="fr_2475"></span>[2476](#fn_2475) We read of Wisdom, then, not as
approaching, but as abiding. <span id="fr_2476"></span>[2477](#fn_2476)
Thus have you the authority of Solomon to teach you of the Omnipotence
and Eternity of Wisdom, and of her Goodness as well, for it is written:
“But malice overcometh not Wisdom.” <span
id="fr_2477"></span>[2478](#fn_2477)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p26"></span>146. But to purpose. “How
unsearchable,” saith the Apostle, “are His judgments!” Now if “the
Father hath given all judgment to the Son,” <span
id="fr_2478"></span>[2479](#fn_2478) it seems that the Father <span
id="fr_2479"></span>[2480](#fn_2479) points to the Son as Judge.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p29"></span>147. But now, to show us that He is
speaking of the Son, not of the Father, St. Paul proceeds: “Who was
first in giving to Him?” For “the Father hath given to the Son,” but it
was as acknowledging the rights of Him Whom He has begotten, not by way
of largess. Therefore, it being undeniable that the Son has received at
the hands of the Father, as it is written, “All things have been given
unto Me of My Father,” <span id="fr_2480"></span>[2481](#fn_2480) yet,
in saying, “Who was first in giving to Him?” the Apostle has not denied
that the Son has received gifts of the Father, by virtue of His Nature,
but he has indeed shown that, of Father and Son, Neither can be said to
be before the Other, forasmuch as, albeit the Father has given gifts
unto the Son, yet He has not so bestowed them as upon one that began to
be after Him; because the uncreate and incomprehensible Trinity, Which
is of One Eternity and Glory, admits neither difference of time nor
degree of precedence.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p31"></span>148. If, however, we hold ourselves
more bound to observe those Greek manuscripts which show “<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p31.1"></span>τίς προσέδωχεν
αὐτῳ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p31.2"></span>;</span>” it is clear that He to Whom
nothing can be added is not unequal to Him Who is perfect and complete.
Therefore, if this passage from the Apostle, in its entirety, is better
understood with reference to the Son, we see that we must also believe
concerning the Son, that all things are of Him, even as it is written:
“For of Him and through Him and in Him are all things.”

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p32"></span>149. Be it so, nevertheless, that they
suppose the passage to be intended of the Father, then let us call to
mind that even as we read of all things being *of* Him, so too we read
of all things being *through* Him, that is to say, the authority of the
Father and of the Son is extended over the whole created universe. And,
though we have already proved the Omnipotence of the Son by the
Omnipotence of the Father, <span id="fr_2481"></span>[2482](#fn_2481)
still—forasmuch as they are ever bent upon disparagement—let them
consider that they disparage the Father as well as the Son. For if the
Son be limited in might, because all things are *through* Him, do we say
further, that the Father likewise is limited, because all things are
through Him also?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p34"></span>150. But to bring them to understand
that <span id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-Page_282"></span>these phrases involve no difference, I
will once again show that it is the same person, “of” whom anything is,
and “through” whom anything is, and that we read of things being related
in both these ways to the Father. For we find: “Faithful is God, through
Whom ye were called into the fellowship of His Son.” <span
id="fr_2482"></span>[2483](#fn_2482) Let our adversaries weigh the
meaning of the Apostle’s words. We are called “through” the Father—they
raise no controversy: we are created “through” the Son—and this they
have set down as a mark of inferiority. <span
id="fr_2483"></span>[2484](#fn_2483) The Father has called us into
fellowship with His Son, and this truth we, as in duty bound, devoutly
receive. The Son has created all things, and Arius’ followers imagine
that here they have not the decree of a free Will, but a forced service,
slavishly performed!

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p37"></span>151. Again, to obtain fuller
understanding that, forasmuch as we are called through the Father into
fellowship with His Son, there is no difference of Power in the Father
and the Son, \[note that\] the fellowship itself has its beginning of
the Son, as it is written: “For from His fulness have we all received,”
though, if we follow the Greek text of the Gospel, we ought to render
“*of* His fulness.” <span id="fr_2484"></span>[2485](#fn_2484)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p39"></span>152. See, then, how there is
fellowship both *through* the Father and *of* the Son, and yet not a
different fellowship, but one and the same. “And that our fellowship be
with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ.” <span
id="fr_2485"></span>[2486](#fn_2485)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p41"></span>153. Observe, further, that Scripture
speaks of our having one fellowship not only “of” the Father and the
Son, but also “of” the Holy Spirit. “The grace of Our Lord Jesus
Christ,” saith the Apostle, “and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Spirit be with you all.” <span
id="fr_2486"></span>[2487](#fn_2486)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p43"></span>154. Now, I ask, wherein does He,
through Whom are all things, appear less than He, of Whom are all
things? Is it because He is declared to be the Worker? But the Father
also works, for He is true who said, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I
work.” <span id="fr_2487"></span>[2488](#fn_2487) Therefore, even as the
Father worketh, so worketh the Son also; and so He Who worketh is not
limitary in power nor abject, for the Father also worketh; which being
so, that which is common to the Son with the Father, or even which the
Son has by the Father, ought not to be the less esteemed, lest heretics
further dishonour the Father in the Person of the Son.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p45"></span>155. Not to be passed over for
silencing the disputings of Arian misbelief are those words of the same
Saint John, which he set down in another Scripture: “If ye know that He
is just, know that he which doeth righteousness is born of Him.” <span
id="fr_2488"></span>[2489](#fn_2488) But who is righteous, save the
Lord, Who loveth righteousness? <span
id="fr_2489"></span>[2490](#fn_2489) Or whom—as the foregoing texts warn
us—have we to assure us of everlasting life, if we have not the Son? If,
therefore, the Son of God hath promised us everlasting life, and He is
righteous, surely we are born “of” Him. Else, if our adversaries deny
that we are born of the Son by grace, they likewise deny His
righteousness.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p48"></span>156. Thou must therefore believe that
all things are of the Son of God \[even as of God the Father, for even
as God is the Father of all, so likewise is the Son the Author and
Creator of all. We see, then, the vanity of this their questioning,
forasmuch as it holds good of the Son \[as of the Father\], that “of Him
and through Him and in Him are all things.”

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p49"></span>157. We have shown how all things are
“of” Him, and likewise how all things are also “through” Him. Who then
doubts that all things are “in” Him, when another Scripture saith: “For
in Him are all things founded, that are in the heavens, and in Him they
were created, and He is before all things, and all things consist in
Him”? ([Col. i. 16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p49.1"></span>). Of Him, then, thou hast grace; Himself
thou hast for thy Creator; in Him thou findest the foundation of all
things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2461"></span>[280:2462](2100251.htm#fr_2461) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p3"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2462"></span>[280:2463](2100251.htm#fr_2462) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p4"></span> Cf. Bk. I. iii. 26.

<span id="fn_2463"></span>[280:2464](2100251.htm#fr_2463) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p6"></span> [Ps. cxix.
91](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#091)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2464"></span>[280:2465](2100251.htm#fr_2464) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2465"></span>[280:2466](2100251.htm#fr_2465) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p8"></span> Or “consist;” Lat.—*constant;*
Greek—<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p8.1"></span>τὰ πάντα ἐν
αὐτῳ συνέστηκεν</span>.

<span id="fn_2466"></span>[280:2467](2100251.htm#fr_2466) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p9"></span> [Col. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2467"></span>[280:2468](2100251.htm#fr_2467) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p10"></span> Lat.—*familia.* Cf. the expression
“house of Israel.”—[Ps. cxv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2468"></span>[280:2469](2100251.htm#fr_2468) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p11"></span> [Rom.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005), [Rom.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2469"></span>[280:2470](2100251.htm#fr_2469) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p12"></span> [Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2470"></span>[280:2471](2100251.htm#fr_2470) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p13"></span> [Ps. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2471"></span>[280:2472](2100251.htm#fr_2471) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p14"></span> [Heb. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2472"></span>[280:2473](2100251.htm#fr_2472) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p16"></span> [Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2473"></span>[280:2474](2100251.htm#fr_2473) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p18"></span> “You think, perhaps,” St. Ambrose
might have said to his Arian opponents, “that this text speaks of God
the Father only, as it begins with ‘of Him.’ Very good. But whilst, in
dealing with [1 Cor. viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p18.1"></span>, you acknowledge that the Father is
Omnipotent because ‘all things are of Him,’ you deny that the Son is
Omnipotent, on the strength of the statement that all things are
‘*through*’ Him. Now here ([Rom. xi.
36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p18.2"></span>) we find that all things are said to be
‘through’ as well as ‘of’ One and the same Person—the Father. On your
own showing, then, you must conclude that the Father is both Omnipotent
(all things being ‘of’ Him) and not Omnipotent (all things being only
‘through’ Him) at the same time and in the same respect. Which is absurd
and impossible. Clearly, then, the inference you want to draw from the
difference of the expressions ‘of Him’ and ‘by Him’ will not stand, if
you make [Rom. xi. 36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p18.3"></span> a declaration regarding the Father only.
But if you make it a declaration concerning the Son, or even including
the Son in its reference, you upset your own position.”

<span id="fn_2474"></span>[281:2475](2100251.htm#fr_2474) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p21"></span> [Rom. xi.
33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p21.1"></span>. St. Ambrose’s quotation of the passage
*in extenso* shows us how texts ought to be used in argument—namely, not
rent from their *con*text, not as unrelated apophthegms.

<span id="fn_2475"></span>[281:2476](2100251.htm#fr_2475) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p23"></span> [Wisd. vii.
27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2476"></span>[281:2477](2100251.htm#fr_2476) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p24"></span> “Approaching”—Lat. *accedentem. An
“accidentem” potius sit legendum?—ut Sapientia non sit accidens, sed
proprium, Substantiæ Divinæ.*

<span id="fn_2477"></span>[281:2478](2100251.htm#fr_2477) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p25"></span> [Wisd. vii.
30](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2478"></span>[281:2479](2100251.htm#fr_2478) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p27"></span> S. [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2479"></span>[281:2480](2100251.htm#fr_2479) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p28"></span> *Potest hic manus incuriose
transcribentis deprehendi, cum “Pauli” pro “Patris” nomen potius
legendum esse videatur. Nec tamen prohibemur quin sic verba
intelligamus, ut Pater Ipse in hoc Epistolæ Romanæ loco, per calamum
Apostoli sit locutus.*

<span id="fn_2480"></span>[281:2481](2100251.htm#fr_2480) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p30"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2481"></span>[281:2482](2100251.htm#fr_2481) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p33"></span> See § 140, and comparison of [Ps.
119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091), [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [Col.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017), [Ps.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#008), [Heb.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2482"></span>[282:2483](2100251.htm#fr_2482) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p35"></span> Or “into fellowship with His Son.”
“Fellowship” in the orig. is *communio* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p35.1"></span>κοινωνία</span>). [1 Cor. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p35.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2483"></span>[282:2484](2100251.htm#fr_2483) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p36"></span> Or “as an inferior work.”

<span id="fn_2484"></span>[282:2485](2100251.htm#fr_2484) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p38"></span> S. [John i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2485"></span>[282:2486](2100251.htm#fr_2485) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p40"></span> [1 John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2486"></span>[282:2487](2100251.htm#fr_2486) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p42"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p42.1"></span>. “Fellowship” in the Latin of St. Ambrose
is (in this citation and that of [1 John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p42.2"></span>,
in § 152) *communicatio;* Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p42.3"></span>κοινωνία</span>.

<span id="fn_2487"></span>[282:2488](2100251.htm#fr_2487) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p44"></span> S. [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2488"></span>[282:2489](2100251.htm#fr_2488) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p46"></span> [1 John ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2489"></span>[282:2490](2100251.htm#fr_2489) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p47"></span> [Ps. xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#008)<span id="iv.iv.vi.xi-p47.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. The comparison, found in the Gospel of St. John, of
the Son to a Vine and the Father to a husbandman, must be understood
with reference to the Incarnation. To understand it with reference to
the Divine Generation is to doubly insult the Son, making Him inferior
to St. Paul, and bringing Him down to the level of the rest of mankind,
as well as in like manner the Father also, by making Him not merely to
be on one footing with the same Apostle, but even of no account at all.
The Son, indeed, in so far as being God, is also the husbandman, and, as
regards His Manhood, a grape-cluster. True statement of the Father's
pre-eminence.](2100252)
