[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100127)  [Next](2100129.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter VIII.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p1"></span>The Holy Spirit is given by God alone,
yet not wholly to each person, since there is no one besides Christ
capable of receiving Him wholly. Charity is shed abroad by the Holy
Spirit, Who, prefigured by the mystical ointment, is shown to have
nothing common with creatures; and He, inasmuch as He is said to proceed
from the mouth of God, must not be classed with creatures, nor with
things divisible, seeing He is eternal.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p2"></span>90. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>Observe</span> at the same time that God
gives the Holy Spirit. For this is no work of man, nor gift of man; but
He Who is invoked by the priest is given by God, wherein is the gift of
God and the ministry of the priest. For if the Apostle Paul judged that
he was not able to give the Holy Spirit himself by his own authority,
and considered himself so far unequal to this office that he wished us
to be filled by God with the Spirit, <span
id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902.md) who is sufficient to dare to arrogate
to himself the conferring of this gift? So the Apostle uttered this wish
in prayer, and did not claim a right by any authority of his own; he
desired to obtain, he did not presume to command. Peter, too, says that
he is not capable of compelling or restraining the Holy Spirit. For he
spoke thus: “Wherefore if God has granted them the same grace as to us,
who was I that I could resist God?” <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903.md)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p5"></span>91. But perchance they would not be
moved by the example of apostles, and so let us use divine utterances;
for it is written: “Jacob is My servant, I will uphold him; Israel is My
elect, My soul hath upheld him, I put My Spirit upon him.” <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904.md) The Lord also said by Isaiah: “The
Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because He hath anointed Me.” <span
id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905.md)

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p8"></span>92. Who, then, can dare to say that the
substance of the Holy Spirit is created, at Whose shining in our hearts
we behold the beauty of divine truth, and the distance between the
creature and the Godhead, that the work may be distinguished from its
Author? Or of what creature has God so spoken as to say: “I will pour
out of My Spirit”? <span id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906.md) He said not
Spirit, but “of My Spirit,” for we are not able to receive the fulness
of the Holy Spirit, but we receive as much as our Master divides to us
of His own according to His will. <span
id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907.md) For as the Son of God thought it not
robbery that He should be equal to God, but emptied Himself, that we
might be able to receive Him in our minds; but He emptied Himself not
that He was void of His own fulness, but in order that He, Whose fulness
I could not endure, might infuse Himself into me according to the
measure of my capacity, in like manner also the Father says that He
pours out of the Spirit upon all flesh; for He did not pour Him forth
wholly, but that which He poured forth abounded for all.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p11"></span>93. There was therefore a pouring out
upon us of the Spirit, but upon the Lord Jesus, when He was in the form
of man, the <span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-Page_106"></span>Spirit abode, as it is written: “Upon
Whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending from heaven, and abiding upon
Him, He it is Who baptizeth in the Holy Spirit.” <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908.md) Around us is the liberality of the
Giver in abundant provision, in Him abides for ever the fulness of the
Spirit. He shed forth then what He deemed to be sufficient for us, and
what was shed forth is not separated nor divided; but He has a unity of
fulness wherewith He may enlighten the sight of our hearts according to
what our strength is capable of. Lastly, we receive so much as the
advancing of our mind acquires, for the fulness of the grace of the
Spirit is indivisible, but is shared in by us according to the capacity
of our own nature.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p13"></span>94. God, then, sheds forth of the
Spirit, and the love of God is also shed abroad through the Spirit; in
which point we ought to recognize the unity of the operation and of the
grace. For as God shed forth of the Holy Spirit, so also “the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts through the Holy Spirit;” <span
id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909.md) in order that we may understand that
the Holy Spirit is not a work, Who is the dispenser and plenteous Fount
of the divine love.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p15"></span>95. In like manner that you may
believe that that which is shed abroad cannot be common to the creatures
but peculiar to the Godhead, the name of the Son is also poured forth,
as you read: “Thy Name is as ointment poured forth.” <span
id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910.md) Of which saying nothing can surpass
the force. For as ointment closed up in a vase keeps in its perfume, so
long as it is confined in the narrow space of that vase, though it
cannot reach many, it yet preserves its strength. But when the ointment
has been poured out of that vase wherein it was enclosed, it spreads far
and wide; so, too, the Name of Christ before His coming amongst the
people of Israel was enclosed in the minds of the Jews as in some vase.
For “God is known in Judah, His Name is great in Israel;” <span
id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911.md) that is, the Name which the vases of
the Jews held confined in their narrow limits.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p18"></span>96. Even then that Name was indeed
great, when it remained in the narrow limits of the weak and few, but it
had not yet poured forth its greatness throughout the hearts of the
Gentiles, and to the ends of the whole world. But after that He by His
coming had shone throughout the whole world, He spread abroad that
divine Name of His throughout all creatures, not filled up by any
addition (for fulness admits not of increase), but filling up the empty
spaces, that His Name might be wonderful in all the world. The pouring
forth, then, of His Name signifies a kind of abundant exuberance of
graces and copiousness of heavenly goods, for whatever is poured forth
flows over from abundance.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p19"></span>97. So as wisdom which proceeds from
the mouth of God cannot be said to be created, nor the Word Which is
uttered from His heart, nor the power in which is the fulness of the
eternal Majesty; so, too, the Spirit which is poured forth from the
mouth of God cannot be considered to be created, since God Himself has
shown their unity to be such that He speaks of His pouring forth of His
Spirit. By which we understand that the grace of God the Father is the
same as that of the Holy Spirit, and that without any division or loss
it is divided to the hearts of each. That, then, which is shed abroad of
the Holy Spirit is neither severed, nor comprehended in any corporeal
parts, nor divided.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p20"></span>98. For how can it be credible that
the Spirit should be divided by any parcelling out? John says of God:
“Hereby know we that He abides in us by the Spirit which He hath given
us.” <span id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912.md) But that which abides
always is certainly not changed, therefore if it suffers no change it is
eternal. And so the Holy Spirit is eternal, but the creature is liable
to fault, and therefore subject to change. But that which is subject to
change cannot be eternal, and there cannot therefore be anything in
common between the Spirit and the creature, because the Spirit is
eternal, but every creature is temporal.

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p22"></span>99. But the Apostle also shows that
the Holy Spirit is eternal, for: “If the blood of bulls and of goats,
and the sprinkling the ashes of an heifer sanctifieth to the purifying
of the flesh, how much more the blood of Christ, Who through the eternal
Spirit offered Himself without spot to God?” <span
id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913.md) Therefore the Spirit is eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_902"></span>[105:903](2100128.htm#fr_902.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p3"></span> [Eph. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[105:904](2100128.htm#fr_903.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p4"></span> [Acts xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[105:905](2100128.htm#fr_904.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p6"></span> [Isa. xlii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[105:906](2100128.htm#fr_905.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p7"></span> [Isa. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[105:907](2100128.htm#fr_906.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p9"></span> [Joel ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[105:908](2100128.htm#fr_907.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p10"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[106:909](2100128.htm#fr_908.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p12"></span> S. [John i.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[106:910](2100128.htm#fr_909.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p14"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[106:911](2100128.htm#fr_910.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p16"></span> [Song of Sol.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[106:912](2100128.htm#fr_911.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p17"></span> [Psa.
76.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[106:913](2100128.htm#fr_912.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p21"></span> [1 John iii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[106:914](2100128.htm#fr_913.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p23"></span> [Heb.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ii.ix-p23.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Holy Spirit is rightly called the ointment of
Christ, and the oil of gladness; and why Christ Himself is not the
ointment, since He was anointed with the Holy Spirit. It is not strange
that the Spirit should be called Ointment, since the Father and the Son
are also called Spirit. And there is no confusion between them, since
Christ alone suffered death, Whose saving cross is then spoken
of.](2100129.md)
