[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100333)  [Next](2100335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iii.i"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iii.i-p0.1"></span>Chapter I.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.i-p1"></span>In this book St. Ambrose purposes to
treat of the training of virgins, using examples rather than precepts,
and explains why he does so in writing rather than by word of mouth.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.i-p2"></span>1. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iii.i-p2.1"></span>In</span> the former book I wished (though
I was not able) to set forth how great is the gift of virginity, that
the grace of the heavenly gift might of itself invite the reader. In the
second book it is fitting that the virgin should be instructed and, as
it were, be educated by the teaching of suitable precepts.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.i-p3"></span>2. But, inasmuch as I am feeble in
advising and unequal to teaching (for he who teaches ought to excel him
who is taught), lest I should seem to have abandoned the task I have
undertaken, or to have taken too much upon myself, I thought it better
to instruct by examples than by precepts; for more progress may be made
by means of an example, inasmuch as that which has been already done is
considered to be not difficult, and that which has been tried to be
expedient, and that which has been transmitted in succession to us by a
kind of hereditary practice of ancestral virtue to be binding in
religion.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.i-p4"></span>3. But if any one rebukes me for
presumption, let him rather rebuke me for zeal, because I thought that I
ought not to refuse even this to the virgins who asked it of me. For I
preferred rather to run the risk of perilling my own modesty, than not
to fulfil the wish of those whose pursuits even our God favours with
kindly approbation.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.i-p5"></span>4. Nor can the mark of presumption be
set on my task, since, when they had those from whom they could learn,
they sought my good-will rather than my teaching, and my zeal may be
excused, since when they had the guidance of a martyr for the observance
of discipline, I did not think it superfluous if I could turn the
persuasion of my discourse into an allurement to profession. He who
teaches with facility restrains fault with severity; I, who cannot
teach, entice.

<span id="iv.vii.iii.i-p6"></span>5. And because many who were absent
desired to have the use of my discourse, I compiled this book, in order
that holding in their hands the substance of what my voice had uttered
to them, they might not think that he whom they were holding failed
them. But let us go on with our plan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The life of Mary is set before virgins as an example,
and her many virtues are dwelt upon, her chastity, humility, hard life,
love of retirement, and the like; then her kindness to others, her zeal
in learning, and love of frequenting the temple. St. Ambrose then sets
forth how she, adorned with all these virtues, will come to meet the
numberless bands of virgins and lead them with great triumph to the
bridal chamber of the Spouse.](2100335)
