[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100030)  [Next](2100032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIX.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xix-p1"></span>How should seemliness be represented by
a speaker? Does beauty add anything to virtue, and, if so, how much?
Lastly, what care should we take that nothing conceited or effeminate be
seen in us?

<span id="iv.i.ii.xix-p2"></span>81. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xix-p2.1"></span>It</span> has given me pleasure to dwell
somewhat at length on the various functions of modesty; for I speak to
you who either can recognize the good that is in it in your own cases,
or at least do not know its loss. Fitted as it is for all ages, persons,
times, and places, yet it most beseems youthful and childish years.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xix-p3"></span>82. But at every age we must take care
that all we do is seemly and becoming, and that the course of our life
forms one harmonious and complete whole. Wherefore Cicero <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) thinks that a certain order ought to
be observed in what is seemly. He says that this lies in beauty, order,
and in appointment fitted for action. This, as he says, it is difficult
to explain in words, yet it can be quite sufficiently understood.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xix-p5"></span>83. Why Cicero should have introduced
beauty, I do not quite understand; though it is true he also speaks in
praise of the powers of the body. We certainly do not locate virtue in
the beauty of the body, though, on the other hand, we do recognize a
certain grace, as when modesty is wont to cover the face with a blush of
shame, and to make it more pleasing. For as a workman is wont to work
better the more suitable his materials are, so modesty is more
conspicuous in the comeliness of the body. Only the comeliness of the
body should not be assumed; it should be natural and artless, unstudied
rather than elaborated, not heightened by costly and glistening
garments, but just clad in ordinary clothing. One must see that nothing
is wanting that one’s credit or necessity demands, whilst nothing must
be added for the sake of splendour.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xix-p6"></span>84. The voice, too, should not be
languid, nor feeble, nor womanish in its tone,—such a tone of voice as
many are in the habit of using, under the idea of seeming important. It
should preserve a certain quality, and rhythm, and a manly vigour. For
all to do what is best suited to their character and sex, that is to
attain to beauty of life. This is the best order for movements, this the
employment fitted for every action. But as I cannot approve of a soft or
weak tone of voice, or an effeminate gesture of the body, so also I
cannot approve of what is boorish and rustic. Let us follow nature. The
imitation of her provides us with a principle of training, and gives us
a pattern of virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_133"></span>[15:134](2100031.htm#fr_133) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xix-p4"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 35, § 126.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX. If we are to preserve our modesty we must avoid
fellowship with profligate men, also the banquets of strangers, and
intercourse with women; our leisure time at home should be spent in
pious and virtuous pursuits.](2100032)
