[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100033)  [Next](2100035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXII.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p1"></span>On reflection and passion, and on
observing propriety of speech, both in ordinary conversation and in
holding discussions.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p2"></span>98. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p2.1"></span>There</span> are two kinds of mental
motions <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) —those of reflection and
of passion. The one has to do with reflection, the other with passion.
There is no confusion one with the other, for they are markedly
different and unlike. Reflection has to search and as it were to grind
out the truth. Passion prompts and stimulates us to do something. Thus
by its very nature reflection diffuses tranquillity and calm; and
passion sends forth the impulse to act. Let us then be ready to allow
reflection on good things to enter into our mind, and to make passion
submit to reason (if indeed we wish to direct our minds to guard what is
seemly), lest desire for anything should shut out reason. Rather let
reason test and see what befits virtue.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p4"></span>99. And since we have said that we
must aim at the observance of what is seemly, <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) so as to know what is the due measure
in our words and deeds, and as order in speech rather than in action
comes first; speech is divided into two kinds: first, as it is used in
friendly conversation, and then in the treatment and discussion of
matters of faith and justice. In either case we must take care that
there is no irritation. Our language should be mild and quiet, and full
of kindness and courtesy and free from insult. Let there be no obstinate
disputes in our familiar conversations, for they are wont <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-Page_18"></span>only to
bring up useless subjects, rather than to supply anything useful. Let
there be discussion without wrath, urbanity without bitterness, warning
without sharpness, advice without giving offence. And as in every action
of our life we ought to take heed to this, in order that no overpowering
impulse of our mind may ever shut out reason (let us always keep a place
for counsel), so, too, ought we to observe that rule in our language, so
that neither wrath nor hatred may be aroused, and that we may not show
any signs of our greed or sloth.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p6"></span>100. Let our language be of this sort,
more especially when we are speaking of the holy Scriptures. For of what
ought we to speak more often than of the best subject of conversation,
of its exhortation to watchfulness, its care for good instruction? Let
us have a reason for beginning, and let our end be within due
limits. <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) For a speech that is
wearisome only stirs up anger. But surely it is most unseemly that when
every kind of conversation generally gives additional pleasure, this
should give cause of offence!

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p8"></span>101. The treatment also of such
subjects as the teaching of faith, instruction on self-restraint,
discussion on justice, exhortation to activity, must not be taken up by
us and fully gone into all at one time, but must be carried on in
course, so far as we can do it, and as the subject-matter of the passage
allows. Our discourse must not be too lengthy, nor too soon cut short,
for fear the former should leave behind it a feeling of aversion, and
the latter produce carelessness and neglect. The address should be plain
and simple, clear and evident, full of dignity and weight; it should not
be studied or too refined, nor yet, on the other hand, be unpleasing and
rough in style.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[17:149](2100034.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p3"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 36, § 132.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[17:150](2100034.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p5"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 37.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[18:151](2100034.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxii-p7"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 37, § 135.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. Jests, although at times they may be quite proper,
should be altogether banished among clerics. The voice should be plain
and frank.](2100035.md)
