[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100267)  [Next](2100269.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p0.1"></span>Chapter XIV.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p1"></span>He continues the discussion of the
difficulty he has entered upon, and teaches that Christ is not subject
but only according to the flesh. Christ, however, whilst in subjection
in the Flesh, still gave proofs of His Godhead. He combats the idea that
Christ is made subject in This. The humanity indeed, which He adopted,
has been so far made subject in us, as ours has been raised in that very
humanity of His. Lastly, we are taught, when that same subjection of
Christ will take place.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p2"></span>170. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>However</span>, lest anyone should cavil,
see what care Scripture takes under divine inspiration. For it shows to
us in what Christ is made subject to God, whilst it also teaches us in
what He made the universe subject to Himself. And so it says: “Now we
see not yet all things put under Him.” <span
id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738.md) For we see Jesus made a little
lower than the angels for the suffering of death. <span
id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739.md) It shows therefore that He was made
lower in taking on Him our flesh. What then hinders Him from openly
showing His subjection in taking on Him our flesh, through which He
subjects all things to Himself, whilst He Himself is made subject in it
to God the Father?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p5"></span>171. Let us then think of His
subjection. “Father,” He says, “if Thou be willing, remove this cup from
Me; nevertheless not My will but Thine be done.” <span
id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740.md) Therefore that subjection will be
according to the assumption of human nature; as we read: “Being found in
fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, being made obedient unto
death.” <span id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741.md) The subjection
therefore is that of obedience; the obedience is that of death; the
death is that of the assumed humanity; that subjection therefore will be
the subjection of the assumed humanity. Thus in no wise is there a
weakness in the Godhead, but there is such a discharge of pious duty as
this.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p8"></span>172. See how I do not fear their
intentions. They allege that He must be subject to God the Father, I say
He was subject to Mary His Mother. For it is written of Joseph and Mary:
“He was subject unto them.” <span id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742.md)
But if they think so, let them say how the Deity was made subject to
men.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p10"></span>173. Let not the fact that He is said
to have been made subject work against Him, Who receives no hurt from
the fact that He is called a servant, or is stated to have been
crucified, or is spoken of as dead. For when He died He lived; when He
was made subject He was reigning; when He was buried He revived again.
He offered Himself in subjection to human power, yet at another time He
declared He was the Lord of eternal glory. He was before the judge, yet
claimed for Himself a throne at the right hand of God, as Judge forever.
For thus it is written: “Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting
on the right hand of the power of God, and coming in the <span
id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-Page_306"></span>clouds of heaven.” <span
id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743.md) He was scourged by the Jews, and
commanded the angels; He was born of Mary under the law; <span
id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744.md) He was before Abraham above the
law. On the cross He was revered by nature; the sun fled; the earth
trembled; the angels became silent. Could the elements see the
Generation of Him Whose Passion they feared to see? And will they uphold
the subjection of an adorable Nature in Him, in Whom they could not
endure the subjection of the body?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p13"></span>174. But since the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit are of one Nature, the Father certainly will not be
in subjection to Himself. And therefore the Son will not be in
subjection in that in which He is one with the Father; lest it should
seem that through the unity of the Godhead the Father also is in
subjection to the Son. Therefore, as upon that cross it was not the
fulness of the Godhead, but our weakness that was brought into
subjection, so also will the Son hereafter become subject to the Father
in the participation of our nature, in order that when the lusts of the
flesh are brought into subjection the heart may have no care for riches,
or ambition, or pleasures; but that God may be all to us, if we live
after His image and likeness, as far as we can attain to it, through
all.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p14"></span>175. The benefit has passed, then,
from the individual to the community; for in His flesh He has tamed the
nature of all human flesh. Thus, according to the Apostle: “As we have
borne the image of the earthly, so also shall we bear the image of the
heavenly.” <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745.md) This thing
certainly cannot come to pass except in the inner man. Therefore,
“laying aside all these,” that is those things which we read of: “anger,
malice, blasphemy, filthy communication;” <span
id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746.md) as he also says below: “Let us,
having put off the old man with his deeds, put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge after the image of Him that created Him.” <span
id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747.md)

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p18"></span>176. And that thou mightest know that
when he says: “That God may be all in all,” he does not separate Christ
from God the Father, he also says to the Colossians: “Where there is
neither male nor female, Jew nor Greek, Barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor
free, but Christ is all and in all.” <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748.md) So also saying to the Corinthians:
“That God may be all and in all,” he comprehended in that the unity and
equality of Christ with God the Father, for the Son is not separated
from the Father. And in like manner as the Father worketh all and in
all, so also Christ worketh all in all. If, then, Christ also worketh
all in all, He is not made subject in the glory of the Godhead, but in
us. But how is He made subject in us, except in the way in which He was
made lower than the angels, I mean in the sacrament of His body? For all
things which served their Creator from their first beginning seemed not
as yet to be made subject to Him in that.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p20"></span>177. But if thou shouldst ask how He
was made subject in us, He Himself shows us, saying: “I was in prison,
and ye came unto Me; I was sick, and ye visited Me: Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these ye have done it unto Me.” <span
id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749.md) Thou hearest of Him as sick and
weak, and art not moved. Thou hearest of Him in subjection, and art
moved, though He is sick and weak in Him in whom He is in subjection, in
whom He was made sin and a curse for us.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p22"></span>178. As, then, He was made sin and a
curse not on His own account but on ours, so He became subject in us not
for His own sake but for ours, being not in subjection in His eternal
Nature, nor accursed in His eternal Nature. “For cursed is every one
that hangeth on a tree.” <span id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750.md)
Cursed He was, for He bore our curses; in subjection, also, for He took
upon Him our subjection, but in the assumption of the form of a servant,
not in the glory of God; so that whilst he makes Himself a partaker of
our weakness in the flesh, He makes us partakers of the divine Nature in
His power. But neither in one nor the other have we any natural
fellowship with the heavenly Generation of Christ, nor is there any
subjection of the Godhead in Christ. But as the Apostle has said that on
Him through that flesh which is the pledge of our salvation, we sit in
heavenly places, <span id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751.md) though
certainly not sitting ourselves, so also He is said to be subject in us
through the assumption of our nature.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p25"></span>179. For who is so mad as to think,
as we have said already, <span id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752.md) that
a seat of honour is due to Him at the right hand of God the Father, when
that is granted to Christ according to the flesh by the Father of His
Generation, even a seat of a heavenly and equal power? The angels
worship, and dost thou attempt to overthrow the throne of God with
impious presumption?

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p27"></span>180. It is written, thou sayest, that
“when we were dead in sins, He hath quickened us <span id="page_307">p.
307</span> <span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-Page_307"></span>in Christ, by Whose
grace ye are saved, and hath raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.” <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753.md) I acknowledge that it is so
written; but it is not written that God suffers men to sit on His right
hand, but only to sit there in the Person of Christ. For He is the
foundation of all, and is the head of the Church, <span
id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754.md) in Whom our common nature according
to the flesh has merited the right to the heavenly throne. For the flesh
is honoured as having a share in Christ Who is God, and the nature of
the whole human race is honoured as having a share in the flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p30"></span>181. As we then sit in Him by
fellowship in our fleshly nature, so also He, Who through the assumption
of our flesh was made a curse for us (seeing that a curse could not fall
upon the blessed Son of God), so, I say, He through the obedience of all
will become subject in us; when the Gentile has believed, and the Jew
has acknowledged Him Whom he crucified; when the Manichæan has
worshipped Him, Whom he has not believed to have come in the flesh; when
the Arian has confessed Him to be Almighty, Whom he has denied; when,
lastly, the wisdom of God, His justice, peace, love, resurrection, is in
all. Through His own works and through the manifold forms of virtues
Christ will be in us in subjection to the Father. And when, with vice
renounced and crime at an end, one spirit in the heart of all peoples
has begun to cleave to God in all things, then will God be all and in
all. <span id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[305:2739](2100268.htm#fr_2738.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p3"></span> [Heb. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[305:2740](2100268.htm#fr_2739.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p4"></span> [Heb. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[305:2741](2100268.htm#fr_2740.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p6"></span> S. [Luke xxii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#042.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[305:2742](2100268.htm#fr_2741.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p7"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[305:2743](2100268.htm#fr_2742.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p9"></span> S. [Luke ii.
51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[306:2744](2100268.htm#fr_2743.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p11"></span> S. [Matt. xxvi.
64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[306:2745](2100268.htm#fr_2744.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p12"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[306:2746](2100268.htm#fr_2745.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p15"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[306:2747](2100268.htm#fr_2746.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p16"></span> [Col. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[306:2748](2100268.htm#fr_2747.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p17"></span> [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[306:2749](2100268.htm#fr_2748.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p19"></span> [Col. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[306:2750](2100268.htm#fr_2749.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p21"></span> S. [Matt.
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#036.md),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[306:2751](2100268.htm#fr_2750.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p23"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[306:2752](2100268.htm#fr_2751.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p24"></span> [Eph. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[306:2753](2100268.htm#fr_2752.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p26"></span> Cf. ch. v.

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[307:2754](2100268.htm#fr_2753.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p28"></span> [Eph.
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[307:2755](2100268.htm#fr_2754.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p29"></span> [Eph. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[307:2756](2100268.htm#fr_2755.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p31"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vii.xv-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. He briefly takes up again the same points of dispute,
and shrewdly concludes from the unity of the divine power in the Father
and the Son, that whatever is said of the subjection of the Son is to be
referred to His humanity alone. He further confirms this on proof of the
love, which exists alike in either.](2100269.md)
