[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100329)  [Next](2100331) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii.x"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.ii.x-p0.1"></span>Chapter X.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.x-p1"></span>Finally, another glory of virginity is
mentioned, that it is free from avarice. St. Ambrose, addressing his
sister, reminds her of the great happiness of those who are free from
those troubles as to luxury and vanity which come upon those who are
about to marry.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.x-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.ii.x-p2.1"></span>What</span> then? What happiness it is that
no desire of possessions inflames you! The poor man demands what you
have, he does not ask for what you have not. The fruit of your labour is
a treasure for the needy, and two mites, if they be all one has, are
wealth on the part of the giver.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.x-p3"></span>54. Listen, then, my sister, from what
you escape. For it is not for me to teach nor for you to learn what you
ought to guard against, for the practice of perfect virtue does not
require teaching, but instructs others. You see how like she is to the
litters at processions, who lays herself out to please, attracting to
herself the look and gaze of <span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span
id="iv.vii.ii.x-Page_372"></span>all; less beautiful is she because she
strives to please, for she displeases the people before she pleases her
husband. But in you the rejection of all care for splendour is far more
becoming, and the very fact that you do not adorn yourselves is an
ornament.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.x-p4"></span>55. Look at the ears pierced with
wounds, and pity the neck weighed down with burdens. That the metals are
different does not lighten the suffering. In one case a chain binds the
neck, in another a fetter encloses the foot. It makes no difference
whether the body be loaded with gold or with iron. Thus the neck is
weighed down and the steps are hindered. The price makes it no better,
except that you women are afraid lest that which causes you suffering be
lost. What is the difference whether the sentence of another or your own
condemn you? Nay, you, even more wretched than those, are condemned by
public justice, since they desire to be set free, you to be bound.

<span id="iv.vii.ii.x-p5"></span>56. But how wretched a position, that
she who is marriageable is in a species of sale put up as it were to
auction to be bid for, so that he who offers the highest price purchases
her. Slaves are sold on more tolerable conditions, for they often choose
their masters; if a maiden chooses it is an offence, if not it is an
insult. And she, though she be beautiful and comely, both fears and
wishes to be seen; she wishes it that she may sell herself for a better
price; she fears lest the fact of her being seen should itself be
unbecoming. But what absurdities of wishes and fears and suspicions are
there as to how the suitors will turn out, lest a poor man may beguile
her, or a rich one contemn her, lest a handsome suitor mock her, lest a
noble one despise her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. St. Ambrose answers objections made to the
uselessness of his exhortations in favour of virginity, and brings
forward instances of virgins especially in various places he mentions,
and speaks of their zeal in the cause.](2100331)
