[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100341)  [Next](2100343.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.ii"></span> <span id="page_382">p. 382</span> <span
id="iv.vii.iv.ii-Page_382"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p0.1"></span>Chapter II.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p1"></span>Touching next upon the training of a
virgin, he speaks of moderation in food and drink, and of restraint upon
the impulses of the mind, introducing some teaching upon the fable of
the death and resurrection of Hippolytus, and advises the avoidance of
certain meats.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p2"></span>5. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>But</span> sometimes even when faith is to
be relied upon, youth is not trusted. Use wine, therefore, sparingly, in
order that the weakness of the body may not increase, not for
pleasurable excitement, for each alike kindles a flame, both wine and
youth. Let fasts also put a bridle on tender age, and spare diet
restrain the unsubdued appetites with a kind of rein. Let reason check,
hope subdue, and fear curb them. For he who knows not how to govern his
desires, like a man run away with by wild horses, is overthrown,
bruised, torn, and injured.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p3"></span>6. And this is said to have happened
to a youth for his love of Diana. But the fable is coloured with poet’s
tales, that Neptune, stirred with grief at his rival being preferred,
sent madness upon his horses, whereby his great power might be set forth
in that he overcame the youth, not by strength, but by fraud. And from
this event a yearly sacrifice is celebrated for Diana, when a horse is
offered at her altar. And they say that she was a virgin, and (of which
even harlots would be ashamed) yet could love one who did not love her.
But as far as I am concerned let their fables have authority, for though
each be criminal, it is yet a less evil that a youth should have been so
enamoured of an adulteress as to perish, than that two gods should, as
they relate, contend for committing adultery, and that Jupiter avenged
the grief of his daughter who played the harlot on the physician who
cured the wound of him who had violated Diana in the woods, a most
excellent huntress, no doubt, not of wild beasts, but of lust: yet also
of wild beasts, so that she was worshipped naked.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p4"></span>7. Let them ascribe, then, to Neptune
the mastery over madness, in order to fix on him the crime of unchaste
love. Let them ascribe to Diana the rule over the woods, wherein she
dwelt, so as to establish the adultery which she practised. Let them
ascribe to Æsculapius the restoration of the dead so long as they
confess that when struck by lightning he himself escaped not. Let them
also ascribe to Jupiter the thunderbolts which he did not possess, so
that they witness to the disgrace with which he was laden.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p5"></span>8. And I think that one should
sparingly eat all kinds of food which cause heat to the limbs, for flesh
drags down even eagles as they fly. But within you let that bird of
which we read, “Thy youth shall be renewed like the eagle’s,” <span
id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271.md) holding its course on high, swift
in its virgin flight, be ignorant of the desire for unnecessary food.
The gathering of banquets and salutations must be avoided.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[382:3272](2100342.htm#fr_3271.md) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p6"></span> [Psa.
103.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Virgins are exhorted to avoid visits, to observe
modesty, to be silent during the celebration of the Mysteries after the
example of Mary. Then after narrating the story of a heathen youth, and
saying of a poet, St. Ambrose relates a miracle wrought by a holy
priest.](2100343.md)
