[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100050)  [Next](2100052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix"></span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-Page_33"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p1"></span>One must show fortitude in fighting
against all vices, especially against avarice. Holy Job teaches this
lesson.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p2"></span>202. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>Fortitude</span> of soul, then, is not an
unimportant thing, nor is it cut off from the other virtues, for it
wages war in conjunction with the virtues, and alone defends the beauty
of all the virtues, and guards their powers of discernment, and fights
against all vices with implacable hate. It is unconquerable as regards
labours, brave to endure dangers, stern as against pleasures, hardened
against allurements, to which it knows not how to lend an ear, nor, so
to speak, to give a greeting. It cares not for money, and flies from
avarice as from a plague that destroys all virtue. <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) For nothing is so much opposed to
fortitude as when one allows oneself to be overcome by gain. Often when
the enemy is repulsed and the hosts of the foe are turned to flight, has
the warrior died miserably among those whom he has laid low, whilst he
is busy with the spoils of the fallen; and the legions, whilst busy with
their booty, have called back upon them the enemy that had fled, and so
have been robbed of their triumph.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p4"></span>203. Fortitude, then, must repulse so
foul a plague and crush it down. It must not let itself be tempted by
desires, nor shaken by fear. Virtue stands true to itself and bravely
pursues all vices as though they were the poison of virtue. It must
repel anger as it were with arms, for it removes counsel far off. It
must avoid it as though it were some severe sickness. <span
id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) It must further be on its guard
against a desire for glory, which often has done harm when sought for
too anxiously, and always when it has been once attained.

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p6"></span>204. What of all this was wanting in
holy Job, or in his virtue, or what came upon him in the way of vice?
How did he bear the distress of sickness or cold or hunger? How did he
look upon the dangers which menaced his safety? Were the riches from
which so much went to the poor gathered together by plunder? Did he ever
allow greed for wealth, or the desire for pleasures, or lusts to rise in
his heart? Did ever the unkind disputes of the three princes, or the
insults of the slaves, rouse him to anger? Did glory carry him away like
some fickle person when he called down vengeance on himself if ever he
had hidden even an involuntary fault, or had feared the multitude of the
people so as not to confess it in the sight of all? His virtues had no
point of contact with any vices, but stood firm on their own ground.
Who, then, was so brave as holy Job? How can he be put second to any, on
whose level hardly one like himself can be placed?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_294"></span>[33:295](2100051.htm#fr_294) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p3"></span> Cic. *de Off.* I. 20, § 68.

<span id="fn_295"></span>[33:296](2100051.htm#fr_295) <span
id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.ii.xxxix-p5"></span> There is a considerable variation of
text here. The original of the translation is: “*iracundiam velut
quibusdam propulset armis, quæ tollat consilium, et tanquam ægritudinem
vitet.*” Cod. Dresd. reads: *“iracundiam…propulset arietibus armisque
tollat et convicia tanquam ægritudinem vitet.”*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL. Courage in war was not wanting in our forefathers, as
is shown by the example of the men of old, especially by the glorious
deed of Eleazar.](2100052)
