[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100089)  [Next](2100091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxvii"></span> <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-Page_64"></span>

#### <span id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p0.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p1"></span>In contempt of money there is the
pattern of justice, which virtue bishops and clerics ought to aim at
together with some others. A few words are added on the duty of not
bringing an excommunication too quickly into force.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p2"></span>133. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>To</span> come to an end; we know that
contempt of riches is a form of justice, therefore we ought to avoid
love of money, and strive with all our powers never to do anything
against justice, but to guard it in all our deeds and actions.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p3"></span>134. If we would please God, we must
have love, we must be of one mind, we must follow humility, each one
thinking the other higher than himself. This is true humility, when one
never claims anything proudly for oneself, but thinks oneself to be the
inferior. The bishop should treat the clerics and attendants, who are
indeed his sons, as members of himself, and give to each one that duty
for which he sees him to be fit.

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p4"></span>135. Not without pain is a limb of
the body cut off which has become corrupt. It is treated for a long
time, to see if it can be cured with various remedies. If it cannot be
cured, then it is cut off by a good physician. Thus it is a good
bishop’s desire to wish to heal the weak, to remove the spreading
ulcers, to burn some parts and not to cut them off; and lastly, when
they cannot be healed, to cut them off with pain to himself. Wherefore
that beautiful rule of the Apostle stands forth brightly, that we should
look each one, not on his own things, but on the things of others. <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) In this way it will never come about
that we shall in anger give way to our own feelings, or concede more
than is right in favour to our own wishes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_562"></span>[64:563](2100090.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p5"></span> [Phil. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.iii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII. Mercy must be freely shown even though it brings
an odium of its own. With regard to this, reference is made to the
well-known story about the sacred vessels which were broken up by
Ambrose to pay for the redemption of captives; and very beautiful advice
is given about the right use of the gold and silver which the Church
possesses. Next, after showing from the action of holy Lawrence what are
the true treasures of the Church, certain rules are laid down which
ought to be observed in melting down and employing for such uses the
consecrated vessels of the Church.](2100091)
