[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100376)  [Next](2100378.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xii"></span>

### <span id="v.xii-p0.1"></span>Letter LVII.

<span id="v.xii-p1"></span>St. Ambrose informs the Emperor Eugenius why
he was absent from Milan. He then proceeds to reprove him for his
conduct with regard to heathen worship. This was, he says, the reason
why he did not write sooner, and he promises that for the future he will
treat him with the same freedom as the other emperors.

<span id="v.xii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.xii-p2.1"></span>Ambrose</span>, Bishop, to the most gracious
Emperor Eugenius.

<span id="v.xii-p3"></span>1. The cause of my departure was the fear of
the Lord, to Whom, so far as I am able, I am accustomed to refer all my
acts, and never to turn away my mind from Him, nor to make more of any
man than of the grace of Christ. For I do no one an injury, if I set God
before all, and, trusting in Him, I am not afraid to tell you emperors
my thoughts, such as they are. And so I will not keep silence before
you, O Emperor, as to things respecting which I have not kept silence
before other emperors. And that I may keep the order of the matters, I
will go through, one by one, the things which have to do with this
matter.

<span id="v.xii-p4"></span>2. The illustrious Symmachus, when prefect of
the city, had memorialized <span id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637.md)
the Emperor Valentinian the younger of august memory, requesting that he
would command that what had been taken away should be restored to the
temples. He performed his part in accordance with his zeal and his
religion. And I also, as Bishop, was bound to recognize my part. I
presented two petitions <span id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638.md) to
the Emperors, in which I pointed out that a Christian man could not
contribute to the cost of the sacrifices; that I indeed had not been the
cause of their being abolished, but I certainly did urge that they
should not be decreed; and lastly, that he himself would seem to be
giving not restoring those sums to the images. For what he had not
himself taken away, he could not, as it were, restore, but of his own
will to grant towards the expenses of superstition. Lastly, that, if he
did it, either he must not come to the Church, or, if he came, he would
either not find a priest there, or he would find one withstanding him in
the Church. Nor could it be alleged in excuse that he was a catechumen,
seeing that catechumens are not allowed to contribute to the idols’
expenses.

<span id="v.xii-p7"></span>3. My letters were read in the consistory.
Count Bauto, a man of the highest rank of military authority was
present, and Rumoridus, himself also of the same dignity, addicted to
the worship of the gentile nations from the first years of his boyhood.
Valentinian at that time listened to my suggestion, and did nothing but
what the rule of our faith required. And they yielded to his officer.

<span id="v.xii-p8"></span>4. Afterwards I plainly addressed the most
clement Emperor Theodosius, and hesitated not to speak to his face. And
he, having received a similar message from the Senate, though it was not
the request of the whole Senate, at length assented to my
recommendation, and so I did not go near him for some days, nor did he
take it ill, for he knew that I was not acting for my own advantage, but
was not ashamed to say in the sight of the king that which was for the
profit of himself and of my own soul. <span
id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639.md)

<span id="v.xii-p10"></span>5. Again a legation sent into Gaul from the
Senate to the Emperor Valentinian of august memory could procure
nothing; and then I was certainly absent, and had not written anything
at that time to him.

<span id="v.xii-p11"></span>6. But when your Clemency took up the reins
of government it was afterwards discovered that favours of this kind had
been granted to men, excellent indeed in matters of state but in
religion heathens. And it may, perhaps, be said, august Emperor, that
you did not make any restitution to temples, but presented gifts to men
who had deserved well of you. But you know that we must constantly act
in the cause of God, <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="v.xii-Page_454"></span>as is often done in the cause of liberty,
also not only by priests, but also by those who are in your armies, or
are reckoned in the number of those who dwell in the provinces. When you
became Emperor envoys requested that you would make restitution to the
temples, and you did not do it; others came a second time and you
resisted, and afterwards you thought fit that this should be granted to
those very persons who made the petition.

<span id="v.xii-p12"></span>7. Though the imperial power be great, yet
consider, O Emperor, how great God is. He sees the hearts of all, He
questions the inmost conscience, He knows all things before they happen,
He knows the inmost things of your breast. You do not suffer yourselves
to be deceived, and do you desire to conceal anything from God? Has not
this come into your mind? For although they acted with such
perseverance, was it not your duty, O Emperor, to resist with still
greater perseverance because of the reverence due to the most high and
true and living God, and to refuse what was an offence against His holy
law?

<span id="v.xii-p13"></span>8. Who grudges your having given what you
would to others? We are not scrutinizers of your liberality, nor envious
of the advantages of others, but are interpreters of the faith. How will
you offer your gifts to Christ? Not many but will put their own estimate
on what you have done, all will do so on your intentions. Whatever they
do will be ascribed to you; whatever they do not do, to themselves.
Although you are Emperor, you ought to be all the more subject to God.
How shall the ministers of Christ dispense your gifts?

<span id="v.xii-p14"></span>9. There was a question of this sort in
former times, and yet persecution itself yielded to the faith of our
fathers, and heathendom gave way. For when in the city of Tyre the
quinquennial game was being kept, and the intensely wicked King of
Antioch had come to witness it, Jason appointed officers of sacred
rites, who were Antiochians, to carry three hundred didrachms of silver
from Jerusalem, and give them to the sacrifice of Hercules. <span
id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640.md) But the fathers did not give the
money to the heathen, but having sent faithful men declared that that
money should not be spent on sacrifices to the gods, because it was not
fitting, but on other expenses. And it was decreed that because he had
said that the money was sent for the sacrifice of Hercules, it ought to
be taken for that for which it was sent; but, because they, who had
brought it, because of their zeal and religion, pleaded that it should
not be used for the sacrifice, but for other expenses, the money was
given for the building of ships. Being compelled they sent it, but it
was not used for sacrifice, but for other expenses of the state.

<span id="v.xii-p16"></span>10. Now they who had brought the money
might, no doubt, have kept silence, but would have done violence to
their faith, because they knew whither the money was being carried, and
therefore they sent men who feared God to contrive that what was sent
should be assigned, not to the temple, but to the cost of ships. For
they entrusted the money to those who should plead the cause of the
sacred Law, and He Who absolves the conscience was made judge of the
matter. If they when in the power of another were so careful, there can
be no doubt what you, O Emperor, ought to have done. You, at any rate,
whom no one compelled, whom no one had in his power, ought to have
sought counsel from the priest.

<span id="v.xii-p17"></span>11. And I certainly when I then resisted,
although I was alone in resistance, was not alone in what I wished, and
was not alone in what I advised. Since, then, I am bound by my own words
both before God and before all men, I felt that nothing else was
allowable or needful for me but to act for myself, because I could not
well trust you. I kept back and concealed my grief for a long time; I
thought it not right to intimate anything to anybody, now I may no
longer dissemble, nor is it open to me to keep silence. For this reason
also at the commencement of your reign I did not reply when you wrote to
me, because I foresaw that this would happen. Then at last, when you
required a letter, because I had not written a reply, I said: This is
the reason that I think this will be extorted from him.

<span id="v.xii-p18"></span>12. But when a reason for exercising my
office arose, I both wrote and petitioned for those who were in anxiety
about themselves, that I might show that in the canse of God I felt a
righteous fear, and that I did not value flattery above my own soul; but
in those matters in which it is fitting that petitions should be
addressed to you. I also pay the deference due to authority, as it is
written: “Honour to whom honour is due, tribute to whom tribute.” <span
id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641.md) For since I deferred from the
bottom of my heart to a private person, how could I not defer to the
Emperor? But do you who <span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="v.xii-Page_455"></span>desire that deference be paid to you suffer
us to pay deference to Him Whom you are desirous to be proved the Author
of your power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[453:3638](2100377.htm#fr_3637.md) <span
id="v.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p5"></span> The memorial is given on p.

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[453:3639](2100377.htm#fr_3638.md) <span
id="v.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p6"></span> Letters 17 and 18, pp.

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[453:3640](2100377.htm#fr_3639.md) <span
id="v.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p9"></span> [Psa.
119.46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046.md)<span id="v.xii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[454:3641](2100377.htm#fr_3640.md) <span
id="v.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p15"></span> [2 Macc. iv.
18](../../../bib/apo/ma2004.htm#018.md)<span id="v.xii-p15.1"></span>, ff.

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[454:3642](2100377.htm#fr_3641.md) <span
id="v.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.xii-p19"></span> [Rom. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007.md)<span id="v.xii-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXI: To Theodosius, After His Victory Over
Eugenius.](2100378.md)
