[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100242)  [Next](2100244) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p0.1"></span>Chapter III.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p1"></span>The words, “The head of every man is
Christ…and the head of Christ is God” misused by the Arians, are now
turned back against them, to their confutation. Next, another passage of
Scripture, commonly taken by the same heretics as a ground of objection,
is called in to show that God is the Head of Christ, in so far as Christ
is human, in regard of His Manhood, and the unwisdom of their opposition
upon the text, “He who planteth and He who watereth are one,” is
displayed. After which explanations, the meaning of the doctrine that
the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father, and that the
faithful are in Both, is expounded.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p2"></span>28. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p2.1"></span>Now</span> let us examine some other
objections raised by the Arians. It is written, say they, that “the head
of every man is Christ, and the head of woman is man, and the head of
Christ is God.” <span id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351) Let them, if
they please, tell me what they mean by this objection—whether to join
together, or to dissociate, these four terms. Suppose they mean to join
them, and say that God is the Head of Christ in the same sense and
manner as man is the head of woman. Mark what a conclusion they fall
into. For if this comparison proceeds on the supposed equality of the
terms of it, and these four—woman, man, Christ, and God—are viewed
together as in virtue of a likeness resulting from their being of one
and the same nature, then woman and God will begin to come under one
definition.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p4"></span>29. But if this conclusion be not
satisfactory, by reason of its impiety, let them divide, on what
principle they will. Thus, if they will have it that Christ stands to
God the Father in the same relation as woman to man, then surely they
pronounce Christ and God to be of one substance, inasmuch as woman and
man are of one nature in respect of the flesh, for their difference is
in respect of sex. But, seeing that there is no difference of sex
between Christ and His Father, they will acknowledge then that which is
one, and common to the Son and the Father, in respect of nature, whereas
they will deny the difference lying in sex.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p5"></span>30. Does this conclusion content them?
Or will they have woman, man, and Christ to be of one substance, and
distinguish the Father from them? Will this, then, serve their turn?
Suppose that it will, then observe what they are brought to. They must
either confess themselves not merely Arians, but very Photinians,
because they acknowledge only the Manhood of Christ, Whom they judge fit
only to be placed on the same scale with human beings. Or else they
must, however contrary to their leanings, subscribe to our belief, by
which we dutifully and in godly fashion maintain that which they have
come at by an im<span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-Page_266"></span>pious course of thought, that Christ
is indeed, after His divine generation, <span
id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352) the power of God, whilst after His
putting on of the flesh, He is of one substance with all men in regard
of His flesh, excepting indeed the proper glory of His
Incarnation, <span id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353) because He took
upon Himself the reality, not a phantom likeness, of flesh.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p8"></span>31. Let God, then, be the Head of
Christ, with regard to the conditions of Manhood. Observe that the
Scripture says not that the *Father* is the Head of Christ; but that
*God* is the Head of Christ, because the Godhead, as the creating power,
is the Head of the being created. And well said \[the Apostle\] “the
Head of Christ is God;” to bring before our thoughts both the Godhead of
Christ and His flesh, implying, that is to say, the Incarnation in the
mention of the name of Christ, and, in that of the name of God, oneness
of Godhead and grandeur of sovereignty.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p9"></span>32. But the saying, that in respect of
the Incarnation God is the Head of Christ, leads on to the principle
that Christ, as Incarnate, is the Head of man, as the Apostle has
clearly expressed in another passage, where he says: “Since man is the
head of woman, even as Christ is the Head of the Church;” <span
id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354) whilst in the words following he
has added: “Who gave Himself for her.” <span
id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355) After His Incarnation, then, is
Christ the head of man, for His self-surrender issued from His
Incarnation.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p12"></span>33. The Head of Christ, then, is God,
in so far as His form of a servant, that is, of man, not of God, is
considered. But it is nothing against the Son of God, if, in accordance
with the reality of His flesh, He is like unto men, whilst in regard of
His Godhead He is one with the Father, for by this account of Him we do
not take aught from His sovereignty, but attribute compassion to Him.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p13"></span>34. But who can with a good
conscience deny the one Godhead of the Father and the Son, when our
Lord, to complete His teaching for His disciples, said: “That they may
be one, even as we also are one.” <span
id="fr_2356"></span>[2357](#fn_2356) The record stands for witness to
the Faith, though Arians turn it aside to suit their heresy; for,
inasmuch as they cannot deny the Unity so often spoken of, they
endeavour to diminish it, in order that the Unity of Godhead subsisting
between the Father and the Son may seem to be such as is unity of
devotion and faith amongst men, though even amongst men themselves
community of nature makes unity thereof.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p15"></span>35. Thus with abundant clearness we
disprove the objection commonly raised by Arians, in order to loosen the
Divine Unity, on the ground that it is written: “But he who planteth and
he who watereth are one.” This passage the Arians, if they were wise,
would not quote against us; for how can they deny that the Father and
the Son are One, if Paul and Apollos are one, both in nature and in
faith? At the same time, we do grant that these cannot be one
throughout, in all relations, because things human cannot bear
comparison with things divine. <span
id="fr_2357"></span>[2358](#fn_2357)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p17"></span>36. No separation, then, is to be
made of the Word from God the Father, no separation in power, no
separation in wisdom, by reason of the Unity of the Divine Substance.
Again, God the Father is in the Son, as we ofttimes find it written, yet
\[He dwells in the Son\] not as sanctifying one who lacks
sanctification, nor as filling a void, for the power of God knows no
void. Nor, again, is the power of the one increased by the power of the
other, for there are not two powers, but one Power; nor does Godhead
entertain Godhead, for there are not two Godheads, but one Godhead. We,
contrariwise, shall be One in Christ through Power received \[from
another\] and dwelling in us.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p18"></span>37. The letter \[of the unity\] is
common, but the Substance of God and the substance of man are different.
We shall be, the Father and the Son \[already\] are, one; we shall be
one by grace, the Son is so by substance. Again, unity by conjunction is
one thing, unity by nature another. Finally, observe what it is that
Scripture hath already recorded: “That they may all be one, as Thou,
Father, art in Me, and I in Thee.” <span
id="fr_2358"></span>[2359](#fn_2358)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p20"></span>38. Mark now that He said not “Thou
in us, and we in Thee,” but “Thou in Me, and I in Thee,” to place
Himself apart from His creatures. Further He added: “that they also may
be in Us,” in order to separate here His dignity and His Father’s from
us, <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-Page_267"></span>that our union in the Father and the
Son may appear the issue, not of nature, but of grace, whilst with
regard to the unity of the Father and the Son it may be believed that
the Son has not received this by grace, but possesses by natural right
of His Sonship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[265:2352](2100243.htm#fr_2351) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[266:2353](2100243.htm#fr_2352) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p6"></span> “After” somewhat as in “Neither
reward us *after* our iniquities”—*i.e.* (1) according to, and so (2)
“by virtue of.” Here the second stage of the metaphorical usage seems to
be arrived at.

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[266:2354](2100243.htm#fr_2353) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p7"></span> Referring to Christ’s sinlessness.

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[266:2355](2100243.htm#fr_2354) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p10"></span> [Eph. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[266:2356](2100243.htm#fr_2355) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p11"></span> [Eph. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2356"></span>[266:2357](2100243.htm#fr_2356) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p14"></span> S. [John xvii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2357"></span>[266:2358](2100243.htm#fr_2357) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p16"></span> The citation is from [1 Cor. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>. Paul and Apollos are <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p16.2"></span>ὁμοούσιοι</span>, “of
one substance, nature, essence,” in so far as the definition of man can
be applied to each. But the presence of Paul does not carry with it the
presence of Apollos, and the existence of Paul is not bound up, save
accidentally, with that of Apollos. Paul could not say, “He that hath
seen me hath seen Apollos.” No human being can say that of another, even
though the other be a twin and closely resembling him in appearance. The
root of the difference is in the difference between the Creator and the
creature, the Eternal, knowing neither beginning of life nor end of
days, existing from everlasting to everlasting, and that which lives
under conditions and limits of time and space.

<span id="fn_2358"></span>[266:2359](2100243.htm#fr_2358) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p19"></span> S. [John xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The passage quoted adversely by heretics, namely,
“The Son can do nothing of Himself,” is first explained from the words
which follow; then, the text being examined, word by word, their
acceptation in the Arian sense is shown to be impossible without
incurring the charge of impiety or absurdity, the proof resting chiefly
on the creation of the world and certain miracles of Christ.](2100244)
