[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100371)  [Next](2100373) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vii"></span> <span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_430"></span>

### <span id="v.vii-p0.1"></span>Sermon Against Auxentius on the Giving Up of the Basilicas.

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span>To calm the anxiety of the people over the
imperial decree, he lays his answer before them, and adds that he did
not go to the consistory, because he was afraid of losing the basilica.
Then, first challenging his opponents to a discussion in the church, he
says that he is not terrified at their weapons; and also, after
recalling his answer on the subject of the sacred vessels, declares that
he is ready for the contest. The will of God, he maintains, cannot be
frustrated, nor can His protection be overcome, yet He is ready too to
suffer in His servants. Since he has not already been taken before this,
it is plain that the heretics are causing this disturbance for no reason
whatever. Next, after applying Naboth’s history and Christ’s entry into
Jerusalem to the present state of affairs, he censures Auxentius’ cruel
law, answers the Arians’ objections, and states that he will gladly
discuss the matter in the presence of the people. Auxentius, he adds,
has been already condemned by the pagans, whom he had chosen to sit as
judges, as he had been condemned by Paul and by Christ. The heretic had
forgotten the year before, when he had made the same appeal to Cæsar;
and the Arians, in stirring up ill-will against the servants of Christ,
are much worse than the Jews: for the Church does not belong to Cæsar,
but displays the image of Christ. Then adding to these a few more words
on his answer and his hymns, he declares that he is not disobedient,
that the Emperor is a son of the Church, and that Auxentius is worse
than a Jew.

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span>1. <span class="sc"><span
id="v.vii-p2.1"></span>I see</span> that you are unusually disturbed,
and that you are closely watching me. I wonder what the reason is? Is it
that you saw or heard that I had received an imperial order at the hands
of the tribunes, to the effect that I was to go hence, whither I would,
and that all who wished might follow me? Were you afraid that I should
desert the Church and forsake you in fear for my own safety? But you
could note the message I sent, that the wish to desert the Church had
never entered my mind; for I feared the Lord of the universe more than
an earthly emperor; and if force were to drag me from the Church, my
body indeed could be driven out, but not my mind. I was ready, if he
were to do what royal power is wont to do, to undergo the fate a priest
has to bear.

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>2. Why, then, are you disturbed? I will never
willingly desert you, though if force is used, I cannot meet it. I shall
be able to grieve, to weep, to groan; against weapons, soldiers, Goths,
my tears are my weapons, for these are a priest’s defence. I ought not,
I cannot resist in any other way; but to fly and forsake the Church is
not my way; lest any one should suppose I did so from fear of some
heavier punishment. You yourselves know that I am wont to show respect
to our emperors, but not to yield to them, to offer myself freely to
punishment, and not to fear what is prepared for me.

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span>3. Would that I were sure the Church would
never be given over to heretics. Gladly would I go to the Emperor’s
palace, if this but fitted the office of a priest, and so hold our
discussion in the palace rather than the church. But in the consistory
Christ is not wont to be the accused but the judge. Who will deny that
the cause of faith should be pleaded in the church? If any one has
confidence let him come hither; let him not seek the judgment of the
Emperor, which already shows its bias, which clearly proves by the law
that is passed that he is against the faith; neither let him seek the
expected goodwill of certain people who want to stand well with both
sides. I will not act in such a way as to give any one the chance of
making money out of a wrong to Christ.

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span>4. The soldiers around, the clash of the arms
wherewith the church is surrounded, do not alarm my faith, but they
disquiet me from fear that in keeping me here you might meet with some
danger to your lives. For I have learnt by now not to be afraid, but I
do begin to have more fear for you. Allow, I beg you, your bishop to
meet his foes. We have an adversary who assails us, for our adversary
“the devil goeth about, as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may
devour,” <span id="fr_3465"></span>[3466](#fn_3465) as the Apostle said.
He has received, no doubt, he has received (we are not deceived, but
warned of this) the power to tempt in this wise, lest I might perhaps by
the wounds of my body be drawn away from the earnestness of my faith.
You have read how the devil tempted holy Job in these many ways, and how
at last he sought and obtained power to try his body, which he covered
with sores.

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span>5. When it was suggested that I should give
up the vessels of the Church, I gave the following answer: I will
willingly give up whatever of my own property is demanded, whether it is
estates, or house, or gold, or silver—anything, in fact, which is in my
power. But I cannot take aught away from the temple of God; nor can I
give up what I have received to guard and not to give up. In doing this
I am acting for the Emperor’s good, for it would neither be right for me
to give it up, nor for him to receive it. Let him listen to the words of
a free-spoken bishop, and if he wishes to do what is best for himself,
let him cease to do wrong to Christ.

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span><span id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_431"></span>6. These words are full of humility, and as I
think of that spirit which a bishop ought to show towards the Emperor.
But since “our contest is not against flesh and blood, but also” (which
is worse) “against spiritual wickedness in high places,” <span
id="fr_3466"></span>[3467](#fn_3466) that tempter the devil makes the
struggle harder by means of his servants, and thinks to make trial of me
by the wounds of my flesh. I know, my brethren, that these wounds which
we receive for Christ’s sake are not wounds that destroy life, but
rather extend it. Allow, I pray, the contest to take place. It is for
you to be the spectators. Reflect that if a city has an athlete, or one
skilled in some other noble art, it is eager to bring him forward for a
contest. Why do you refuse to do in a more important matter what you are
wont to wish in smaller affairs? He fears not weapons nor barbarians who
fears not death, and is not held fast by any pleasures of the flesh.

<span id="v.vii-p10"></span>7. And indeed if the Lord has appointed me
for this struggle, in vain have you kept sleepless watch so many nights
and days. The will of Christ will be fulfilled. For our Lord Jesus is
almighty, this is our faith: and so what He wills to be done will be
fulfilled, and it is not for us to thwart the divine purpose.

<span id="v.vii-p11"></span>8. You heard what was read to-day: The
Saviour ordered that the foal of an ass should be brought to Him by the
apostles, and bade them say, if any one withstood them: “The Lord hath
need of him.” <span id="fr_3467"></span>[3468](#fn_3467) What if now,
too, He has commanded that foal of an ass, that is, the foal of that
animal which is wont to bear a heavy burden, as man must, to whom is
said: “Come unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest; take My yoke upon you, for it is easy;” <span
id="fr_3468"></span>[3469](#fn_3468) what if, I say, He has commanded
that foal to be brought to Him now, sending forth those apostles, who,
having put off their body, wear the semblance of the angels unseen by
our eyes? If withstood by any, will they not say: The Lord hath need of
him? If, for instance, love of this life, or flesh and blood, or earthly
intercourse (for perhaps we seem pleasing to some), were to withstand
them? But he who loves me here, would show his love much more if he
would suffer me to become Christ’s victim, for “to depart and be with
Christ is much better, though to abide in the flesh is more needful for
you.” <span id="fr_3469"></span>[3470](#fn_3469) There is nothing
therefore for you to fear, beloved brethren. For I know that whatever I
may suffer, I shall suffer for Christ’s sake. And I have read that I
ought not to fear those that can kill the flesh. <span
id="fr_3470"></span>[3471](#fn_3470) And I have heard One Who says: “He
that loseth his life for My sake shall find it.” <span
id="fr_3471"></span>[3472](#fn_3471)

<span id="v.vii-p17"></span>9. Wherefore if the Lord wills, surely no
one will resist. And if as yet He delay my struggle, what do you fear?
It is not bodily guardianship but the Lord’s providence that is wont to
fence in the servant of Christ.

<span id="v.vii-p18"></span>10. You are troubled because you have found
the double doors open, which a blind man in seeking his chamber is said
to have unfastened. In this you learn that human watchfulness is no
defence. Behold! one who has lost the gift of sight has broken through
all our defences, and escaped the notice of the guards. But the Lord has
not lost <span id="fr_3472"></span>[3473](#fn_3472) the guard of His
mercy. Was it not also discovered two days ago, as you remember, that a
certain entrance on the left side of the basilica was open, which you
thought had been shut and secured? Armed men surrounded the basilica,
they tried this and the other entrance, but their eyes were blinded so
that that could not see the one that was open. And you know well that it
was open many nights. Cease, then, to be anxious; for that will take
place which Christ commands and which is for the best.

<span id="v.vii-p20"></span>11. And now I will put before you examples
from the Law. Eliseus was sought by the king of Syria; an army had been
sent to capture him; and he was surrounded on all sides. His servant
began to fear, for he was a servant, that is, he had not a free mind,
nor had he free powers of action. The holy prophet sought to open his
eyes, and said: “Look and see how many more are on our side than there
are against us.” <span id="fr_3473"></span>[3474](#fn_3473) And he
beheld, and saw thousands of angels. Mark therefore that it is those
that are not seen rather than those that are seen that guard the
servants of Christ. But if they guard you, they do it in answer to your
prayers: for you have read that those very men, who sought Eliseus,
entered Samaria, and came to him whom they desired to take. Not only
were they unable to harm him, but they were themselves preserved at the
intercession of the man against whom they had come.

<span id="v.vii-p22"></span><span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_432"></span>12. The Apostle Peter also gives you an
example of either case. <span id="fr_3474"></span>[3475](#fn_3474) For
when Herod sought him and took him, he was put into prison. For the
servant of God had not got away, but stood firm without a thought of
fear. The Church prayed for him, but the Apostle slept in prison, a
proof that he was not in fear. An angel was sent to rouse him as he
slept, by whom Peter was led forth out of prison, and escaped death for
a time.

<span id="v.vii-p24"></span>13. And Peter again afterwards, when he had
overcome Simon, in sowing the doctrine of God among the people, and in
teaching chastity, stirred up the minds of the Gentiles. And when these
sought him, the Christians begged that he would withdraw himself for a
little while. And although he was desirous to suffer, yet was he moved
at the sight of the people praying, for they asked him to save himself
for the instruction and strengthening of his people. Need I say more? At
night he begins to leave the town, and seeing Christ coming to meet him
at the gate, and entering the city, says: Lord, whither goest Thou?
Christ answers: I am coming to be crucified again. Peter understood the
divine answer to refer to his own cross, for Christ could not be
crucified a second time, for He had put off the flesh by the passion of
the death which He had undergone; since: “In that He died, He died unto
sin once, but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God.” <span
id="fr_3475"></span>[3476](#fn_3475) So Peter understood that Christ was
to be crucified again in the person of His servant. Therefore he
willingly returned; and when the Christians questioned him, told them
the reason. He was immediately seized, and glorified the Lord Jesus by
his cross.

<span id="v.vii-p26"></span>14. You see, then, that Christ wills to
suffer in His servants. And what if He says to this servant, “I will
that he tarry, follow thou Me,” <span
id="fr_3476"></span>[3477](#fn_3476) and wishes to taste the fruit of
this tree? For if His meat was to do the will of His Father, <span
id="fr_3477"></span>[3478](#fn_3477) so also is it His meat to partake
of our sufferings. Did He not, to take an example from our Lord
Himself,—did He not suffer when He willed, and was He not found when He
was sought? But when the hour of His passion had not yet come, He passed
through the midst of those that sought Him, <span
id="fr_3478"></span>[3479](#fn_3478) and though they saw Him they could
not hold Him fast. This plainly shows us that when the Lord wills, each
one is found and taken, but because the time is put off, he is not held
fast, although he meets the eyes of those who seek him.

<span id="v.vii-p30"></span>15. And did not I myself go forth daily to
pay visits, or go to the tombs of the martyrs? Did I not pass by the
royal palace both in going and returning? Yet no one laid hands on me,
though they had the intention of driving me out, as they afterwards gave
out, saying, Leave the city, and go where you will. I was, I own,
looking for some great thing, either sword or fire for the Name of
Christ, yet they offered me pleasant things instead of sufferings; but
Christ’s athlete needs not pleasant things but sufferings. Let no one,
then, disturb you, because they have provided a carriage, <span
id="fr_3479"></span>[3480](#fn_3479) or because hard words, as he thinks
them, have been uttered by Auxentius, who calls himself bishop.

<span id="v.vii-p32"></span>16. Many stated that assassins had been
despatched, that the penalty of death had been decreed against me. I do
not fear all that, nor am I going to desert my position here. Whither
shall I go, when there is no spirit that is not filled with groans and
tears; when throughout the Churches Catholic bishops are being expelled,
or if they resist, are put to the sword, and every senator who does not
obey the decree is proscribed. And these things were written by the hand
and spoken by the mouth of a bishop who, that he might show himself to
be most learned, omitted not an ancient warning. For we read in the
prophet that he saw a flying sickle. <span
id="fr_3480"></span>[3481](#fn_3480) Auxentius, to imitate this, sent a
flying sword through all cities. But Satan, too, transforms himself into
an angel of light, <span id="fr_3481"></span>[3482](#fn_3481) and
imitates his power for evil.

<span id="v.vii-p35"></span>17. Thou, Lord Jesus, hast redeemed the
world in one moment of time: shall Auxentius in one moment slay, as far
as he can, so many peoples, some by the sword, others by sacrilege? He
seeks my basilica with bloody lips and gory hands. Him to-day’s chapter
answers well: “But unto the wicked said God: Wherefore dost thou declare
My righteousness?” <span id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482) That is,
there is no union between peace and madness, there is no union between
Christ and Belial. <span id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483) You
remember also that we read to-day of Naboth, a holy man who owned his
own <span id="page_433">p. 433</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_433"></span>vineyard, being urged on the king’s request
to give it up. When the king after rooting up the vines intended to
plant common herbs, he answered him: “God forbid that I should give up
the inheritance of my fathers.” <span
id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) The king was grieved, because what
belonged by right to another had been refused him on fair grounds, but
had been unfairly got by a woman’s device. Naboth defended his vines
with his own blood. And if he did not give up his vineyard, shall we
give up the Church of Christ?

<span id="v.vii-p39"></span>18. Was the answer that I gave then
contumacious? For when summoned I said: God forbid that I should give up
the inheritance of Christ. If Naboth gave not up the inheritance of his
fathers, shall I give up the inheritance of Christ? And I added further:
God forbid that I shall give up the inheritance of my fathers, that is,
the inheritance of Dionysius, who died in exile in the cause of the
faith; the inheritance of the Confessor Eustorgius, the inheritance of
Mysocles and of all the faithful bishops of bygone days. I answered as a
bishop ought to answer: Let the Emperor act as an emperor ought to. He
must take away my life rather than my faith.

<span id="v.vii-p40"></span>19. But to whom shall I give it up? Today’s
lesson from the Gospel ought to teach us what is asked for and by whom
it is asked. You have heard read that when Christ <span
id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) sat upon the foal of an ass, the
children cried aloud, and the Jews were vexed. At length they spoke to
the Lord Jesus, bidding Him to silence them. He answered: “If these
should hold their peace, the stones will cry out.” <span
id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486) Then on entering the temple, He
cast out the money-changers, and the tables, and those that sold doves
in the temple of God. That passage was read by no arrangement of mine,
but by chance; but it is well fitted to the present time. The praises of
Christ are ever the scourges of the unfaithful. And now when Christ is
praised, the heretics say that sedition is stirred up. The heretics say
that death is being prepared for them, and truly they have their death
in the praises of Christ. For how can they bear His praises, Whose
weakness they maintain. And so to-day, when Christ is praised, the
madness of the Arians is scourged.

<span id="v.vii-p43"></span>20. The Gerasenes could not bear the
presence of Christ; <span id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487) these,
worse than the Gerasenes, cannot endure the praises of Christ. They see
boys singing of the glory of Christ, for it is written: “Out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings Thou hast perfected praise.” <span
id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488) They mock at their tender age, so
full of faith, and say: “Behold, why do they cry out?” But Christ
answers them: “If these should hold their peace, the stones will cry
out,” <span id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) that is, the stronger
will cry out, both youths and the more mature will cry out, and old men
will cry out; these stones now firmly laid upon that stone of which it
is written: “The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of
the corner.” <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490)

<span id="v.vii-p48"></span>21. Invited, then, by these praises, Christ
enters His temple, <span id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) and takes
His scourge and drives the money-changers out of the temple. For He does
not allow the slaves of money to be in His temple, nor does He allow
those to be there who sell seats. What are seats but honours? What are
the doves but simple minds or souls that follow a pure and clear faith?
Shall I, then, bring into the temple him whom Christ shuts out? For he
who sells dignities and honours will be bidden to go out. He will be
bidden to go out who desires to sell the simple minds of the faithful.

<span id="v.vii-p50"></span>22. Therefore, Auxentius is cast out.
Mercurius is shut out. The portent is one, the names are two! That no
one might know who he was, he changed his name so as to call himself
Auxentius, because there had been here an Arian bishop, named Auxentius.
He did this to deceive the people over whom the other had had power. He
changed his name, but he did not change his falseness. He puts off the
wolf, yet puts on the wolf again. It is no help to him that he has
changed his name; whatever happens he is known. He is called by one name
in the parts of Scythia, he is called by another here. He has a name for
each country he lives in. He has two names already, and if he were to go
elsewhere from here, he will have yet a third. For how will he endure to
keep a name as a proof of such wickedness? He did less in Scythia, and
was so ashamed that he changed his name. Here he has dared to do worse
things, and will he be ready to be betrayed by his name wherever he
goes? Shall he write the death warrant of so many people with his own
hand, and yet be able to be unshaken in mind?

<span id="v.vii-p51"></span>23. The Lord Jesus shut a few out of His
temple, but Auxentius left none. Jesus with a scourge drove them out of
His temple, <span id="page_434">p. 434</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_434"></span>Auxentius with a sword; Jesus with a scourge,
Mercurius with an axe. The holy Lord drives out the sacrilegious with a
scourge; the impious man pursues the holy with a sword. Of him you have
well said to-day: Let him take away his laws with him. He will take
them, although he is unwilling; he will take with him his conscience,
although he takes no writing; he will take with him his soul inscribed
with blood although he will not take a letter inscribed with ink. It is
written: “Juda, thy sin is written with a pen of iron and with the point
of a diamond, and it is graven upon thy heart,” <span
id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) that is, it is written there,
whence it came forth.

<span id="v.vii-p53"></span>24. Does he, a man full of blood and full of
murder, dare to make mention to me of a discussion? He who thinks that
they whom he could not mislead by his words are to be slain with the
sword, giving bloody laws with his mouth, writing them with his hand,
and thinking that the law can order a faith for man to hold. He has not
heard what was read to-day: “That a man is not justified by the works of
the law,” <span id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493) or “I, through the
law, am dead to the law, that I may live unto God,” <span
id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) that is, by the spiritual law he is
dead to the carnal interpretation of the law. And we, by the law of our
Lord Jesus Christ, are dead to this law, which sanctions such perfidious
decrees. The law did not gather the Church together, but the faith of
Christ. For the law is not by faith, but “the just man lives by
faith.” <span id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495) Therefore, faith, not
the law, makes a man just, for justice is not through the law, but
through the faith of Christ. But he who casts aside his faith and pleads
for that the claims of the law, bears witness that he is himself unjust;
for the just man lives by faith.

<span id="v.vii-p57"></span>25. Shall any one, then, follow this law,
whereby the Council of Ariminum is confirmed, wherein Christ was said to
be a creature. But say they: “God sent forth His Son, made of a woman,
made under the law.” <span id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496) And so
they say “made,” that is, “created.” Do they not consider these very
words which they have brought forward; that Christ is said to have been
made, but of a woman; that is, He was “made” as regards his birth from a
Virgin, Who was begotten of the Father as regards His divine generation?
Have they read also to-day, “that Christ redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us”? <span
id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) Was Christ a curse in His Godhead?
But why He is called a curse the Apostle tells us, saying that it is
written: “Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree,” <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498) that is, He Who in his flesh bore
our flesh, in His body bore our infirmities and our curses, that He
might crucify them; for He was not cursed Himself, but was cursed in
thee. So it is written elsewhere: “Who knew no sin, but was made sin for
us, for He bore our sins, <span id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499)
that he might destroy them by the Sacrament of His Passion.”

<span id="v.vii-p62"></span>26. These matters, my brethren, I would
discuss more fully with him in your presence; but knowing that you are
not ignorant of the faith, he has avoided a trial before yon, and has
chosen some four or five heathen to represent him, if that is he has
chosen any, whom I should like to be present in our company, not to
judge concerning Christ, but to hear the majesty of Christ. They,
however, have already given their decision concerning Auxentius, to whom
they gave no credence as he pleaded before them day by day. What can be
more of a condemnation of him than the fact, that without an adversary
he was defeated before his own judges? So now we also have their opinion
against Auxentius.

<span id="v.vii-p63"></span>27. And that he has chosen heathen is
rightly to be condemned; for he has disregarded the Apostle’s command,
where he says: “Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to
law before the unjust and not before the saints? Do ye not know the
saints shall judge the world?” <span
id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500) And below he says: “Is it so, that
there is not a wise man among you, who can judge between heathen? But
brother goeth to law with brother, and that before the
unbelievers.” <span id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) You see, then,
that what he has introduced is against the Apostle’s authority. Do you
decide, then, whether we are to follow Auxentius or Paul as our master.

<span id="v.vii-p66"></span>28. But why speak of the Apostle, when the
Lord Himself cries through the prophet: “Hearken unto Me, My people, ye
who know judgment, in whose heart is My law.” <span
id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502) God says: “Hearken unto Me, My
people, ye that know judgment.” Auxentius says: Ye know not judgment. Do
you see how he condemns God in you, who rejects the voice of the
heavenly oracle: “Hearken unto Me, My people,” says the Lord. He says
not, “Hearken, ye Gentiles,” nor does He say, “Hearken, ye Jews.” For
they who had been the people of the Lord <span id="page_435">p.
435</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_435"></span>have now become the people
of error, and they who were the people of error have begun to be the
people of God; for they have believed on Christ. That people then judges
in whose heart is the divine, not the human law, the law not written in
ink, but in the spirit of the living God; <span
id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503) not set down on paper, but stamped
upon the heart. Who then, does you a wrong, he who refuses, or he who
chooses to be heard by you?

<span id="v.vii-p69"></span>29. Hemmed in on all sides, he betakes
himself to the wiles of his fathers. He wants to stir up ill-will on the
Emperor’s side, saying that a youth, a catechumen ignorant of the sacred
writings, ought to judge, and to judge in the consistory. As though last
year when I was sent for to go to the palace, when in the presence of
the chief men the matter was discussed before the consistory, when the
Emperor wished to seize the basilica, I was cowed then at the sight of
the royal court, and did not show the firmness a bishop should, or
departed with diminished claims. Do they not remember that the people,
when they knew I had gone to the palace, made such a rush that they
could not resist its force; and all offered themselves to death for the
faith of Christ as a military officer came out with some light troops to
disperse the crowd? Was not I asked to calm the people with a long
speech? Did I not pledge my word that no one should invade the basilica
of the church? And though my services were asked for to do an act of
kindness, yet the fact that the people came to the palace was used to
bring ill-will upon me. They wish to bring me to this now again.

<span id="v.vii-p70"></span>30. I recalled the people, and yet I did not
escape their ill-will, which ill-will, however, I think we ought rather
to tempt than fear. For why should we fear for the Name of Christ?
Unless perchance I ought to be troubled because they say: “Ought not the
Emperor to have one basilica, to which to go, and Ambrose wants to have
more power than the Emperor, and so refuses to the Emperor the
opportunity of going forth to church?” When they say this, they desire
to lay hold of my words, as did the Jews who tried Christ with cunning
words, saying: “Master, is it lawful to give tribute to Cæsar or
not?” <span id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) Is ill-will always
stirred up against the servants of God on Cæsar’s account, and does
impiety make use of this with a view to starting a slander, so as to
shelter itself under the imperial name? and can they say that they do
not share in the sacrilege of those whose advice they follow?

<span id="v.vii-p72"></span>31. See how much worse than the Jews the
Arians are. They asked whether He thought that the right of tribute
should be given to Cæsar; these want to give to Cæsar the right of the
Church. But as these faithless ones follow their author, so also let us
answer as our Lord and Author has taught us. For Jesus seeing the
wickedness of the Jews said to them: Why tempt ye Me? show Me a penny.
When they had given it, He said: “Whose image and superscription hath
it?” <span id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505) They answered and said:
Cæsar’s. And Jesus says to them: “Render unto Cæsar the things that are
Cæsar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” <span
id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506) So, too, I say to these who oppose
me: Show me a penny. Jesus sees Cæsar’s penny and says: Render unto
Cæsar the things that are Cæsar’s, and unto God the things that are
God’s. Can they in seizing the basilicas of the church offer Cæsar’s
penny?

<span id="v.vii-p75"></span>32. But in the church I only know of one
Image, that is the Image of the unseen God, of Which God has said: “Let
us make man in Our image and Our likeness;” <span
id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507) that Image of Which it is written,
that Christ is the Brightness of His glory and the Image of His
Person. <span id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) In that Image I
perceive the Father, as the Lord Jesus Himself has said: “He that seeth
Me seeth the Father.” <span id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) For
this Image is not separated from the Father, which indeed has taught me
the unity of the Trinity, saying: “I and My Father are One,” <span
id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510) and again: “All things that the
Father hath are Mine.” <span id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511) Also
of the Holy Spirit, saying that the Spirit is Christ’s, and has received
of Christ, as it is written: “He shall receive of Mine, and shall
declare it unto you.” <span id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512)

<span id="v.vii-p82"></span>33. How, then, did we not answer humbly
enough? If he demand tribute, we do not refuse it. The lands of the
Church pay tribute. If the Emperor wants the lands, he has the power to
claim them, none of us will interfere. The contributions of the people
are amply sufficient for the poor. Do not stir up ill-will in the matter
of the lands. Let them take them if it is the Emperor’s will. I do not
give them, but I do not refuse them. They ask for gold. I can say:
Silver and gold I do not ask for. But they stir up ill-will because gold
is spent. I am not afraid of such ill-will as this. I have dependents.
My dependents are Christ’s poor. I know how to collect this treasure.
<span id="page_436">p. 436</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_436"></span>On
that they may even charge me with this crime, that I have spent money on
the poor! and if they make the charge that I seek for defence at their
hands, I do not deny it; nay, I solicit it. I have my defence, but it
consists in the prayers of the poor. The blind and the lame, the weak
and the old, are stronger than hardy warriors. Lastly, gifts to the poor
make God indebted to us, for it is written: “He that giveth to the poor,
lendeth to God.” <span id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513) The guards
of warriors often do not merit divine grace.

<span id="v.vii-p84"></span>34. They declare also that the people have
been led astray by the strains of my hymns. <span
id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514) I certainly do not deny it. That is
a lofty strain, and there is nothing more powerful than it. For what has
more power than the confession of the Trinity which is daily celebrated
by the mouth of the whole people? All eagerly vie one with the other in
confessing the faith, and know how to praise in verse the Father, Son,
and Holy Spirit. So they all have become teachers, who scarcely could be
disciples.

<span id="v.vii-p86"></span>35. What could show greater obedience than
that we should follow Christ’s example, “Who, being found in fashion as
a man, humbled Himself and became obedient even unto death?” <span
id="fr_3515"></span>[3516](#fn_3515) Accordingly He has freed all
through His obedience. “For as by one man’s disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of One shall many be made righteous.” <span
id="fr_3516"></span>[3517](#fn_3516) If, then, He was obedient, let them
receive the rule of obedience: to which we cling, saying to those who
stir up ill-will against us on the Emperor’s side: We pay to Cæsar what
is Cæsar’s, and to God what is God’s. Tribute is due to Cæsar, we do not
deny it. The Church belongs to God, therefore it ought not to be
assigned to Cæsar. For the temple of God cannot be Cæsar’s by right.

<span id="v.vii-p89"></span>36. That this is said with respectful
feeling for the Emperor, no one can deny. For what is more full of
respect than that the Emperor should be called the son of the Church. As
it is said, it is said without sin, since it is said with the divine
favour. For the Emperor is within the Church, not above it. For a good
emperor seeks the aid of the Church and does not refuse it. As I say
this with all humility, so also I state it with firmness. Some threaten
us with fire, sword, exile; we have learnt as servants of Christ not to
fear. To those who have no fear, nothing is ever a serious cause of
dread. Thus too is it written: “Arrows of infants their blows have
become.” <span id="fr_3517"></span>[3518](#fn_3517)

<span id="v.vii-p91"></span>37. A sufficient answer, then, seems to have
been given to their suggestion. Now I ask them, what the Saviour asked:
“The baptism of John, was it from heaven or men?” <span
id="fr_3518"></span>[3519](#fn_3518) The Jews could not answer Him. If
the Jews did not make nothing of the baptism of John, does Auxentius
make nothing of the baptism of Christ? For that is not a baptism of men,
but from heaven, which the angel of great counsel <span
id="fr_3519"></span>[3520](#fn_3519) has brought to us, that we might be
justified to God. Wherefore, then, does Auxentius hold that the faithful
ought to be rebaptized, when they have been baptized in the name of the
Trinity, when the Apostle says: “One faith, one baptism”? <span
id="fr_3520"></span>[3521](#fn_3520) And wherefore does he say that he
is man’s enemy, not Christ’s, seeing that he despises the counsel of God
and condemns the baptism which Christ has granted us to redeem our sins.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3465"></span>[430:3466](2100372.htm#fr_3465) <span
id="v.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span> [1 Pet. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3466"></span>[431:3467](2100372.htm#fr_3466) <span
id="v.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p9"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="v.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3467"></span>[431:3468](2100372.htm#fr_3467) <span
id="v.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p12"></span> S. [Luke xix.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#035)<span id="v.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3468"></span>[431:3469](2100372.htm#fr_3468) <span
id="v.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p13"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="v.vii-p13.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_3469"></span>[431:3470](2100372.htm#fr_3469) <span
id="v.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p14"></span> [Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="v.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3470"></span>[431:3471](2100372.htm#fr_3470) <span
id="v.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p15"></span> S. [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="v.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3471"></span>[431:3472](2100372.htm#fr_3471) <span
id="v.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p16"></span> S. [Matt. x.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#039)<span id="v.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3472"></span>[431:3473](2100372.htm#fr_3472) <span
id="v.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p19"></span> The words *amisit* (lost) and *custodiam*
(guard) are repeated by St. Ambrose from the earlier part of the
sentence. Such play upon words is not uncommon in his writings.

<span id="fn_3473"></span>[431:3474](2100372.htm#fr_3473) <span
id="v.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p21"></span> [2 Kings vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#016)<span id="v.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3474"></span>[432:3475](2100372.htm#fr_3474) <span
id="v.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p23"></span> [Acts xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#004)<span id="v.vii-p23.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_3475"></span>[432:3476](2100372.htm#fr_3475) <span
id="v.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p25"></span> [Rom. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)<span id="v.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3476"></span>[432:3477](2100372.htm#fr_3476) <span
id="v.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p27"></span> S. [John xxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#022)<span id="v.vii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3477"></span>[432:3478](2100372.htm#fr_3477) <span
id="v.vii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p28"></span> S. [John iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034)<span id="v.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3478"></span>[432:3479](2100372.htm#fr_3478) <span
id="v.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p29"></span> S. [John vii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030)<span id="v.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3479"></span>[432:3480](2100372.htm#fr_3479) <span
id="v.vii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p31"></span> The story is related at length by Paulinus
in his *Life of St. Ambrose,* ch. 12. He tells us that whilst many tried
to drive the saint into exile, one named Euterymius went the greatest
lengths to accomplish this purpose. He hired a house near the church and
kept a carriage there, so as to be able the more readily to carry off
St. Ambrose into exile, if he could once but seize him. But that very
day year he was himself put into the same carriage, and from the same
house was carried into exile. For “his wickedness fell on his own pate.”
([Ps. vii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007)<span
id="v.vii-p31.1"></span>.) He adds also that the bishop did much to
comfort him, and gave him money and other things he needed.

<span id="fn_3480"></span>[432:3481](2100372.htm#fr_3480) <span
id="v.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p33"></span> [Zech. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#001)<span id="v.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3481"></span>[432:3482](2100372.htm#fr_3481) <span
id="v.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p34"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014)<span id="v.vii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[432:3483](2100372.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="v.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p36"></span> [Ps. l.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)<span id="v.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[432:3484](2100372.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="v.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p37"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015)<span id="v.vii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[433:3485](2100372.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="v.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p38"></span> [1 Kings xxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#003)<span id="v.vii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[433:3486](2100372.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="v.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p41"></span> S. [Luke xix.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#035)<span id="v.vii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[433:3487](2100372.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="v.vii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p42"></span> S. [Luke xix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040)<span id="v.vii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[433:3488](2100372.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="v.vii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p44"></span> S. [Luke viii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#037)<span id="v.vii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[433:3489](2100372.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="v.vii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p45"></span> [Ps. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span id="v.vii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[433:3490](2100372.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="v.vii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p46"></span> S. [Luke xix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040)<span id="v.vii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[433:3491](2100372.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="v.vii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p47"></span> [Psa.
118.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)<span id="v.vii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[433:3492](2100372.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="v.vii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p49"></span> S. [John ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015)<span id="v.vii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[434:3493](2100372.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="v.vii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p52"></span> [Jer. xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)<span id="v.vii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[434:3494](2100372.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="v.vii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p54"></span> [Gal. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)<span id="v.vii-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[434:3495](2100372.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="v.vii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p55"></span> [Gal. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)<span id="v.vii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[434:3496](2100372.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="v.vii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p56"></span> [Gal. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)<span id="v.vii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[434:3497](2100372.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="v.vii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p58"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="v.vii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[434:3498](2100372.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="v.vii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p59"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="v.vii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[434:3499](2100372.htm#fr_3498) <span
id="v.vii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p60"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="v.vii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[434:3500](2100372.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="v.vii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p61"></span> [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span id="v.vii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[434:3501](2100372.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="v.vii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p64"></span> [1 Cor.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)<span id="v.vii-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[434:3502](2100372.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="v.vii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p65"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005)<span id="v.vii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[434:3503](2100372.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="v.vii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p67"></span> [Isa. li.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[435:3504](2100372.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="v.vii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p68"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span id="v.vii-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[435:3505](2100372.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="v.vii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p71"></span> S. [Matt. xxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017)<span id="v.vii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[435:3506](2100372.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="v.vii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p73"></span> S. [Matt. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#018)<span id="v.vii-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[435:3507](2100372.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="v.vii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p74"></span> S. [Matt. xxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)<span id="v.vii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[435:3508](2100372.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="v.vii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p76"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="v.vii-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[435:3509](2100372.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="v.vii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p77"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="v.vii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[435:3510](2100372.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="v.vii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p78"></span> S. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="v.vii-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[435:3511](2100372.htm#fr_3510) <span
id="v.vii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p79"></span> S. [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="v.vii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[435:3512](2100372.htm#fr_3511) <span
id="v.vii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p80"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="v.vii-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[435:3513](2100372.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="v.vii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p81"></span> S. [John xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)<span id="v.vii-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[436:3514](2100372.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="v.vii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p83"></span> [Prov. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#017)<span id="v.vii-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[436:3515](2100372.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="v.vii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p85"></span> St. Augustine speaks of this introduction
of hymns into the services of the Church at Milan (*Confess.* IX. 7):
“Then was it first instituted that after the manner of the Eastern
Churches, hymns and psalms should be sung, lest the people should wax
faint through the tediousness of sorrow.”—Eng. Trans. Such a hymn as
“The eternal gifts of Christ the king,” etc., written by St. Ambrose,
was perhaps first sung there.

<span id="fn_3515"></span>[436:3516](2100372.htm#fr_3515) <span
id="v.vii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p87"></span> [Phil.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="v.vii-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3516"></span>[436:3517](2100372.htm#fr_3516) <span
id="v.vii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p88"></span> [Rom. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span id="v.vii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3517"></span>[436:3518](2100372.htm#fr_3517) <span
id="v.vii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p90"></span> [Psa.
64.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3518"></span>[436:3519](2100372.htm#fr_3518) <span
id="v.vii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p92"></span> S. [Luke xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#004)<span id="v.vii-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3519"></span>[436:3520](2100372.htm#fr_3519) <span
id="v.vii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p93"></span> [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="v.vii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3520"></span>[436:3521](2100372.htm#fr_3520) <span
id="v.vii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p94"></span> [Eph. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span id="v.vii-p94.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXII: To Marcellina on Finding the Bodies of SS. Gervasius
and Protasius.](2100373)
