[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100343)  [Next](2100345) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv"></span>

#### <span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p0.1"></span>Chapter IV.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p1"></span>Having summed up the address of
Liberius, St. Ambrose passes on to the virtues of his sister, especially
her fasts, which however he advises her to moderate to some extent, and
to exercise herself in other matters, after the example which he
adduces. Especially he recommends the Lord’s Prayer, and the repetition
of Psalms by night, and the recitation of the Creed before daylight.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p2"></span>15. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>After</span> such a fashion did Liberius
of holy memory address you, in words beyond the reality of practice in
most cases, but coming short of your performance, who have not only
attained to the whole of discipline by your virtue, but have surpassed
it in your zeal. For we are bidden to practise fasting, but only for
single days; but you, multiplying nights and days, pass untold periods
without food, and if ever requested to partake of some, and to lay aside
your book a little while, you at once answer: “Man doth not live by
bread alone, but by every word of God.” <span
id="fr_3278"></span>[3279](#fn_3278) Your very meals consisted but of
what food came to hand, so that fasting is to be preferred to eating
what was repugnant; your drink is from the spring, your weeping and
prayer combine, your sleep is on your book.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p4"></span>16. These kings were suited to younger
years, whilst he was ripening with the gray hairs of age; but when a
virgin has gained the triumph over her subdued body, she should lessen
her toil, that she may be preserved as teacher for a younger age. The
vine laden with the fruitful branches of full growth soon breaks unless
it be from time to time kept back. But whilst it is young let it grow
rank, and as it grows older be pruned, so as not to grow into a forest
of twigs, or die deprived of life by its exceptive produce. A good
husbandman by tending the soil keeps the vine in excellent order,
protects it from cold, and guards it from being parched by the mid-day
sun. And he works his land by turns, or if he will not let it lie
fallow, he alternates his crops, so that the fields may rest through
change of produce. Do you too, a veteran in virginity, at least sow the
fields of your breast with different seeds, at one time with moderate
sustenance, at another with sparing fasts, <span id="page_384">p.
384</span> <span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-Page_384"></span>with reading, work,
and prayer, that change of toil may be as a truce for rest.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p5"></span>17. The whole land does not produce
the same harvest. On one side vines grow on the hills, on another you
can see the purple olives, elsewhere the scented roses. And after
leaving the plough, the strong husbandman with his fingers scrapes the
soil to plant the roots of flowers, and with the rough hands wherewith
he turns the bullocks striving amongst the vines, he gently presses the
udders of the sheep. The land is the better the more numerous are its
fruits. So do you, following the example of a good husbandman, avoid
cleaving your soil with perpetual fastings as if with deep ploughings.
Let the rose of modesty bloom in your garden, and the lily of the mind,
and let the violet beds drink from the source of sacred blood. There is
a common saying, “What you wish to perform abundantly, sometimes do not
do at all.” There ought to be something to add to the days of Lent, but
so that nothing be done for the sake of ostentation, but of religion.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p6"></span>18. Frequent prayer also commends us
to God. For if the prophet says, “Seven times a day have I praised
Thee,” <span id="fr_3279"></span>[3280](#fn_3279) though he was busy
with the affairs of a kingdom, what ought we to do, who read: “Watch and
pray that ye enter not into temptation”? <span
id="fr_3280"></span>[3281](#fn_3280) Certainly our customary prayers
ought to be said with giving of thanks, when we rise from sleep, when we
go forth, when we prepare to receive food, after receiving it, and at
the hour of incense, <span id="fr_3281"></span>[3282](#fn_3281) when at
last we are going to rest.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p10"></span>19. And again in your bed-chamber
itself, I would have you join psalms in frequent interchange with the
Lord’s prayer, either when you wake up, or before sleep bedews your
body, so that at the very commencement of rest sleep may find you free
from the care of worldly matters, meditating upon the things of God.
And, indeed, he who first found out the name of Philosophy itself, <span
id="fr_3282"></span>[3283](#fn_3282) every day before he went to rest,
had the flute-player play softer melodies to soothe his mind disturbed
by worldly cares. But he, like a man washing tiles, fruitlessly desired
to drive away worldly things by worldly means, for he was, indeed,
rather besmearing himself with fresh mud, in seeking a reward from
pleasure, but let us, having wiped off the filth of earthly vices,
purify our utmost souls from every defilement of the flesh.

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p12"></span>20. We ought, also, specially to
repeat the Creed, as a seal upon our hearts, daily, before light, and to
recur to it in thought whenever we are in fear of anything. For when is
the soldier in his tent or the warrior in battle without his military
oath?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3278"></span>[383:3279](2100344.htm#fr_3278) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p3"></span> S. [Matt. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004)<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3279"></span>[384:3280](2100344.htm#fr_3279) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p7"></span> [Psa.
119.164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3280"></span>[384:3281](2100344.htm#fr_3280) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p8"></span> S. [Matt. xxvi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041)<span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3281"></span>[384:3282](2100344.htm#fr_3281) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p9"></span> It is doubtful whether incense was
burnt as an adjunct of Christian worship so early as the time of St.
Ambrose, and the reference here may be to the offering at evening in the
Jewish temple. He speaks again of incense in *Expos. Ev. sec. Lucam.* §
28, but again there is no conclusive proof. It was certainly used as a
perfume.

<span id="fn_3282"></span>[384:3283](2100344.htm#fr_3282) <span
id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.iv.iv-p11"></span> Pythagoras.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. St. Ambrose, speaking of tears, explains David's
saying, “Every night wash l my couch with my tears,” and goes on to
speak of Christ bearing our griefs and infirmities. Everything should be
referred to His honour, and we ought to rejoice with spiritual joy, but
not after a worldly fashion.](2100345)
