[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100248)  [Next](2100250.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix"></span>

#### <span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p0.1"></span>Chapter IX.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p1"></span>Various quibbling arguments, advanced
by the Arians to show that the Son had a beginning of existence, are
considered and refuted, on the ground that whilst the Arians plainly
prove nothing, or if they prove anything, prove it against themselves,
(inasmuch as He Who is the beginning of all cannot Himself have a
beginning), their reasonings do not even hold true with regard to facts
of human existence. Time could not be before He was, Who is the Author
of time—if indeed at some time He was not in existence, then the Father
was without His Power and Wisdom. Again, our own human experience shows
that a person is said to exist before he is born.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p2"></span>97. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>Now</span> that our opponents have failed
to maintain their objection against the truth of <span id="page_275">p.
275</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-Page_275"></span>His Son’s equality
with the Father, on the ground of His Generation, let them see that
their well known device of controversy, their stock misrepresentation,
is frustrated. Their common use is to propound this riddle: “How can the
Son be equal with the Father? If He is a Son, then before He was
begotten He was not in existence. If He was in existence, why was He
begotten?” And men who advance difficulties raised by Arius yet sturdily
deny that they are Arians.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p3"></span>98. Accordingly, they demand our
answer, intending, if we say, “The Son existed before He was begotten,”
to meet us with a subtle retort, that “If so, then, before He was
begotten, He was created, and there is no difference between Him and the
rest of created beings, for He began to be a creature before He began to
be the Son.” To which they add: “Why was He begotten, when He was
already in existence? Because He was imperfect, and in order that He
might afterwards be made more perfect?” Whilst if we reply that the Son
did not exist before He was begotten, they will immediately reply: “Then
by being begotten He was brought into existence, not having existed
before He was begotten,” so as to lead on from this to the conclusion
that “the Son existed, when He did not exist.” <span
id="fr_2420"></span>[2421](#fn_2420.md)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p5"></span>99. But let those who propound this
difficulty and endeavour to enwrap the truth in a cloud tell us
themselves whether the Father exerts His power of begetting within or
without limits of time. If they say “within limits of time,” then they
will attribute to the Father what they object against the Son, so as to
make the Father seem to have begun to be what He was not before. If
their answer is “without such limits,” then what is left them but to
resolve for themselves the problem they have propounded, and acknowledge
that the Son is not begotten under limits and conditions of time, since
they deny that the Father so begets?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p6"></span>100. If the Son, then, is not begotten
within limits of time, we are free to judge that nothing can have
existed before the Son, Whose being is not confined by time. If, indeed,
there was anything in being before the Son, then it instantly follows
that in Him were not created all things in heaven or in earth, and the
Apostle is shown to have erred in so setting it down in his
Epistle, <span id="fr_2421"></span>[2422](#fn_2421.md) whereas, if before
He was begotten there was nothing, I see not wherefore He, before Whom
none was, should be said to have been after any.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p8"></span>101. With the consideration whereof we
must join another most blasphemous objection of theirs, which covers a
subtle purpose to confuse the sense and understanding of simple folk.
They ask whether everything that comes to an end had also at any time a
beginning. If they are told that what has an end also had a beginning,
then they return to the charge with the question whether the Father has
ceased to beget His Son. This by our consent being granted them, they
conclude that the generation of the Son had a beginning. The which if
you allow, it seems to follow that if the Generation had a beginning, it
appears to have begun in Him Who was begotten; so that one, who had not
existed before, may be called “begotten”—their intent being to close the
inquiry by laying down as conclusive that there was a time when the Son
existed not.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p9"></span>102. Besides this, there are other vain
objections, such as persons of their glibness of tongue would readily
urge. If, say they, the Son is the Word of the Father, then He is called
“begotten,” inasmuch as He is the Word. But then since He is the Word,
He is not a work. Now the Father has spoken “in divers manners,” <span
id="fr_2422"></span>[2423](#fn_2422.md) whence it follows that He has
begotten many Sons, if He has spoken His Word, not created it as a work
of His hands. O fools, talking as though they knew not the difference
between the word uttered and the Divine Word, abiding eternally, born of
the Father—born, I say, not uttered only—in Whom is no combination of
syllables, but the fulness of the eternal Godhead and life without
end! <span id="fr_2423"></span>[2424](#fn_2423.md)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p12"></span>103. Follows another blasphemy,
whereby they enquire whether it was of His own free will, or on
compulsion, that the Father begat \[His Son\], intending, if we say, “Of
His own free will,” that we should appear as though we acknowledged that
the Father’s Will preceded the \[Divine\] Generation, and to answer that
there being something that preceded the existence of the Son, the Son is
not co-eternal with the Father, or that He, like the rest of the world,
is a being created, forasmuch as it is written, “He hath made all
things, as many as He would,” <span id="fr_2424"></span>[2425](#fn_2424.md)
though this is spoken, not of the Father and <span id="page_276">p.
276</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-Page_276"></span>the Son, but of those
creatures which the Son made. Whereas if we answered that the Father
begat \[His Son\] on compulsion, we should seem to have attributed
infirmity to the Father.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p14"></span>104. But in the eternal Generation
there is no foregoing condition, neither of will, nor of unwillingness,
and therefore I can neither say that the Father begat of His free Will,
nor yet that He begat on compulsion, for to beget depends not upon
possibility as determined by will, but rather appears to stand in a
certain right and property of the hidden being of the Father. For just
as the Father is not good because He wills to be so, or is compelled to
be so, but is above these conditions—is good, that is, by nature,—even
so the putting forth of His generative power is neither of will nor of
necessity.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p15"></span>105. Yet let us grant their proposal.
Granted that the Generation depends on the Will of Him Who generates;
when do they say that this act of will took place? If it was in the
beginning, then, plainly, the Son was in the beginning. If the Will is
eternal, then the Son also is eternal. If the Will began to exist, then
God the Father, as He was, was so displeased with Himself, that He made
a change in His condition, that is to say, without His Son He was
displeasing to Himself; in His Son He began to be well pleased.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p16"></span>106. To follow out the consequences
thereof. If the Father conceived, after the manner of human nature, a
desire to beget, then did He also pass through all the experiences which
befal men before the birth takes place—but we find that generation is
not determined merely by will, but is an object of wish.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p17"></span>107. Thus do they betray their own
ungodliness, who would have it that Christ’s generation had a beginning,
in order that it may seem, not that true begetting of the Word abiding,
but the utterance of words that pass and are forgotten, and that by
intrusion of \[the premiss of\] a multitude of sons, they may \[be
warranted to\] deny Christ’s personal possession of the divine
attributes, to the end that He may be regarded as neither the
only-begotten nor the first-begotten Son; and lastly, that given the
belief that His existence had a beginning, it may also be deemed as
appointed to have an end.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p18"></span>108. But neither had the Son of God
any beginning, seeing that He already was at the beginning, nor shall He
come to an end, Who is the Beginning and the End of the Universe; <span
id="fr_2425"></span>[2426](#fn_2425.md) for being the Beginning, how could
He take and receive that which He already had, <span
id="fr_2426"></span>[2427](#fn_2426.md) or how shall He come to an end,
being Himself the End of all things, so that in that End we have an
abiding-place without end? The Divine Generation is not an event
occurring in the course of time, and within its limits, and therefore
before it time is not, and in it time has no place.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p21"></span>109. Again, their aimless and futile
question finds no loophole for entry, even when directed upon the
creation itself; <span id="fr_2427"></span>[2428](#fn_2427.md) nay, indeed,
temporal existences appear, in certain cases, to admit of no division of
time. For instance, light generates radiance, but we can neither
conceive that the radiance begins to exist after the light, nor that the
light is in existence before the radiance, for where there is a
light, <span id="fr_2428"></span>[2429](#fn_2428.md) there is radiance, and
where there is radiance there is also a light; and thus we can neither
have a light without radiance, nor radiance without light, because both
the light is in the radiance, and the radiance in the light. Thus the
Apostle was taught to call the Son “the Radiance of the Father’s
Glory,” <span id="fr_2429"></span>[2430](#fn_2429.md) for the Son is the
Radiance of His Father’s light, co-eternal, because of eternity of
Power; inseparable, by unity of brightness.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p25"></span>110. If then we can neither understand
the mystery of, nor dissociate, these created objects in the sky above
us, which we see, can we comprehend Him Whom we see not, Who is above
every created existence, God, as He is in the very Holy of Holies of His
own Generation? Can we make time a barrier between Him and the Son, when
all time is the creation of the Son?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p26"></span>111. Let them cease therefore, and say
no more that before He was begotten the Son was not. For the word
“before” is a mark of time, whereas the Generation is before <span
id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-Page_277"></span>all
times, <span id="fr_2430"></span>[2431](#fn_2430.md) and therefore that
which comes after aught comes not before it, and the work cannot be
before the maker, seeing that necessarily objects made take their
commencement from the craftsman who makes them. How can the customary
action of any created object be regarded as existing prior to the maker
of it, whilst all time is a creation, and every creation has taken its
being from its creator?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p28"></span>112. I would, therefore, further
examine our opponents, who esteem themselves so cunning, and have them
make good the application of their theory to human existence, seeing
that they use it to disparage the glory of God’s Existence, and keep far
away from any confession of an inscrutable mystery in the Divine
Generation. I would have them find ground for their objection in the
facts of human generation. Of God’s Son they assert that before He was
begotten He was not,—that is to say, they say this of the Wisdom, the
Power, the Word of God, Whose Generation knows nothing prior to itself.
But if, as they would have us believe, there was a time when the Son
existed not (the which it is blasphemy to affirm), then there was a time
when God lacked the fulness of Divine Perfection, if afterwards He
passed through a process of begetting a Son.

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p29"></span>113. To show them, however, the
weakness and transparency of their objection, though it has no real
relation to any truth, divine or human, I will prove to them that men
have existed before they were born. Else, let them show that Jacob, who
whilst yet hidden in the secret chamber of his mother’s womb supplanted
his brother, had not been appointed and ordained, ere ever he was
born; <span id="fr_2431"></span>[2432](#fn_2431.md) let them show that
Jeremiah had not likewise been so, before his birth,—Jeremiah, to whom
the message comes: “Before I formed thee in thy mother’s womb, I knew
thee; and before thou camest forth from the belly, I sanctified thee,
and appointed thee for a prophet amongst the nations.” <span
id="fr_2432"></span>[2433](#fn_2432.md) What testimony can we have stronger
than the case of this great prophet, who was sanctified before he was
born, and known before he was shaped?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p32"></span>114. What, again, shall I say of John,
of whom his holy mother testifies that, whilst he yet lay in her womb,
he perceived in spirit <span id="fr_2433"></span>[2434](#fn_2433.md) the
presence of his Lord, and leaped for joy, as we remember it to be
written, his mother saying: “For lo, as soon as the voice of the
salutation entered mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.” <span
id="fr_2434"></span>[2435](#fn_2434.md) Was he, then, who prophesied, in
existence or not? Nay, surely he was—surely he was in being who
worshipped his Maker; he was in being who spake in his mother’s womb.
And so Elisabeth was filled with the spirit of her son, and Mary
sanctified by the Spirit of hers, for thus you may find it recorded,
that “the babe leaped in her womb, and Elisabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost.” <span id="fr_2435"></span>[2436](#fn_2435.md)

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p36"></span>115. Consider the proper force of each
word. Elisabeth was indeed the first to hear the voice of Mary, but John
was first to feel His Lord’s gracious Presence. Sweet is the harmony of
prophecy with prophecy, of woman with woman, of babe with babe. The
women speak words of grace, the babes move hiddenly, and as their
mothers approach one another, so do they engage in mysterious converse
of love; and in a twofold miracle, though in diverse degrees of honour,
the mothers prophesy in the spirit of their little ones. Who, I ask, was
it that performed this miracle? Was it not the Son of God, Who made the
unborn to be?

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p37"></span>116. Thus your objection fails of
reconcilement with the truths of human existence—can it attain thereto
with divine mysteries? What mean you by your principle that “before He
was begotten He was not”? Was the Father engaged for some time in
conception, so that certain epochs passed away before the Son was
begotten? Was He, like women, in travail of birth, so that just this
travail? What would you? Why seek we to pry into divine mysteries? The
Scriptures tell me the necessary effects of the Divine Generation, <span
id="fr_2436"></span>[2437](#fn_2436.md) not how it is done.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2420"></span>[275:2421](2100249.htm#fr_2420.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p4"></span> St. Ambrose exhibits the argument as a
*reductio ad absurdum.*

<span id="fn_2421"></span>[275:2422](2100249.htm#fr_2421.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p7"></span> [Col. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2422"></span>[275:2423](2100249.htm#fr_2422.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p10"></span> [Heb. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2423"></span>[275:2424](2100249.htm#fr_2423.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p11"></span> [Col.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019.md), [Col.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009.md), [Col.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004.md), [John
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md), [John
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026.md), [John
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025.md), [John
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md), [Rev.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2424"></span>[275:2425](2100249.htm#fr_2424.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p13"></span> [Ps. cxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p13.1"></span>,
which, however, in the English, runs: “He hath done whatsoever pleased
Him.”—Prayer-book.

<span id="fn_2425"></span>[276:2426](2100249.htm#fr_2425.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p19"></span> [Rev.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017.md), [Rev.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008.md), [Rev.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014.md), [Rev.
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013.md), [Isa.
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004.md), [Isa.
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006.md), [Isa.
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2426"></span>[276:2427](2100249.htm#fr_2426.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p20"></span> “And,” we may add; “already
*was.*”—St. Ambrose refers to St. [John viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p20.1"></span>, but the reference is only justifiable by
means of a defective rendering of the Greek; unless we suppose our
Saviour to be alluding to what the prophets had said of Himself as well
as to His own statements. Cf. Bk. III. vii. 49.

<span id="fn_2427"></span>[276:2428](2100249.htm#fr_2427.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p22"></span> On the analogy of which, indeed,
Arianism endeavoured to conceive of the Nature and Activities of God.

<span id="fn_2428"></span>[276:2429](2100249.htm#fr_2428.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p23"></span> Or “a shining body”—*lumen,* not
*lux,* as in other places of this passage. St. Ambrose probably was
unaware that “radiance” or “effulgence” from an incandescent or
otherwise shining body is clue to the presence of the atmosphere, so
that his analogy requires modification when bodies shining *in vacuo*
come into the account. But with regard to these it may be urged that the
shining of the body may be taken as the sole object of consideration,
whilst it is fully admitted that the brightness and the body, though
separated for purposes of mental treatment and thought, are not so in
fact and actual reality. In the Book of Wisdom, vii. 26, the Divine
Wisdom is called “the brightness of everlasting Light” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p23.1"></span>ἀταύγασμα φωτὸς
αϊδίου</span>)—These texts would naturally suggest the ‘Light of Light’
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p23.2"></span>φῶς ἐκ
φωτός</span>,) of the Nicene Creed. The analogy of light and radiance is
employed by many of the Fathers in maintaining the doctrine of the
Church, see Alford’s note on [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p23.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2429"></span>[276:2430](2100249.htm#fr_2429.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p23.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p24"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2430"></span>[277:2431](2100249.htm#fr_2430.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p27"></span> Or “before all *worlds.*” Cf. [Heb.
i. 2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p27.1"></span>, in the Greek, Latin, and English.

<span id="fn_2431"></span>[277:2432](2100249.htm#fr_2431.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p30"></span> [Gen. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2432"></span>[277:2433](2100249.htm#fr_2432.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p31"></span> [Jer. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2433"></span>[277:2434](2100249.htm#fr_2433.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p33"></span> Or “by the Spirit,” *i.e.* by the
help, power of the Spirit, working indeed with his spirit.

<span id="fn_2434"></span>[277:2435](2100249.htm#fr_2434.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p34"></span> S. [Luke i.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#044.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2435"></span>[277:2436](2100249.htm#fr_2435.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p35"></span> S. [Luke i.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041.md)<span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2436"></span>[277:2437](2100249.htm#fr_2436.md) <span
id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.vi.ix-p38"></span> *i.e.* that “such as the Father is,
such is the Son.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The objection that Christ, on the showing of St. John,
lives because of the Father, and therefore is not to be regarded as
equal with the Father, is met by the reply that for the Life of the Son,
in respect of His Godhead, there has never been a time when it began;
and that it is dependent upon none, whilst the passage in question must
be understood as referring to His human life, as is shown by His
speaking there of His body and blood. Two expositions of the passage are
given, the one of which is shown to refer to Christ's Manhood, whilst
the second teaches His equality with the Father, as also His likeness
with men. Rebuke is administered to the Arians for the insult which they
are seeking to inflict upon the Son, and the sense in which the Son can
be said to live “because of” the Father is explained, as also the union
of life with the divine Life. A further objection, based upon the Son's
prayer that He may be glorified by the Father, is briefly
refuted.](2100250.md)
