[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2100370)  [Next](2100372.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi"></span> <span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="v.vi-Page_427"></span>

### <span id="v.vi-p0.1"></span>Letter XXI.

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span>St. Ambrose excuses himself for not having
gone to the consistory when summoned, on the ground that in matters of
faith no one but bishops could rightly judge, and that he was not
contumacious because he would not suffer wrong to be done to his own
order. And he adds that Auxentius would perhaps choose as judges either
Jews or unbelievers, that is, persons hostile to Christ. He says further
that he is willing to discuss the matters in dispute at a synod, and
that he would have told the Emperor by word of mouth what he is now
writing, but that his fellow bishops and the people would not suffer him
to do so.

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.vi-p2.1"></span>Ambrose</span>, Bishop, to the most gracious
Emperor and blessed Augustus, Valentinian.

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span>1. Dalmatius, the tribune and notary, summoned
me by the orders of your Clemency, as he asserted, demanding that I
should also choose judges, as Auxentius had done. He did not mention the
names of those who had been asked for, but he added that there was to be
a discussion in the consistory, and that the judgment of your piety
would give the decision.

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span>2. To this I make, as I think, a suitable
answer. No one ought to consider me contumacious when I affirm what your
father of august memory not only replied by word of mouth, <span
id="fr_3460"></span>[3461](#fn_3460.md) but also sanctioned by his laws,
that, in a matter of faith, or any ecclesiastical ordinance, he should
judge who was not unsuited by office, nor disqualified by equity, for
these are the words of the rescript. That is, it was his desire that
priests should judge concerning priests. Moreover, if a bishop were
accused of other matters also, and a question of character was to be
enquired into, it was also his will that this should be reserved for the
judgment of bishops.

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span>3. Who, then, has answered your Clemency
contumaciously? He who desires that you should be like your father, or
he that wishes you to be unlike him? Unless, perhaps, the judgment of so
great an Emperor seems to any persons of small account, whose faith has
been proved by the constancy of his profession, <span
id="fr_3461"></span>[3462](#fn_3461.md) and his wisdom declared by the
continual improvement of the State.

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span>4. When have you heard, most gracious Emperor,
that laymen gave judgment concerning a bishop in a matter of faith? Are
we so prostrate through the flattery of some as to be unmindful of the
rights of the priesthood, and do I think that I can entrust to others
what God has given me? If a bishop is to be taught by a layman, what
will follow? Let the layman argue, and the bishop listen, let the bishop
learn of the layman. But undoubtedly, whether we go through the series
of the holy Scriptures, or the times of old, who is there who can deny
that, in a matter of faith,—in a matter I say of faith,—bishops are wont
to judge of Christian emperors, not emperors of bishops.

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>5. You will, by the favour of God, attain to a
riper age, and then you will judge what kind of bishop he is who
subjects the rights of the priesthood to laymen. Your father, by the
favour of God a man of riper age, used to say: It is not my business to
judge between bishops. Your Clemency now says: I ought to judge. And he,
though baptized in Christ, thought himself unequal to the burden of such
a judgment, does your Clemency, who have yet to earn for yourself the
sacrament of baptism, arrogate to yourself a judgment concerning the
faith, though ignorant of the sacrament of that faith?

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>6. I can leave it to be imagined what sort of
judges he will have chosen, since he is afraid to publish their names.
Let them simply come to the Church, if there are any to come; let them
listen with the people, not for every one to sit as judge, but that each
may examine his own disposition, and choose whom to follow. The matter
is concerning the bishop of that Church: if the people hear him and
think that he has the best of the argument, let them follow him, I shall
not be jealous.

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>7. I omit to mention that the people have
themselves already given their judgment. I am silent as to the fact that
they demanded of your father him whom they now have. <span
id="fr_3462"></span>[3463](#fn_3462.md) I am silent as to the promise of
your father that if he who was chosen would undertake the bishopric
there should be tranquillity. I acted on the faith of these promises.

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span>8. But if he boasts himself of the approval
of some foreigners, let him be bishop there from whence they are who
think that he ought to receive the name of bishop. For I neither
recognize him as a bishop, nor know I whence he comes.

<span id="v.vi-p14"></span><span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="v.vi-Page_428"></span>9. And how, O Emperor, are we to settle a
matter on which you have already declared your judgment, and have even
promulgated laws, <span id="fr_3463"></span>[3464](#fn_3463.md) so that it
is not open to any one to judge otherwise? But when you laid down this
law for others, you laid it down for yourself as well. For the Emperor
is the first to keep the laws which he passes. Do you, then, wish me to
try how those who are chosen as judges will either come, contrary to
your decision, or at least excuse themselves, saying that they cannot
act against so severe and so stringent a law of the Emperor?

<span id="v.vi-p16"></span>10. But this would be the act of one
contumacious, not of one who knew his position. See, O Emperor, you are
already yourself partially rescinding your law, would that it were not
partially but altogether! for I would not that your law should be set
above the law of God. The law of God has taught us what to follow; human
laws cannot teach us this. They usually extort a change from the
fearful, but they cannot inspire faith.

<span id="v.vi-p17"></span>11. Who, then, will there be, who when he
reads that at one instant through so many provinces the order was given,
that whoever acts against the Emperor shall be beheaded, that whoever
does not give up the temple of God shall at once be put to death; who,
say, is there who will be able either alone or with a few others to say
to the Emperor: I do not approve of your law? Priests are not allowed to
say this, are then laymen allowed? And shall he judge concerning the
faith who either hopes for favour or is afraid of giving offence?

<span id="v.vi-p18"></span>12. Lastly, shall I myself choose laymen for
judges, who, if they upheld the truth of their faith, would be either
proscribed or put to death, as that law passed concerning the faith
decrees? Shall I then expose these men either to denial of the truth or
to punishment?

<span id="v.vi-p19"></span>13. Ambrose is not of sufficient importance
to degrade the priesthood on his own account. The life of one is not of
so much value as the dignity of all priests, by whose advice I gave
those directions, when they intimated that there might perchance be some
heathen or Jew chosen by Auxentius, to whom I should give a triumph over
Christ, if I entrusted to him a judgment concerning Christ. What else
pleases them but to hear of some insult to Christ? What else can please
them unless (which God forbid) the Godhead of Christ should be denied?
Plainly they agree well with the Arian who says that Christ is a
creature, which also heathen and Jews most readily acknowledge.

<span id="v.vi-p20"></span>14. This was decreed at the Synod of
Ariminum, and rightly do I detest that council, following the rule of
the Nicene Council, from which neither death nor the sword can detach
me, which faith the father of your Clemency also, Theodosius, the most
blessed Emperor, both approved and follows. The Gauls hold this faith,
and Spain, and keep it with the pious confession of the Divine Spirit.

<span id="v.vi-p21"></span>15. If anything has to be discussed I have
learnt to discuss it in church as those before me did. If a conference
is to be held concerning the faith, there ought to be a gathering of
Bishops, as was done under Constantine, the Prince of august memory, who
did not promulgate any laws beforehand, but left the decision to the
Bishops. This was done also under Constantius, Emperor of august memory,
the heir of his father’s dignity. But what began well ended otherwise,
for the Bishops had at first subscribed an unadulterated confession of
faith, but since some were desirous of deciding concerning the faith
inside the palace, they managed that those decisions of the Bishops
should be altered by fraud. But they immediately recalled this perverted
decision, and certainly the larger number at Ariminum approved the faith
of the Nicene Council and condemned the Arian propositions.

<span id="v.vi-p22"></span>16. If Auxentius appeals to a synod, in order
to discuss points concerning the faith (although it is not necessary
that so many Bishops should be troubled for the sake of one man, who,
even if he were an angel from heaven, ought not to be preferred to the
peace of the Church), when I hear that a synod is gathering, I, too,
will not be wanting. Repeal, then, the law if you wish for a
disputation.

<span id="v.vi-p23"></span>17. I would have come, O Emperor, to your
consistory, and have made these remarks in your presence, if either the
Bishops or the people had allowed me, but they said that matters
concerning the faith ought to be treated in the church, in presence of
the people.

<span id="v.vi-p24"></span>18. And I wish, O Emperor, that you had not
given sentence that I should go into banishment whither I would. I went
out daily. No one guarded me. You ought to have appointed me a place
wherever you would, for I offered myself for anything. But now the
clergy say to me, “There is not much difference whether you voluntarily
<span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span id="v.vi-Page_429"></span>leave
the altar of Christ or betray it, for if you leave it you will betray
it.”

<span id="v.vi-p25"></span>19. And I wish it were clearly certain to me
that the Church would by no means be given over to the Arians. I would
then willingly offer myself to the will of your piety. But if I only am
guilty of disturbance, why is there a command to invade all other
churches? I would it were established that no one should trouble the
churches, and then I could wish that whatever sentence seems good should
be pronounced concerning me.

<span id="v.vi-p26"></span>20. Vouchsafe, then, O Emperor, to accept the
reason for which I could not come to the consistory. I have never
learned to appear in the consistory except on your behalf, <span
id="fr_3464"></span>[3465](#fn_3464.md) and I am not able to dispute within
the palace, who neither know nor wish to know the secrets of the palace.

<span id="v.vi-p28"></span>21. I, Ambrose, Bishop, offer this memorial
to the most gracious Emperor, and most blessed Augustus Valentinian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3460"></span>[427:3461](2100371.htm#fr_3460.md) <span
id="v.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span> “When Valentinian was journeying from
Constantinople to Rome…some bishops despatched Hypatian…to request
permission to assemble themselves together for deliberation on questions
of doctrine.…Valentinian made the following reply: ‘I am but one of the
laity, and have therefore no right to interfere in these transactions;
let the priests, to whom such matters appertain, assemble where they
please.’” Sozomen, *Eccl. Hist.* VI. 7 \[Vol. II. of this series\]. The
law referred to is not extant.

<span id="fn_3461"></span>[427:3462](2100371.htm#fr_3461.md) <span
id="v.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span> Allusion is here made to a celebrated act of
Valentinian, when attending on the Emperor Julian at the temple of
Fortune. One of the attendants sprinkled him with lustral water, and
Valentinian struck him with his fist, saying that this water defiled
rather than purified those whom it touched. Comp. Sozomen, *Hist. Eccl.*
VI. 6.

<span id="fn_3462"></span>[427:3463](2100371.htm#fr_3462.md) <span
id="v.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span> St. Ambrose is alluding to the circumstances
of his own election.

<span id="fn_3463"></span>[428:3464](2100371.htm#fr_3463.md) <span
id="v.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p15"></span> A law in favour of the Arians, allowing them
to meet together freely, passed through the influence of Justina. See
Sozomen, *Hist. Eccl.* VII. 13.

<span id="fn_3464"></span>[429:3465](2100371.htm#fr_3464.md) <span
id="v.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p27"></span> This refers modestly to the legations
undertaken by St. Ambrose on two separate occasions to Maximus, when the
Empress Justina feared for the safety of herself and Valentinian. In his
first mission, <span class="sc"><span id="v.vi-p27.1"></span>a.d.</span>
383, he had at great personal risk induced Maximus not to invade Italy,
but to leave Valentinian in peaceful possession of a share of the
empire. In his second embassy, <span class="sc"><span
id="v.vi-p27.2"></span>a.d.</span> 387, he was less successful, as
Maximus had determined on invading Italy; so that Justina and
Valentinian escaped to the East, seeking the protection of Theodosius,
who took their part, and defeated Maximus and put him to death at
Aquileia, <span class="sc"><span id="v.vi-p27.3"></span>a.d.</span> 388.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon Against Auxentius on the Giving Up of the
Basilicas.](2100372.md)
