[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Astrology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hba04)  [Next](hba06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766187152/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Hindu Book of Astrology*, by Bhakti Seva, \[1902\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### Aquarius.

### ♒

*All persons born from January* 20 *to February* 18*, inclusive, were
born under the sign of Aquarius*.

This is the last sign of the Air Triplicity, and people born under it
will do well to give the strictest heed and attention to what I say
here. Your strength and power lies wholly within your own hands, and it
is very important that you so think and live as to bring out your great
possibilities. You must not rely on your friends for help, but must be
thoroughly self-reliant, self-supporting and independent. But you should
rely on and pay great attention to the teachings and writings of good
and great men and women, who are striving to help mankind. You have days
of great happiness and days of great misery, and you must learn how to
avoid these blue spells and have all of your days bright and happy. This
can be done by your understanding once and for all time that you are
possessed of unusual powers and abilities; but, if you are lazy and blue
you cannot use these powers. Wake up, then, and by your will throw off
all

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

doubts of your ability to make a grand success of life. When you do this
then will come to you great health and wealth, and your rare and natural
talents will be amply rewarded. You have wonderful magnetic and hypnotic
powers, which you can develop to a very high degree by keeping quiet and
calm and free from all worry. As a matter of fact your planetary and
solar forces will carry you through any and all sickness or trouble if
you will only remain quiet and give them a chance to work. But the very
moment you begin to doubt, fret or worry about any good thing coming to
you these forces cannot work. Work, and lots of it, is what you require,
and you will not amount to a great deal until you keep fully occupied in
some line of work which you have a taste or inclination for. You must
not be proud or vain, or think too much of yourself. If you do you will
not be as charming as you could by being quiet and modest. Persons born
in your sign have no reason whatever to idly sit about deploring their
misfortunes or inability to succeed, for, I tell you, positively, you
can succeed far beyond your fondest expectations, if you will go about
it as directed here and elsewhere in this book. Read this book carefully
and thoughtfully many times when, you are calm and quiet; its teachings
can direct you to

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

all you desire. People of your sign who worry and fret and become
discouraged surround themselves with the repelling forces of the
Universe, which will cause their friends and acquaintances to dislike
them; indeed, they drive people from them who could be of great
assistance, when in moody or blue fits. Don't live in the senses too
much. Remember you are not here to eat, drink and be merry all the time.
Realize that you have duties to perform; that God intends each one of
His children to do certain work, reap the reward and be cheerful and
happy. Don't be afraid or timid or halfhearted in your undertakings,
whether it is in amassing money, making love or acquiring knowledge.
Whatever you attempt to do or desire to become will be accomplished,
providing you have full faith in your ability to succeed. You ought to
read a great deal—of newspapers, magazines and books. Reading the lives
of successful men and women will help you wonderfully. Don't care what
people think or say about your actions. Be good and honest and do the
very best you can without fear of criticism or without caring what your
friends will think about it. Forge ahead, with strong will, and grim
determination to succeed, and your success will be assured. Don't talk
at all with your friends about the great things you intend doing;

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

keep a closed mouth and quietly and intently go about doing your work or
carrying out your plans, and then you will succeed. All this advice will
apply to social achievements, business success or love affairs, and is
written for both sexes. You can succeed in anything you undertake when
once you understand or realize that you must have no fears or doubts
about your ability to succeed. Always be careful to think alone over a
project, an undertaking or selection of a calling, and after cool and
careful thought, if you arrive at a conclusion just what you want to do,
go about it, without consulting anyone, fully determined you will
succeed. Economy and strict application to business is the foundation of
all wealth. Pay as you go and keep out of debt. Debt weakens and makes
an arrant coward of one born in your sign. Attention to religion and
philosophy will be very beneficial to you. Try to feel and realize that
there is a Great and Good God back of everything you see; that this
world, this Universe, You, did not happen by chance. When aroused to
Spiritual or Divine truths the Aquarius people are marvelous beings. In
India, the Yogis, who are the most wonderful people in the world, give
their whole lives to worship and the service of God; they are mighty
workers and do a great amount of good. We say to you

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of the Aquarius sign have faith and hope, be cheerful and happy, and
then the good forces, which are the unseen powers, will all work for
your good. The Devas (angels), of which there are countless numbers,
will begin to help you just as soon as you have a sincere desire to be a
good or great person. Understand, your great help can come from
yourself, and when you arouse your will and spirit these unseen forces
and powers will be at hand to guide and help you. Either sex of this
sign ought to make a happy marriage and surround their home with
children.

By knowing and correcting our faults we become great. Strenuously strive
to go onward, forward and upward; be progressive; don't lag at the tail
end of the procession, but be at the head. Cast out of your mind forever
all fear, doubt, lack of hope, and thoughts of failure, and your life
will be bright and happy.

This sign is governed by Saturn and Uranus; the gems are sapphire, opal
and turquoise; and the astral colors are blue, pink and Nile green.

The diseases that you are most likely to suffer from are rheumatism,
pains in the head and feet, brain difficulties, low circulation, loss of
vital heat, nervous diseases and gloomy forebodings. Your best
companions are those born in Aries,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sagittarius and
Aquarius, and sometimes you would work harmoniously with Libra people.

People born in this sign are usually tall, dignified, healthy, robust,
and have clear complexions.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas
(angels), and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear
sister or brother of Aquarius.—*Bhakti Seva*.

#### CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of
another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence
you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days,
any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding
sign.

##### THE CUSP OF CAPRICORN—AQUARIUS.

This is the union of two negative signs—the last sign of the air, the
last sign of the earth. From a business point this is said to be the
chief cusp for both men and women. The men are cool in their
performances and calculations, and are ingenious and are unusually
exact. The women have

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

a natural gift for business. They can run most any kind of an
establishment with ease and success. The pronounced ideas concerning
economy insure people born in this cusp plenty of this world's goods.
They are original in their ideas and sometimes exceedingly stubborn.
They are spasmodically generous, giving where other people do not give,
and withholding where others give. They enjoy philanthropic work, but
are liable to tire of it if it interferes with their business.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pisces](hba06)
