[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Astrology](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hba13)  [Next](hba15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766187152/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Hindu Book of Astrology*, by Bhakti Seva, \[1902\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### Scorpio

### ♏

*All persons born from October* 23 *to November* 21*, inclusive, were
born under the sign of Scorpio*.

The Scorpio people are allied to the great powers of the ocean of this
planet. This is the middle sign of the Water Triplicity. The Scorpio
people are wonderfully strong, as the planetary and solar forces which
surge through them constantly, give them great magnetism and vitality.
In India, the land of wonders, the Yogis, especially the Bhakti Yogis
(True God Lovers), fully know that any person born in this sign has
great possibilities, so we earnestly urge them to realize their
greatness. Many Yogis and wise men and women are born in this sign, and
they have set down many rules which, if followed, will lead the Scorpio
person to the greatest success. The most helpful men and women come out
of this sign; and the world can rejoice every time a Scorpio person is
born. Oh, you blessed people, what strength and power for success and
happiness you have! You are the salt of the earth.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Many eloquent speakers come out of this sign, such as lecturers of note
and preachers of prominence. Also some of our best writers are Scorpio
people. When not ignorant, but educated, these people can turn their
minds and hands to any line of work with success.

Therefore, it is very important that you read a great deal and acquire
all the knowledge you can. It is important that you always maintain a
quiet, modest and dignified bearing. It is well for you to be fond of
the good things of the world, dress well, and have a comfortable home.
In money matters you can amass wealth by steady and persistent endeavor
in one line. Always be provident and saving, and put by money for future
needs or investments. But don't be stingy, mean or penurious; you can be
careful with money and yet spend considerable sums in improving your
surroundings; in improving your mind. Much of your leisure time should
be given to outdoor exercise, as your health and vigor depends upon lots
of pure fresh air and sunshine. Traveling on water, such as an ocean or
lake trip, is very beneficial to you, and if you are fond of boating
give much of your leisure time to it. Strolling along a river bank, or
on the shores of a lake or ocean, will do you much good. Don't get money
mad, or let money getting be your

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

only aim, as being too deeply engrossed in the acquiring of riches often
with Scorpio people defeats the very end sought. Sometimes a person of
this sign will get money mad and break down their health and destroy the
vigor and vitality necessary to everyone who amasses money. Don't worry;
don't hurry; take it easy. I mean work steadily at something which you
like and give more thought to doing your work honestly and thoroughly,
and in the best possible manner, than to what money it will bring you.
Learn to work and be busy with the idea of the good your work will do
rather than with the thought of how much money you can get out of it.

In love affairs you will be successful from the very moment that you can
fully control any feelings of anger, jealousy, envy or hatred. Indeed,
the worst fault of this sign, and the fault which retards progress and
success, is a tendency that you are likely to have to get angry and
disturbed if things don't go just as you think they ought to go. For
this cause some Scorpio people are not successful in love and business.
Be kind, gentle, amiable and polite to all, and all will love you, and
your success is assured. By following this advice you will become
magnetic, hypnotic, fascinating, charming, and draw and attract to
yourself the love of

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

everyone; people will admire you and want to associate with you, and do
business with you. This means success. If you are not married, I would
advise you to look about and select a good life partner, as marriage
will bring you great success and happiness. This advice applies equally
to both sexes. And while speaking of marriage let me say, the Hindu
Yogis positively know that the man or woman who gets married, no matter
what sign they are born in, makes a move which can bring more prosperity
and happiness than anything else. We always advocate marriage and the
rearing and raising of children. It is the divine command. God intended
all of His children to marry and raise children. Countless men and women
make life a failure and are very miserable and unhappy, because they
have disobeyed God's command about marriage. If you are of a nagging or
jealous nature don't think of marriage until you are thoroughly cured of
this mean, low and bad habit; there is nothing meaner or lower in our
natures than jealousy and its twin brother envy. A jealous or envious
person will never be happy; is never loved; always drives people away.
Now I want you to overcome all bad tendencies and become a good and true
being, and then you can be anything you choose to be. Give some thought
to God your Father,

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

and understand that in all history there never was a grand or noble
character who did not love God—the Good. When you love God you will not
be suspicious or want to scold or find fault with people whom you
associate with. The best way to love God is to love all human beings and
all animals, and be kind, gentle and considerate of others.

Associate all you can with men and women of success, and carefully study
and observe how they order their lives. Read the lives of great and good
men and women who have achieved success. Around you all the time are
great forces and powers which can help you if you will only heed what I
say here. My only interest is the deep love I have for all and my desire
to see you get the full benefit of the extraordinarily good planetary
and solar conditions under which you were born.

This sign is governed by Mars, and the gems are topaz and malachite. The
astral colors are golden brown and black. The diseases which you are
most likely to suffer from are heart troubles, weakness of the back,
lumbago and gout. Your best companions are those born in Pisces, Libra
and Virgo.

People born in this sign are inclined to corpulency in middle life, have
dusky complexions, broad square faces and dark hair.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas
(angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister
or brother of Scorpio.—*Bhakti Seva*.

#### CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of
another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence
you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days,
any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding
sign.

##### THE CUSP OF LIBRA—SCORPIO.

*October* 23 *to* 29.

Persons born on any of these six days have a remarkable creative genius.
They are great originators, and can carry their ideas to successful
conclusion. The women are excellent cooks and housekeepers and are
usually successful in anything they undertake.

The combination of the Libra—Scorpio makes a pleasing and unconventional
character. The

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

natural Libra fear and hesitation sometimes communicate their influence
to this cusp and make the person stop in a crisis, but when the time
actually arrives for the deed to be done, the forces from Scorpio unite
with those of Libra, and success is generally accomplished. They are
sometimes very jealous and untruthful. Their appearance is usually
immaculate, and they have a faculty of getting out of most any scrape
that they become involved in.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sagittarius](hba15.md)
