[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gft04)  [Next](gft06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="img_00700"></span> ![](img/00700.jpg)

### PART TWO

### How Perseus Vowed a Rash Vow

FIFTEEN years were past and gone, and the babe was now grown to be a
tall lad and a sailor, and went many voyages after merchandise to the
islands round. His mother called him Perseus: but all the people in
Seriphos said that he was not the son of mortal man, and called him the
son of Zeus, the king of the Immortals. For though he was but fifteen,
he was taller by a head than any man in the island; and he was the most
skilful of all in running and wrestling and boxing, and in throwing the
quoit and the javelin, and in rowing with the oar, and in playing on the
harp, and in all which befits a man. And he was brave and truthful,
gentle and courteous, for good old Dictys had trained him well; and well
it was for Perseus that he had done so. For now Danae and her son fell
into great danger, and Perseus had need of all his wit to defend his
mother and himself.

I said that Dictys' brother was Polydectes, king of the island. He was
not a righteous man, like Dictys: but greedy, and cunning,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

and cruel. And when he saw fair Danae, he wanted to marry her. But she
would not; for she did not love him, and cared for no one but her boy,
and her boy's father, whom she never hoped to see again. At last
Polydectes became furious; and while Perseus was away at sea he took
poor Danae away from Dictys, saying, "If you will not be my wife, you
shall be my slave." So Danae was made a slave, and had to fetch water
from the well, and grind in the mill, and perhaps was beaten, and wore a
heavy chain, because she would not marry that cruel king. But Perseus
was far away over the seas in the isle of Samos, little thinking how his
mother was languishing in grief.

Now one day at Samos, while the ship was lading, Perseus wandered into a
pleasant wood to get out of the sun, and sat down on the turf and fell
asleep. And as he slept a strange dream came to him--the strangest dream
which he had ever had in his life.

There came a lady to him through the wood, taller than he, or any mortal
man: but beautiful exceedingly, with great gray eyes, clear and
piercing, but strangely soft and mild. On her head was a helmet, and in
her hand a spear. And over her shoulder, above her long blue robes, hung
a goatskin, which bore up a mighty shield of brass, polished like a
mirror. She stood and looked at him with her clear gray eyes; and
Perseus saw that her eyelids never moved, nor her eyeballs, but looked
straight through and through him, and into his very heart, as if she
could see all the secrets of his soul, and knew all that he had

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

ever thought or longed for since the day that he was born. And Perseus
dropped his eyes, trembling and blushing, as the wonderful lady spoke.

"Perseus, you must do an errand for me."<span id="img_00900"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/00900.jpg) |

"Who are you, lady? And how do you know my name?"

"I am Pallas Athené and I know the thoughts of all men's hearts, and
discern their manhood or their baseness. And from the souls of clay I
turn away; and they are blest, but not by me. They fatten at ease, like
sheep in the pasture, and eat what they did not sow, like oxen in the
stall. They grow and spread, like the gourd along the ground: but, like
the gourd, they give no shade to the traveller; and when they are ripe
death gathers them, and they go down unloved into hell, and their name
vanishes out of the land.

"But to the souls of fire I give more fire, and to those who are manful
I give a might more than man's. These are the heroes,

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

the sons of the Immortals, who are blest, but not like the souls of
clay. For I drive them forth by strange paths, Perseus, that they may
fight the Titans and the monsters, the enemies of Gods and men. Through
doubt and need, danger and battle, I drive them; and some of them are
slain in the flower of youth, no man knows when or where; and some of
them win noble names, and a fair and green old age; but what will be
their latter end I know not, and none, save Zeus, the father of Gods and
men. Tell me now, Perseus, which of these two sorts of men seem to you
more blest?"

Then Perseus answered boldly: "Better to die in the flower of youth, on
the chance of winning a noble name, than to live at ease like the sheep,
and die unloved and unrenowned."

Then that strange lady laughed, and held up her brazen shield, and
cried: "See here, Perseus; dare you face such a monster as this, and
slay it, that I may place its head upon this shield?"

And in the mirror of the shield there appeared a face, and as Perseus
looked on it his blood ran cold. It was the face of a beautiful woman;
but her cheeks were pale as death, and her brows were knit with
everlasting pain, and her lips were thin and bitter like a snake's; and
instead of hair, vipers wreathed about her temples, and shot out their
forked tongues; while round her head were folded wings like an eagle's,
and upon her bosom claws of brass.

And Perseus looked awhile, and then said: "If there is anything so
fierce and foul on earth, it were a noble deed to kill it. Where can I
find the monster?"

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Then the strange lady smiled again, and said: "Not yet; you are too
young, and too unskilled; for this is Medusa the Gorgon, the mother of a
monstrous brood. Return to your home, and do the work which waits there
for you. You must play the man in that before I can think you worthy to
go in search of the Gorgon."

Then Perseus would have spoken, but the strange lady vanished, and he
awoke; and behold, it was a dream. But day and night Perseus saw before
him the face <span id="img_01100"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/01100.jpg) |

of that dreadful woman, with the vipers writhing round her head.

So he returned home; and when he came to Seriphos, the first thing which
he heard was that his mother was a slave in the house of Polydectes.

Grinding his teeth with rage, he went out, and away to the king's
palace, and through the men's rooms, and the women's rooms, and so
through all the house (for no one dared stop him, so terrible and fair
was he), till he found his mother sitting on the floor, turning the
stone hand-mill, and weeping as she turned it. And he lifted her up, and
kissed her, and bade her follow him forth. But before they could pass
out of the room, Polydectes came in, raging. And when Perseus saw him,
he flew upon him as the mastiff flies on the boar. "Villain and tyrant!"
he cried; "is this your respect for the

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Gods, and thy mercy to strangers and widows? You
shall die!" And because he had no sword, he caught up the stone
hand-mill, and he lifted it to dash out Polydectes' brains.

 

<span id="img_01200"></span> ![](img/01200.jpg)

 

But his mother clung to him, shrieking, "Oh, my son, we are strangers
and helpless in the land; and if you kill the king, all the people will
fall on us, and we shall both die."

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Good Dictys, too, who had come in, entreated him. "Remember that he is
my brother. Remember how I have brought you up, and trained you as my
own son, and spare him for my sake."

Then Perseus lowered his hand; and Polydectes, who had been trembling
all this while like a coward, because he knew that he was in the wrong,
let Perseus and his mother pass.

Perseus took his mother to the temple of Athené, and there the priestess
made her one of the temple-sweepers; for there they knew she would be
safe, and not even Polydectes would dare to drag her away from the
altar. And there Perseus, and the good Dictys, and his wife, came to
visit her every day; while Polydectes, not being able to get what he
wanted by force, cast about in his wicked heart how he might get it by
cunning.

Now he was sure that he could never get back Danae as long as Perseus
was in the island; so he made a plot to rid himself of him. And first he
pretended to have forgiven Perseus, and to have forgotten Danae; so
that, for a while, all went as smoothly as ever.

Next he proclaimed a great feast, and invited to it all the chiefs, and
land-owners, and the young men of the island, and among them Perseus,
that they might all do him homage as their king, and eat of his banquet
in his hall.

On the appointed day they all came; and, as the custom was then, each
guest brought his present with him to the king: one a horse, another a
shawl, or a ring, or a sword; and those who

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

had nothing better brought a basket of grapes, or of game; but Perseus
brought nothing, for he had nothing to bring, being but a poor
sailor-lad.

He was ashamed, however, to go into the king's presence without his
gift; and he was too proud to ask Dictys to lend him one. So he stood at
the door sorrowfully, watching the rich men go in; and his face grew
very red as they pointed at him, and smiled, and whispered, "What has
that foundling to give?"

Now this was what Polydectes wanted; and as soon as he heard that
Perseus stood without, he bade them bring him in, and asked him
scornfully before them all,--"Am I not your king, Perseus, and have I
not invited you to my feast? Where is your present, then?"

Perseus blushed and stammered, while all the proud men round laughed,
and some of them began jeering him openly. "This fellow was thrown
ashore here like a piece of weed or drift-wood, and yet he is too proud
to bring a gift to the king."

"And though he does not know who his father is, he is vain enough to let
the old women call him the son of Zeus."

And so forth, till poor Perseus grew mad with shame, and hardly knowing
what he said, cried out,:--"A present! who are you who talk of presents?
See if I do not bring a nobler one than all of yours together!"

So he said, boasting; and yet he felt in his heart that he was braver
than all those scoffers, and more able to do some glorious deed.

 

<span id="img_01400"></span>

[![See if I do not bring a nobler present than all of yours
together!](tn/01400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/01400.jpg)  
See if I do not bring a nobler present than all of yours together!  

 

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

"Hear him! Hear the boaster! What is it to be?" cried they all, laughing
louder than ever.

Then his dream at Samos came into his mind, and he cried aloud, "The
head of the Gorgon."

He was half afraid after he had said the words; for all laughed louder
than ever, and Polydectes loudest of all.

"You have promised to bring me the Gorgon's head? Then never appear
again in this island without it. Go!"

Perseus ground his teeth with rage, for he saw that he had fallen into a
trap; but his promise lay upon him, and he went out without a word.

Down to the cliffs he went, and looked across the broad blue sea; and he
wondered if his dream were true, and prayed in the bitterness of his
soul,--

"Pallas Athené, was my dream true? and shall I slay the Gorgon? If thou
didst really show me her face, let me not come to shame as a liar and
boastful. Rashly and angrily I promised: but cunningly and patiently
will I perform."

But there was no answer, nor sign; neither thunder nor any appearance;
not even a cloud in the sky.

And three times Perseus called weeping. "Rashly and angrily I promised:
but cunningly and patiently will I perform."

Then he saw afar off above the sea a small white cloud, as bright as
silver. And it came on, nearer and nearer, till its brightness dazzled
his eyes.

Perseus wondered at that strange cloud, for there was no other cloud all
round the sky; and he trembled as it touched the cliff

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

below. And as it touched, it broke, and parted, and within it appeared
Pallas Athené, as he had seen her at Samos in his dream, and beside her
a young man more light-limbed than the stag, whose eyes were like sparks
of fire. By his side was a scimitar of diamond, all of one clear
precious stone, and on his feet were golden sandals, from the heels of
which grew living wings.

They looked upon Perseus keenly, and yet they never moved their eyes;
and they came up the cliffs towards him more swiftly than the sea-gull,
and yet they never moved their feet, nor did the breeze stir the robes
about their limbs; only the wings of the youth's sandals quivered, like
a hawk's when he hangs above the cliff. And Perseus fell down and
worshipped, for he knew that they were more than man.

But Athené stood before him and spoke gently, and bid him have no fear.
Then--

"Perseus," she said, "he who overcomes in one trial merits thereby a
sharper trial still. You have braved Polydectes, and done manfully. Dare
you brave Medusa the Gorgon?"

And Perseus said, "Try me; for since you spoke to me in Samos a new soul
has come into my breast, and I should be ashamed not to dare anything
which I can do. Show me, then, how I can do this!"

"Perseus," said Athené, "think well before you attempt; for this deed
requires a seven years' journey, in which you cannot repent or turn back
nor escape; but if your heart fails you, you must die in the Unshapen
Land, where no man will ever find your bones."

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

"Better so than live here, useless and despised," said Perseus. "Tell
me, then, oh tell me, fair and wise Goddess, of your great kindness and
condescension, how I can do but this one thing, and then, if need be,
die!"

Then Athené smiled and said,--

"Be patient, and listen; for if you forget my words, you will indeed
die. You must go northward to the country of the Hyperboreans, who live
beyond the pole, at the sources of the cold north wind; till you find
the three Grey Sisters, who have but one eye and one tooth between them.
You must ask them the way to the Nymphs, the daughters of the Evening
Star, who dance about the golden tree, in the Atlantic island of the
west. They will tell you the way to the Gorgon, that you may slay her,
my enemy, the mother of monstrous beasts. Once she was a maiden as
beautiful as morn, till in her pride she sinned a sin at which the sun
hid his face; and from that day her hair was turned to vipers, and her
hands to eagle's claws; and her heart was filled with shame and rage,
and her lips with bitter venom; and her eyes became so terrible that
whosoever looks on them is turned to stone; and her children are the
winged horse, and the giant of the golden sword; and her grandchildren
are Echidna the witch-adder, and Geryon the three-headed tyrant, who
feeds his herds beside the herds of hell. So she became the sister of
the Gorgons, Stheino and Euryte the abhorred, the daughters of the Queen
of the Sea. Touch them not, for they are immortal: but bring me only
Medusa's head."

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

"And I will bring it!" said Perseus; "but how am I to escape her eyes?
Will she not freeze me too into stone?"

"You shall take this polished shield," said Athené "and when you come
near her look not at her herself, but at her image in the brass; so you
may strike her safely. And when you have struck off her head, wrap it,
with your face turned away, in the folds of the goat-skin on which the
shield hangs, the hide of Amaltheié, the nurse of the Ægis-holder. So
you will bring it safely back to me, and win to yourself renown, and a
place among the heroes who feast with the Immortals upon the peak where
no winds blow."

Then Perseus said, "I will go, though I die in going. But how shall I
cross the seas without a ship? And who will show me my way? And when I
find her, how shall I slay her, if her scales be iron and brass?"

Then the young man spoke: "These sandals of mine will bear you across
the seas, and over hill and dale like a bird, as they bear me all day
long; for I am Hermes, the far-famed Argus-slayer, the messenger of the
Immortals who dwell on Olympus."

Then Perseus fell down and worshipped, while the young man spoke
again,--

"The sandals themselves will guide you on the road, for they are divine
and cannot stray; and this sword itself, the Argus-slayer, will kill
her, for it is divine, and needs no second stroke. Arise, and gird them
on, and go forth."

So Perseus arose, and girded on the sandals and the sword.

And Athené cried, "Now leap from the cliff and be gone."

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

But Perseus lingered.

"May I not bid farewell to my mother and to Dictys? And may I not offer
burnt-offerings to you, and to Hermes the far-famed Argus-slayer, and to
Father Zeus above?"

"You shall not bid farewell to your mother, lest your heart relent at
her weeping. I will comfort her and Dictys until you return in peace.
Nor shall you offer burnt-offerings to the Olympians; for your offering
shall be Medusa's head. Leap, and trust in the armour of the Immortals."

Then Perseus looked down the cliff and shuddered; but he was ashamed to
show his dread. Then he thought of Medusa and the renown before him, and
he leaped into the empty air.

And behold, instead of falling he floated, and stood, and ran along the
sky. He looked back, but Athené had vanished, and Hermes; and the
sandals led him on northward ever, like a crane who follows the spring
toward the Ister fens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Three: How Perseus Slew the Gorgon](gft06)
