[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gft05)  [Next](gft07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span id="img_02000"></span> ![](img/02000.jpg)

### PART THREE

### How Perseus Slew the Gorgon

SO Perseus started on his journey, going dry-shod over land and sea; and
his heart was high and joyful, for the winged sandals bore him each day
a seven days' journey.

And he went by Cythnus, and by Ceos, and the pleasant Cyclades to
Attica; and past Athens and Thebes, and the Copaic lake, and up the vale
of Cephissus, and past the peaks of Œta and Pindus, and over the rich
Thessalian plains, till the sunny hills of Greece were behind him, and
before him were the wilds of the north. Then he passed the Thracian
mountains, and many a barbarous tribe, Pæons and Dardans and Triballi,
till he came to the Ister stream, and the dreary Scythian plains. And he
walked across the Ister dry-shod, and away through the moors and fens,
day and night toward the bleak northwest, turning neither to the right
hand nor the left, till he came to the Unshapen Land, and the place
which has no name.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

And seven days he walked through it, on a path which few can tell; for
those who have trodden it like least to speak of it, and those who go
there again in dreams are glad enough when they awake; till he came to
the edge of the everlasting night, where the air was full of feathers,
and the soil was hard with ice; and there at last he found the three
Grey Sisters, by the shore of the freezing sea, nodding upon a white log
of drift-wood, beneath the cold white winter moon; and they chanted a
low song together, "Why the old times were better than the new."

There was no living thing around them, not a fly, not a moss upon the
rocks. Neither seal nor sea-gull dare come near, lest the ice should
clutch them in its claws. The surge broke up in foam, but it fell again
in flakes of snow; and it frosted the hair of the three Grey Sisters,
and the bones in the ice-cliff above their heads. They passed the eye
from one to the other, but for all that they could not see; and they
passed the tooth from one to the other, but for all that they could not
eat; and they sat in the full glare of the moon, but they were none the
warmer for her beams. And Perseus pitied the three Grey Sisters; but
they did not pity themselves.

So he said, "Oh, venerable mothers, wisdom is the daughter of old age.
You therefore should know many things. Tell me, if you can, the path to
the Gorgon."

Then one cried, "Who is this who reproaches us with old age?" And
another, "This is the voice of one of the children of men."

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

And he, "I do not reproach, but honour your old age, and I am one of the
sons of men and of the heroes. The rulers of Olympus have sent me to you
to ask the way to the Gorgon."

Then one--"There are new rulers in Olympus, and all new things are bad."
And another--"We hate your rulers, and the heroes, and all the children
of men. We are the kindred of the Titans, and the Giants, and the
Gorgons, and the ancient monsters of the deep." And another--"Who is
this rash and insolent man who pushes unbidden into our world?" And the
first--"There never was such a world as ours, nor will be; if we let him
see it, he will spoil it all."

Then one cried, "Give me the eye, that I may see him;" and another,
"Give me the tooth, that I may bite him." But Perseus, when he saw that
they were foolish and proud, and did not love the children of men, left
off pitying them, and said to himself, "Hungry men must needs be hasty;
if I stay making many words here, I shall be starved." Then he stepped
close to them, and watched till they passed the eye from hand to hand.
And as they groped about between themselves, he held out his own hand
gently, till one of them put the eye into it, fancying that it was the
hand of her sister. Then he sprang back, and laughed, and cried,--

"Cruel and proud old women, I have your eye; and I will throw it into
the sea, unless you tell me the path to the Gorgon, and swear to me that
you tell me right."

Then they wept, and chattered, and scolded; but in vain.

 

<span id="img_02200"></span>

[![Then they wept, and chattered and scolded; but in
vain.](tn/02200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02200.jpg)  
Then they wept, and chattered and scolded; but in vain.  

 

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

\[paragraph continues\] They were forced to tell the truth, though when
they told it, Perseus could hardly make out the road.

"You must go," they said, "foolish boy, to the southward, into the ugly
glare of the sun, till you come to Atlas the Giant, who holds the heaven
and the earth apart. And you must ask his daughters, the Hesperides, who
are young and foolish like yourself. And now give us back our eye; for
we have forgotten all the rest."

So Perseus gave them back their eye; but instead of using it, they
nodded and fell fast asleep, and were turned into blocks of ice, till
the tide came up and washed them all away. And now they float up and
down like icebergs forever, weeping whenever they meet the sunshine, and
the fruitful summer and the warm south wind, which fill young hearts
with joy.

But Perseus leaped away to the southward, leaving the snow and the ice
behind: past the isle of the Hyperboreans, and the tin isles, and the
long Iberian shore; while the sun rose higher day by day upon a bright
blue summer sea. And the terns and the sea-gulls swept laughing round
his head, and called to him to stop and play, and the dolphins gambolled
up as he passed, and offered to carry him on their backs. And all night
long the sea-nymphs sang sweetly, and the Tritons blew upon their
conchs, as they played round Galatæa their queen, in her car of pearled
shells. Day by day the sun rose higher, and leaped more swiftly into the
sea at night, and more swiftly out of the sea at dawn; while Perseus
skimmed over the billows like a sea-gull, and his feet were never
wetted; and leapt on from wave to wave, and

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

his limbs were never weary, till he saw far away a mighty mountain, all
rose-red in the setting sun. Its feet were wrapped in forests, and its
head in wreaths of cloud; and Perseus knew that it was Atlas, who holds
the heavens and the earth apart.

He came to the mountain, and leapt on shore, and wandered upward, among
pleasant valleys and waterfalls, and tall trees and strange ferns and
flowers; but there was no smoke rising from any glen, nor house, nor
sign of man.

At last he heard sweet voices singing; and he guessed that he was come
to the garden of the Nymphs, the daughters of the Evening Star.

They sang like nightingales among the thickets, and Perseus stopped to
hear their song; but the words which they spoke he could not understand;
no, nor no man after him for many a hundred years. So he stepped forward
and saw them dancing, hand in hand around the charmed tree, which bent
under its golden fruit; and round the tree-foot was coiled the dragon,
old Ladon the sleepless snake, who lies there for ever, listening to the
song of the maidens, blinking and watching with dry bright eyes.

Then Perseus stopped, not because he feared the dragon, but because he
was bashful before those fair maids; but when they saw him, they too
stopped, and called to him with trembling voices,--

"Who are you? Are you Heracles the mighty, who will come to rob our
garden, and carry off our golden fruit?" And he answered,--

 

<span id="img_02400"></span>

[![So he stepped forward and saw them dancing](tn/02400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02400.jpg)  
So he stepped forward and saw them dancing  

 

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

"I am not Heracles the mighty, and I want none of your golden fruit.
Tell me, fair nymphs, the way which leads to the Gorgon, that I may go
on my way and slay her."

"Not yet, not yet, fair boy; come dance with us around the tree in the
garden which knows no winter, the home of the south wind and the sun.
Come hither and play with us awhile; we have danced alone here for a
thousand years, and our hearts are weary with longing for a playfellow.
So come, come, come!"

"I cannot dance with you, fair maidens; for I must do the errand of the
Immortals. So tell me the way to the Gorgon, lest I wander and perish in
the waves."

Then they sighed and wept; and answered:--

"The Gorgon! she will freeze you into stone."

"It is better to die like a hero than to live like an ox in a stall. The
Immortals have lent me weapons, and they will give me wit to use them."

Then they sighed again and answered: "Fair boy, if you are bent on your
own ruin, be it so. We know not the way to the Gorgon; but we will ask
the giant Atlas, above upon the mountain peak, the brother of our
father, the silver Evening Star. He sits aloft and sees across the
ocean, and far away into the Unshapen Land."

So they went up the mountain to Atlas their uncle, and Perseus went up
with them. And they found the giant kneeling, as he held the heavens and
the earth apart.

They asked him, and he answered mildly, pointing to the sea-board with
his mighty hand: "I can see the Gorgons lying on

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

an island far away, but this youth can never come near them, unless he
has the hat of darkness, which whosoever wears cannot <span
id="img_02600"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/02600.jpg) |

be seen."

Then cried Perseus, "Where is that hat, that I may find it?"

But the giant smiled. "No living mortal can find that hat, for it lies
in the depths of Hades, in the regions of the dead. But my nieces are
immortal, and they shall fetch it for you, if you will promise me one
thing and keep your faith."

Then Perseus promised; and the giant said: "When you come back with the
head of Medusa, you shall show me the beautiful horror; that I may lose
my feeling and my breathing, and become a stone forever; for it is weary
labor for me to hold the heavens and the earth apart."

Then Perseus promised; and the eldest of the nymphs went down, and into
a dark cavern among the cliffs, out of which came smoke and thunder, for
it was one of the mouths of Hell.

And Perseus and the nymphs sat down seven days, and waited

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

trembling, till the nymph came up again; and her face was pale, and her
eyes dazzled with the light, for she had been long in the dreary
darkness; but in her hand was the magic hat.

Then all the nymphs kissed Perseus, and wept over him a long while; but
he was only impatient to be gone. And at last they put the hat upon his
head, and he vanished out of their sight.

But Perseus went on boldly, past many an ugly sight, far away into the
heart of the Unshapen Land, beyond the streams of Ocean, to the isles
where no ship cruises, where is neither night nor day, where nothing is
in its right place, and nothing has a name; till he heard the rustle of
the Gorgons' wings and saw the glitter of their brazen talons; and then
he knew that it was time to halt, lest Medusa should freeze him into
stone.

He thought awhile with himself, and remembered Athené's words. He rose
aloft into the air, and held the mirror of the shield above his head,
and looked up into it that he might see all that was below him.

And he saw the three Gorgons sleeping, as huge as elephants. He knew
that they could not see him, because the hat of darkness hid him; and
yet he trembled as he sank down near them, so terrible were those brazen
claws.

Two of the Gorgons were foul as swine, and lay sleeping heavily, as
swine sleep, with their mighty wings outspread; but Medusa tossed to and
fro restlessly, and as she tossed, Perseus pitied her, she looked so
fair and sad. Her plumage was like the rainbow, and her face was like
the face of a nymph, only

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

her eyebrows were knit, and her lips clenched, with everlasting care and
pain; and her long neck gleamed so white in the mirror that Perseus had
not the heart to strike, and said: "Ah, that it had been either of her
sisters!"

But as he looked, from among her tresses the vipers' heads awoke, and
peeped up with their bright dry eyes, and showed their fangs, and
hissed; and Medusa, as she tossed, threw back her wings, and showed her
brazen claws; and Perseus saw that, for all her beauty, she was as foul
and venomous as the rest.

Then he came down and stepped to her boldly, and looked steadfastly on
his mirror, and struck with Herpé stoutly once; and he did not need to
strike again.

Then he wrapped the head in the goat-skin, turning away his eyes, and
sprang into the air aloft, faster than he ever sprang before.

For Medusa's wings and talons rattled as she sank dead upon the rocks;
and her two foul sisters woke, and saw her lying dead.

Into the air they sprang yelling, and looked for him who had done the
deed. Thrice they swung round and round, like hawks who beat for a
partridge; and thrice they snuffed round and round, like hounds who draw
upon a deer. At last they struck upon the scent of the blood, and they
checked for a moment to make sure; and then on they rushed with a
fearful howl, while the wind rattled hoarse in their wings.

On they rushed, sweeping and flapping, like eagles after a hare; and
Perseus' blood ran cold, for all his courage, as he saw them come
howling on his track; and he cried: "Bear

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

me well, now, brave sandals, for the hounds of death are at my heels!"

And well the brave sandals bore him, aloft through cloud and sunshine,
across the shoreless sea; and fast followed the hounds of Death, as the
roar of their wings came down the wind. But the roar came down fainter
and fainter, and the howl of their voices died away; for the sandals
were too swift, even for Gorgons, and by nightfall they were far behind,
two black specks in the southern sky, till the sun sank and he saw them
no more.

Then he came again to Atlas, and the garden of the Nymphs; and when the
giant heard him coming, he groaned, and said: "Fulfil thy promise to
me." Then Perseus held up to him the Gorgon's head, and he had rest from
all his toil; for he became a crag of stone, which sleeps forever far
above the clouds.

Then he thanked the Nymphs, and asked them: "By what road shall I go
homeward again, for I wandered far round in coming hither?"

And they wept and cried: "Go home no more, but stay and play with us,
the lonely maidens, who dwell forever far away from gods and men."

But he refused, and they told him his road, and said: "Take with you
this magic fruit, which, if you eat once, you will not hunger for seven
days. For you must go eastward and eastward ever, over the doleful
Lybian shore, which Poseidon gave to Father Zeus, when he burst open the
Bosphorus and the Hellespont, and drowned the fair Lectonian land. And
Zeus took

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

that land in exchange, a fair bargain, much bad ground for a little
good, and to this day it lies waste and desert with shingle, and rock,
and sand."

Then they kissed Perseus, and wept over him, and he leapt down the
mountain, and went on, lessening and lessening like a sea-gull, away and
out to sea.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Four: How Perseus Came to the Æthiops](gft07)
