[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gft16)  [Next](gft18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span id="img_17600"></span> ![](img/17600.jpg)

### PART THREE

### How Theseus Slew the Minotaur

AND at last they came to Crete, and to Cnossus, beneath the peaks of
Ida, and to the palace of Minos the great king, to whom Zeus himself
taught laws. So he was the wisest of all mortal kings, and conquered all
the Ægean isles; and his ships were as many as the sea-gulls, and his
palace like a marble hill. And he sat among the pillars of the hall,
upon his throne of beaten gold, and around him stood the speaking
statues which Daidalos had made by his skill. For Daidalos was the most
cunning of all Athenians, and he first invented the plumb-line, and the
auger, and glue, and many a tool with which wood is wrought. And he
first set up masts in ships, and yards, and his son made sails for them:
but Perdix his nephew excelled him; for he first invented the saw and
its teeth, copying it from the back-bone of a fish; and invented, too,
the chisel, and the compasses, and the potter's wheel which moulds the
clay. Therefore Daidalos envied him, and hurled him headlong from the
temple

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

of Athené: but the Goddess pitied him, (for she loves the wise,) and
changed him into a partridge, which flits forever about the hills. And
Daidalos fled to Crete, to Minos, and worked for him many a year, till
he did a shameful deed, at which the sun hid his face on high.

Then he fled from the anger of Minos, he and Icaros his son having made
themselves wings of feathers, and fixed the feathers with wax. So they
flew over the sea toward Sicily; but Icaros flew too near the sun; and
the wax of his wings was melted, and he fell into the Icarian Sea. But
Daidalos came safe to Sicily, and there wrought many a wondrous work;
for he made for King Cocalos a reservoir, from which a great river
watered all the land, and a castle and a treasury on a mountain, which
the giants themselves could not have stormed; and in Selinos he took the
steam which comes up from the fires of Ætna, and made of it a warm bath
of vapour, to cure the pains of mortal men; and he made a honeycomb of
gold, in which the bees came and stored their honey, and in Egypt he
made the forecourt of the temple of Hephaistos in Memphis, and a statue
of himself within it, and many another wondrous work. And for Minos he
made statues which spoke and moved, and the temple of Britomartis, and
the dancing-hall of Ariadne, which he carved of fair white stone. And in
Sardinia he worked for Iölaos, and in many a land beside, wandering up
and down forever with his cunning, unlovely and accursed by men.

But Theseus stood before Minos, and they looked each other in the face.
And Minos bade take them to prison, and cast them

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

to the monster one by one, that the death of Androgeos might be avenged.
Then Theseus cried,--

"A boon, O Minos. Let me be thrown first to the beast. For I came hither
for that very purpose, of my own will, and not by lot."

"Who art thou, then, brave youth?"

"I am the son of him whom of all men thou hatest most, Ægeus the king of
Athens, and I am come here to end this matter."

And Minos pondered awhile, looking steadfastly at him, and he thought,
"The lad means to atone by his own death for his father's sin;" and he
answered at last mildly,--

"Go back in peace, my son. It is a pity that one so brave should die."

But Theseus said, "I have sworn that I will not go back till I have seen
the monster face to face."

And at that Minos frowned, and said, "Then thou shalt see him; take the
madman away."

And they led Theseus away into the prison, with the other youths and
maids.

But Ariadne, Minos' daughter, saw him, as she came out of her white
stone hall; and she loved him for his courage and his majesty, and said,
"Shame that such a youth should die!" And by night she went down to the
prison, and told him all her heart; and said,--

"Flee down to your ship at once, for I have bribed the guards before the
door. Flee, you and all your friends, and go back in peace to Greece;
and take me, take me with you! for I dare not

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

stay after you are gone; for my father will kill me miserably, if he
knows what I have done."

And Theseus stood silent awhile; for he was astonished and confounded by
her beauty: but at last he said, "I cannot go home in peace, till I have
seen and slain this Minotaur, and avenged the deaths of the youths and
maidens, and put an end to the terrors of my land."

"And will you kill the Minotaur? How, then?"

"I know not, nor do I care: but he must be strong if he be too strong
for me."

Then she loved him all the more, and said, "But when you have killed
him, how will you find your way out of the labyrinth?"

"I know not, neither do I care: but it must be a strange road, if I do
not find it out before I have eaten up the monster's carcase."

Then she loved him all the more, and said,--

"Fair youth, you are too bold; but I can help you, weak as I am. I will
give you a sword, and with that, perhaps, you may slay the beast; and a
clue of thread, and by that, perhaps, you may find your way out again.
Only promise me, that if you escape safe, you will take me home with you
to Greece; for my father will surely kill me, if he knows what I have
done."

Then Theseus laughed, and said, "Am I not safe enough now?" And he hid
the sword in his bosom, and rolled up the clue in his hand; and then he
swore to Ariadne, and fell down before her, and kissed her hands and her
feet; and she wept over

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

him a long while, and then went away; and Theseus lay down and slept
sweetly.

And when the evening came, the guards came in and led him away to the
labyrinth.

And he went down into that doleful gulf, through winding paths among the
rocks, under caverns, and arches, and galleries, and over heaps of
fallen stone. And he turned on the left hand, and on the right hand, and
went up and down, till his head was dizzy; but all the while he held his
clue. For when he went in he had fastened it to a stone, and left it to
unroll out of his hand as he went on; and it lasted him till he met the
Minotaur, in a narrow chasm between black cliffs.

And when he saw him he stopped awhile, for he had never seen so strange
a beast. His body was a man's; but his head was the head of a bull; and
his teeth were the teeth of a lion; and with them he tore his prey. And
when he saw Theseus he roared, and put his head down, and rushed right
at him.

But Theseus stept aside nimbly, and as he passed by, cut him in the
knee; and ere he could turn in the narrow path, he followed him, and
stabbed him again and again from behind, till the monster fled bellowing
wildly; for he had never before felt a wound. And Theseus followed him
at full speed, holding the clue of thread in his left hand.

Then on, through cavern after cavern, under dark ribs of sounding stone,
and up rough glens and torrent-beds, among the sunless roots of Ida, and
to the edge of the eternal snow, went they, the hunter and the hunted,
while the hills bellowed to the monster's bellow.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

And at last Theseus came up with him, where he lay panting on a slab
among the snow, and caught him by the horns, and forced his head back,
and drove the keen sword through his throat.

<span id="img_18100"></span> ![](img/18100.jpg)

Then he turned, and went back limping and weary, feeling his way down by
the clue of thread, till he came to the mouth of that doleful place; and
saw waiting for him, whom but Ariadne!

And he whispered "It is done!" and showed her the sword; and she laid
her finger on her lips, and led him to the prison, and opened the doors,
and set all the prisoners free, while the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

guards lay sleeping heavily; for she had silenced them with wine.

Then they fled to their ship together, and leapt on board, and hoisted
up the sail; and the night lay dark around them, so that they passed
through Minos' ships, and escaped all safe to Naxos; and there Ariadne
became Theseus' wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Four: How Theseus Fell By His Pride](gft18)
