[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yat01)  [Next](yat03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQALSY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Yana Texts*, by Edward Sapir, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.

The following myths were obtained in 1907 as part of the Ethnological
and Archaeological Survey of California conducted by the Department of
Anthropology of the University of California. Numbers I-IX were obtained
in December near Redding, the county seat of Shasta county, numbers
X-XXII were obtained in July and August between Round Mountain and
Montgomery creek in the same county (see notes 3a and 202 of text). The
two sets of texts represent two not very different but clearly distinct
dialects, the Northern Yana (garī'<sup>?</sup>i) and the Central Yana
(gat‘ā'<sup>?</sup>i), of which the former may be considered more
specialized phonetically. The territory formerly occupied by these
dialects may be defined as that part of Shasta county, California, that
stretches south of Pit river from and including Montgomery creek, a
southern affluent of that stream, west to a point on Pit river between
Copper City and Woodman, then south to Woodman on Little Cow creek,
along the eastern bank of that stream and Cow creek to the Sacramento
river, southeast to Battle creek, east along, or some distance north of,
Battle creek and North fork of Battle creek to the mountainous country
southwest of the headwaters of Hat creek, and northwest back to
Montgomery creek in a line that fell short of Crater

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

peak and Burney creek. Of this country only that small portion that lies
northeast of Bullskin ridge, in other words the region of Montgomery and
Cedar creeks, belonged to the Northern Yana or garī'<sup>?</sup>i
dialect. The territory defined above formed roughly the northern half of
the country occupied by the whole Yanan stock. A third, now extinct and
apparently rather divergent, dialect was spoken in the region bounded by
the Sacramento river, a line drawn from opposite Tehama east along Mill
creek to and including Lassen peak, a line running northwest to the
headwaters of Battle creek, and the valley of Battle creek west to the
Sacramento. These boundaries are somewhat uncertain, it remaining
doubtful whether the Yanas reached the Sacramento. The Yanas were
surrounded by the Achomâ'wi (Pit River Indians) to the north; the
Achomâ'wi, Hat Creek or Atsugê'wi Indians (of Shastan stock), and
Northeast Maidu ("Big Meadows Indians") to the east; the Northwest Maidu
to the south; and the Wintun to the west.

Nothing has hitherto been published on the Yana language except a few
notes in Dixon and Kroeber's "Native Languages of California"; <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) the authors place Yana in a morphological
class by itself, it showing little or no grammatical resemblance to the
Central Californian type of languages (such as Maidu or Wintun). Yana
mythology has fared better. Pages 281-484 of Jeremiah Curtin's "Creation
Myths of Primitive America" (Boston, 1903) consist of thirteen Yana
myths, some of which are closely parallel forms of myths published in
this volume. Unfortunately Curtin fails to give the names either of his
informants or of the places at which the myths were procured; it would
have been desirable to have definite information on this point, as the
Yana myths undoubtedly appeared in several distinct forms (cf., *e.g.*,
Curtin's "Theft of Fire" with Sam Bat‘wī's version below). Information
secured from my informants, Sam Bat‘wī and Betty Brown, indicates that
Curtin's material was derived partly at Round Mountain from the now dead
chief Round Mountain Jack (Buī'yas\*i), partly near Redding from an old
Indian, since deceased, known as "The Governor," for whom

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sam Bat‘wī acted
as interpreter. Notes on Yana myths obtained by Dr. Dixon are to be
found in his "Northern Maidu." <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) The
published Yana mythologic material is briefly summarized and discussed
by Dr. Kroeber in "Myths of South Central California." <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)

Thanks are due Mrs. Curtin and Little, Brown and Company for permission
to reprint in this volume Curtin's myth of "The Theft of Fire" an Indian
translation of which was secured from Betty Brown. Thanks are also due
to Dr. R. B. Dixon for kindly consenting to have his manuscript Yana
material incorporated with my own; this material was collected for the
American Museum of Natural History in the late fall and early winter of
1900, partly from Sam Bat‘wī and partly from Round Mountain Jack.

KEY TO CHARACTERS USED.

*Vowels*:

a short as in Ger. Mann,

ā long as in Ger. Bahn.

e short and open as in Eng. met.

ê long and open as in Fr. fête, approximately as in Eng. there, but
without final "r vanish."

i short and open as in Eng. it.

ī close as in Eng. eat. Not necessarily long unless accented.

o short and open as in Ger. dort.

ô long and open as in Eng. saw.

u short and open as in Eng. put.

û close as in Eng. spoon. Generally long.

ē close as in Fr. été, and ō close as in Fr. chapeau, are not true Yana
sounds and of very doubtful occurrence.

ä as in Eng. hat. Of rare occurrence.

ü approximately like short and open Ger. ü in Mütze. Rarely occurs as
variant of yu.

Superior vowels (<sup>a</sup>, <sup>i</sup>, <sup>u</sup>, rarely
<sup>e</sup> and <sup>o</sup>) are whispered and accompanied by
aspiration of preceding consonant. Less frequently syllables consisting
of voiced consonant and vowel are written superior to indicate
whispering, *e.g.*,

Diphthongs:

ai as in Eng. night. Apt to split up into a-i.

au as in Eng. house. Apt to split up into a-u.

oi (of rare occurrence), ui, and uī, are o+i, u+i, and u+ī.

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Consonants:

b, d, dj, g with considerably less sonancy than corresponding Eng.
consonants (dj = Eng. j in judge); best considered as intermediate
between surds and sonants.

p, t, tc (or ts\*), k unaspirated surds (tc = Eng. ch in church). These
are of secondary origin.

p‘, t‘, tc‘ (or ts\*‘ ), k‘ distinctly aspirated surds.

p!, t!, tc! (or ts\*!), k! "fortis" in articulation. Pronounced with
sudden release of tongue and accompanying stricture of glottis. Distinct
from, though similar to, p?, t?, ---, k?.

w as in Eng. wine.

*w* unvoiced w, approximately as in Eng. what. Occurs only as syllabic
final.

c, s as in Eng. ship and sip respectively. These are variants of s\*
acoustically midway between them and which also occurs as second member
of affricative ts\*.

t<sup>s\*</sup> t with slight s\*-affection following. Sometimes heard
as variant of t‘ before dj.

j as in Eng. azure or, better, acoustically midway between z and j (in
Fr. jour). It practically never occurs except as second member of
affricative dj.

l, m, n as in English.

*l*, *m*, *n* unvoiced l, m, and n. These occur generally before?
(glottal stop).

r pronounced with tip of tongue and rather weakly trilled, so as
frequently to sound like sonant d.

*r* unvoiced r with fairly strong aspiration. It goes back
etymologically to r (sonant d).

<sup>r</sup>t<sup>?</sup>, <sup>r</sup>t‘ differing from ordinary
t<sup>?</sup>, t‘ by peculiar voiceless-r quality of dental surd
(<sup>r</sup>t<sup>?</sup> seems often to be acoustic variant of r).
They are related to ordinary dental surds as r (sonant d) is to ordinary
d.

h, x as in Ger. Hand and Dach, except that x is considerably weaker than
Ger. guttural spirant ch. They are variants of one sound.

y as in Eng. yes.

x\* as in Ger. ich. Rarely heard as variant of whispered y.

<sup>?</sup> glottal stop, produced by complete stricture of glottis.

‘ aspiration of preceding consonant or vowel. Before initial vowels it
denotes very weak aspiration (‘ī-, *e.g.*, is apt to be heard now as ī-,
now as hī-).

<sup>w</sup> very weak w-attack of initial u, ū, o, or ô. One often
doubts whether he hears, *e.g.*, ‘ô- or <sup>w</sup>ô-.

<sup>n</sup> indicates nasalization of preceding vowel. Found only in
interjections.

' stressed vowel.

secondarily stressed vowel.

\+ denotes prolongation of preceding consonant or vowel.

\- sometimes placed between vowels to show that they are to be
separately pronounced.

( ) enclose words not in Indian text.

NOTE.--Doubled -ll-, -nn-, -mm- should be pronounced as l+l, n+n, m+m;
they are in no case equivalent to -l-, -n-, -m-. Distinguish carefully
also between -td- and -t‘d-, and correspondingly for other stops. Final
consonants should be pronounced with vowel of following word; *e.g.*,
p‘ad a'idja is to be syllabified p‘a-da'i-dja.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[3:1](yat02.htm#fr_0.md) Amer. Anthropologist, N.
S., V, 7, 12, 15.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[4:2](yat02.htm#fr_1.md) Bull. Am. Mus. Nat. Hist.,
XVII, 339, 340, 342.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[4:3](yat02.htm#fr_2.md) Univ. Calif. Publ. Am.
Arch. Ethn., IV, 148-9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Flint Boy](yat03.md)
