[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yat10)  [Next](yat12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQALSY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yana Texts*, by Edward Sapir, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

### XI. THE DROWNING OF YOUNG BUZZARD'S WIFE.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[215](#fn_81)

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

(Buzzard's son said to his people,) "Now dig for roots! They are ripe
already. Let us climb sugar pines. We shall move tomorrow and you will
settle down there. Now I shall climb for sugar-pine nuts, they are ripe
already. The people will all come there, and we shall settle down there
where there is a nice spring, I think the people will come here. We
shall wait for them." Many were the people that came together. (The
chief said,) "Now let us climb for sugar-pine nuts, and take food
along." (To the women he said,) "Now you will dig for tiger-lilies. Now
procure food for yourselves. Probably you will not like to climb
(sugar-pines). If you finish it, they will have food for themselves."

(They all went off to Silver Lake <span id="fr_84"></span>[216](#fn_82)
to get sugar-pines nuts. Buzzard's son told his wife not to venture into
the water, but when he was gone she said,) "I should like to go into the
water there. Let me see! Let us go to drink." "Do not go to drink," (she
was told). "Why should I be afraid? I shall go to drink." She saw logs
bobbing up and down in the water. "Let me see!" she said. "I can swim
across yonder to the west." They missed her and looked around. "Let me
see!" she said, "I shall try it. I can swim out of the water." "You
would not be able to swim out of the water," (she was told). She took
off her skirt, (saying,) "I shall swim into the water. Just see me!" She
swam to the west. They were many who saw her. Now she sank right between
the logs. "I told you that before," (she was told). Her buckskin skirt
and tassels beaded with pine nuts remained as she had left them. Then
they cried. "Why is it that you are crying?" (Buzzard's Son asked them).
"She is sinking." "I told you, 'Do not take her to the water!' It is
your fault. It

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

would have been good if I had been there myself. To think that I should
have come here just for that! I shall stop (climbing for sugar-pine
nuts). Let us look for her! Pray do so, to see if I can find her. Let us
try it. She is a good girl." (He said to one,) "Run back to the people!
They shall come here." He ran back, telling them to come. "Yes," they
said. "Let me see!" he said, "I will try to save her." They drew off the
water by means of a ditch. "You will probably not be able to draw it
off, you will not draw off the water," (they said to him). "What, now,
shall we do? Do you all clean out the ditch! I hardly think we shall be
able to find her. We shall not find her. She must have sunk straight
down, she must have sunk right between the two logs. That is a bad
place."

They all went back home, parting from one another. Some stayed together
right there. "No longer," (he said), "shall I procure winter food for
myself. Now I have done with that. Alas! I was happy, I did not think
that this would happen to me. Now I shall have done." "Why, pray," (her
mother said to him,) "did you let her go off? You should have taken
water while on your way. You were foolish." "I did not know. I should
have gone with her, but she just rain off by herself. She should have
told me, 'Let us go and drink.' She was angry. I am not good. My heart
feels grieved." They all arrived home, they lay down in the ashes in the
fireplace. <span id="fr_85"></span>[217](#fn_83) Also the men did so.
Her people, those who had climbed for (sugar-pine nuts), cried. They
piled the pine-nuts into the fire. <span id="fr_86"></span>[218](#fn_84)

(Before she had left, Buzzard's wife) had said, "Perhaps I shall not
again enter the house. I dreamt that I was dying. Pray burn up all of
these things." "I am afraid," (said her mother,) "of your speaking in
that manner." "We shall probably be away two months climbing for
(sugar-pine nuts)," (said her daughter,) "and I shall perhaps die. I
shall not again enter my house." "I shall cry because you speak in that
manner," (said her mother). "Truly, you shall indeed find it out." Her
mother wept. Now she is dead. Her hair now comes flying back

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

home. It comes blown back home. (She had said,) "I shall surely have
died if my hair comes hither, blown back by the wind." "Take along with
you," (said her mother,) "your tasseled buckskin skirt and your apron
fringed with white grass. Put your beads about your neck." "Yes," she
said. "Now, mother," she said, "good-bye! <span
id="fr_87"></span>[219](#fn_85) You shall not see me again." "I am
afraid," (said her mother). "Stay at home. I am afraid for you."
"Father, do not feel bad. Just cry a little bit for me. You shall grow
old. Mother! pray do not cry much. If you see people eating, do not go
over to the next house. If you see food over there, pray hold your head
down. <span id="fr_88"></span>[220](#fn_86) You were happy in raising
me. I did not think before that I should take a husband."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[137:215](yat11.htm#fr_83) It is curious that in
the telling Betty Brown left out all the names of the characters. It was
only when the text was gone over for purposes of translation that it was
found what animals she had in mind. The chief is Buzzard's son
(ma‘ts!k‘ili'lla), his wife is an insect with long blue wings
(p‘a‘k!a'nna perhaps Dragon Fly), her father is Woodpecker
(ts\*!urā'du). The text is distressingly elliptical in narrative.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[140:216](yat11.htm#fr_84) The Yana name is
Tc‘ā'p!ulxa. it is situated about eight miles southeast of Round
Mountain, at a height of approximately 3700 feet.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[141:217](yat11.htm#fr_85) As sign of mourning.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[141:218](yat11.htm#fr_86) It would have been
unlucky to use them.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[142:219](yat11.htm#fr_87) The literal
translation is, "Now stay!"

<span id="fn_86"></span>[142:220](yat11.htm#fr_88) I.e., do not look on
greedily when others eat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. Coyote, Heron, and Lizard](yat12)
