[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](yat21)  [Next](yat23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQALSY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Yana Texts*, by Edward Sapir, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

# SUPPLEMENTARY TEXTS <span id="fr_142"></span>[314](#fn_138)

### XXIII. THE ROLLING SKULL. <span id="fr_143"></span>[315](#fn_139)

(Round Mountain Jack's Version)

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Wildcat had a bad dream. He climbed up a digger pine and broke off the
branches, broke them all off. He wrenched off one of his arms from his
shoulders, then wrenched off the other one also; he also wrenched off
one of his legs, also the other leg. He broke off his backbone and threw
it down; he also broke off his neck. Down he bounded, (now nothing but)
a human skull, and there he lay for a while.

He bounded to the south, and, bounding, arrived at a house. All the
people died. He bounded (still farther) south, to a house in the south.
All the people died. He turned and bounded back, hastened back to the
north. Off towards the west the people died: he hastened back to the
east. He hastened off towards the north, and arrived at a house; the
people died. He hastened back to the south; there were no people. There
he lay for a while. He came hastening back from the south, came
hastening back to this place. He hastened back as far as a hill.

Coyote was coming from the north, from Montgomery creek. The human skull
was singing. Coyote heard him, and stood still. "Come to me,
pack-basket!" <span id="fr_144"></span>[318](#fn_140) he said. "Come to
me, tasselled apron? Come to me, basket-cap! Come to me, bread! Come to
me, salmon! Come to me, deer-meat! Enough now!" Now he was carrying a
pack-basket on his back. "Come here, staff!"

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

he said. Now he was walking along, coming from the north. Now (Wildcat)
was rolling north, bounded along the ground to that one. (Coyote, now) a
woman, was coming from the north, came near to him. He started in to
weep. "Yes," he said, "my brother acted in that manner. I put rocks in
the fire, dug a round hole in the ground, and put the hot rocks into it.
I roasted him in the hole. Let me roast you in a hole: you will not
die." (Wildcat agreed, and Coyote) roasted him in a hole. He kept
holding on to him, kept holding him down tight. (Wildcat attempted to
break out.) The earth shook all about, but he did not (succeed)--he
remained there. Coyote put out his hand for him, took up the head back
again, the human skull.

"I am a sensible person," he said. "It is I that have always been
possessed of much sense." Now he took him up and carried him off. He
went west (until) he came to a halt. "Now!" he said, "I shall throw you
into the creek here. People will bathe here," he said; "they will become
medicine-men." Now he threw him into the creek there. Then he went back
home to the east.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_138"></span>[200:314](yat22.htm#fr_142) These two
supplementary texts of myths were obtained in 1900 by Dr. R. B. Dixon
from Round Mountain Jack, who has since died. Round Mountain Jack, whose
Indian name was Buī'yas\*i (cf. buī- "to kick"), was recognized as the
last chief or "captain" of the Northern Yana and was always mentioned
with respect and affection. By Dr. Dixon's kindness I am enabled to
append these texts to my own. The first is a variant of a myth
independently secured by Curtin and myself, the second is valuable as
the only Yana version secured of a widespread western American myth.
With Dr. Dixon's consent I have normalized his orthography in conformity
to my own. The dialect of the texts is garī'?i or Northern Yana. On only
one phonetic point is there uncertainty. Dr. Dixon often writes a
syllabically final r where my own materials shows gat‘ā'?i n, rt‘, or
t?, garī'?i t (or t‘), rt‘, or t?; e.g., Dr. Dixon has tirdjauā'lti
(i.e., dirdjawa'ldi?) where Central Yana would show ditdja-, Betty
Brown's material ditdja-. As it is doubtful how far Dr. Dixon's r
represents voiced r and how far voiceless r (or rt‘, rt?), it has seemed
most expedient to normalize all eases with variant r in conformity with
the phonetics of Betty Brown's material.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[200:315](yat22.htm#fr_143) Cf. text IX and
footnote 191.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[202:318](yat22.htm#fr_144) The pack-basket,
tasselled apron, and basket cap stamp the woman, the bread, salmon, and
deer meat are to be the contents of the pack-basket, the staff marks the
old woman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. Grizzly Bear and Deer](yat23)
