[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](yat35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQALSY/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Yana Texts*, by Edward Sapir, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

### XIII. PINE MARTEN'S QUEST FOR MOON'S DAUGHTER. <span id="fr_173"></span>[350](#fn_168.md)

Moon lived in the west. Lion, Wolf, and others lived far up toward Fall
river in a big sweat-house. Lion went first to Moon's house for his
daughter, went in. Moon put brains in the fire, and there was a strong
smoke, so that Lion could not breathe. The two women said, "You must
die. There are many dead outside. My father does not want me to have a
husband." Moon gave Lion a pipe to smoke. He took but two whiffs and was
killed. Moon threw him out. Then Wolf went to sue for Moon's daughter,
went in. The same thing occurred to him. Silver Fox went, with the same
result. The women cried, told Moon he had killed enough, but he did not
mind.

The last one to sue was Pine Marten. He put Weasel in his quiver which
he carried with him. When he came in, Pine Marten caused the smoke to go
away. Moon gave Pine Marten a strong pipe. Pine Marten smoked it, blew
the smoke down into a hole in the ground, and returned the pipe to Moon
unaffected. The girls warned Pine Marten. Weasel pulled out a stronger
tobacco, but Pine Marten made the smoke go down into the ground as
before. Moon gave Pine Marten a stronger tobacco again, but it had no
effect. He threw back the pipe and broke it.

Pine Marten went for wood, brought spruce and cedar. He came back and
put it all in. "That is the kind of wood one should use for sweating,
not brains." The spruce wood popped, the sparks burned Moon half up.
Pine Marten danced. Moon cried out to stop it, for he was nearly dead.
Pine Marten stopped it, and Moon said, "You ought not to do that." Moon
said, "Son-in-law, go swim." So he went, and soon a big water grizzly
(hā't‘enna) pulled him in, and tried to kill him. He could not do so,
however. Pine Marten stayed one night with him at the bottom of the
river, then went back with many presents

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

from his nephew. He brought back his hide to Moon and said, "I hung up a
salmon outside." Moon saw it and was frightened.

Moon asked him to go for wood, so he went to the north. A big snake with
a horn (‘e‘k‘ū'na) came and caught Pine Marten, but Pine Marten told him
that he was his uncle. Pine Marten killed him, skinned him, and brought
home the skin with the wood. He told his father-in-law to go and look at
the wood. He saw the hide and was frightened, did not know what to do.

"Son-in-law, go and hunt up on this mountain, kill deer," so he went to
the north. Big Rain (tc‘ilwa'rik!u), Hail (sabilk!ê'yu), and Buzzard
(ma‘ts!k‘ili'lla) were jealous of Pine Marten. Moon told Pine Marten to
sit down, while the people circled about and drove in the animals. Pine
Marten thought they were deer, but they were really grizzly bears. Pine
Marten ran, and the grizzly bears ran after him and tore off his
buckskin leggings. All day he ran. In the afternoon he heard a voice
above, "You are nearly caught. Tell the tree to open, get in, and go
through." He did so. The bear came after him but was caught by the tree
as it closed. Pine Marten went back, got out the bear, and skinned him.
When he returned to Moon's house, he hung up the hide. He told Moon to
go out and see the squirrel. Moon did so, saw the bear-hide, and was
frightened.

"Son-in-law," called Moon. Drifting Rain and Blue Racer (tcī'wa) were to
have a race with Pine Marten. They started, went to the south, ran a
long way. Pine Marten gave out. First he killed Big Rain by pulling a
log out from under him, next he killed Blue Racer. He carried home the
spoils. Moon thought that Pine Marten was dead, but cried when he found
what had happened.

"Son-in-law, we will play tomorrow morning." He took deer-sinew rope,
and wanted Pine Marten to get on the digger pine while he pulled it down
by the rope and let it snap back. Pine Marten jumped off before Moon
could snap. Moon thought he had snapped him up to the sky, but he came
back. Now Moon was to get up, and he did so. Pine Marten swung the tree
a little, and Moon said, "Look out, my son-in-law. Be careful, do not
pull too much." Pine Marten thought to himself, "I

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_168"></span>[233:350](yat36.htm#fr_173.md) In a general way
this suitor tale corresponds to Curtin's "The Winning of Halai Auna,"
Creation Myths of Primitive America, pp. 281-294, but there are plenty
of differences of detail. Some of the incidents, such as the fight with
the water grizzly, recall the Damha'udju story obtained by Curtin and
myself (text no. IV).

will fix him." He gave him a big swing and snapped him off into the sky,
where he is the moon. Pine Marten looked and saw him. Moon said, "I
shall stay here now, he gave me a good place to stay. I shall see what
people do." Pine Marten went back to the house. The old woman Frog,
asked, "Where is my husband?" Pine Marten said, "He wants you up there."
He took them to the same place where he had snapped the old man, and
snapped her up also, also the two girls. Then he went home, and told the
people that he had fixed things well.
