[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jch12)  [Next](jch14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Jesus Christ heals*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1939\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Chapter XI Healing Power of Joy 

I REJOICE and am glad because Thy harmonizing love makes me every whit
whole. All healing systems recognize joy as a beneficent factor in the
restoration of health to the sick. "The joy of Jehovah is your
strength." This statement is based on a principle recognized by all who
help to bring about strength of mind and health of body. An old country
doctor used to tell how he healed a woman of a large cyst by telling her
a funny story: at which she laughed so heartily that the fluid broke
loose and passed away.

The mind puts kinks in the nerves in ways beyond description. A thought
of fear will stop the even flow of life in some nerve center deep down
in the body, forming a nucleus where other fears may accumulate and
finally congest the blood concerned in some important function. The
impast of energy of some kind is necessary to break the dam. Physical
exercise will sometimes do it, or massage, or electricity; but these are
temporary remedies. None of them has touched the cause, which is mental:
fear.

There are various methods of erasing fear from the mind and preventing
its congestions in the body. One of the most direct and effective
shatterers of fear is laughter. Laugh your fears away. See how
ridiculous they are when traced to their source.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

Nearly all persons have some pet fear, and they give up to it without
trying to find its source.

The nerves surrounding the heart are most sensitive to thoughts of fear,
and when mind and body are strenuously excited the fearfully charged
nerve cells grab the heart and hold it like a vise. Businessmen who live
in a world of sharp competition and constant risk of loss with few
exceptions are subject to this kind of fear.

Christian metaphysicians of course know that the only permanent cure for
the ailment is a heartfelt trust in God as the one and only source of
good to man. A daily prayer for wisdom and divine guidance in the
conduct of one's affairs will restore peace and harmony to mind and
body, and health must of necessity follow.

I will sing unto the Lord a new song of harmony and health.

That there is an intimate relation between happiness and health goes
without question. When you feel good you sing either audibly or
silently. Singing promotes health because it increases the circulation,
and a good circulation is a sign and promoter of health. If the blood
stream were never congested and all the nerves and pores were open and
free and were swiftly carrying forward their appointed work, there would
never be an abnormal or false growth in the body. It follows logically
then that we should cultivate those mind activities which stimulate
naturally the currents of life in the body. One of these, and a very
important one, is joy.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

No one likes to take medicine even when sugar-coated, because there is
an instinctive feeling that it will do no good. Besides it usually
tastes bad. But nearly anyone can sing a little song, and those who have
tried it right in the face of suffering will tell you that it is a
marvelous health restorer.

The reason that singing restores harmony to tense nerves is that its
vibrations stir them to action, thus making it possible for the
ever-waiting healing Spirit to get in. The organ of the human voice is
located right between the thyroid glands, the accelerators of certain
important body functions. To a greater or less degree every word you
speak vibrates the cells up and down the body, from front brain to
abdomen.

The Spirit of health, or as the doctors call it, the restorative power
of nature, is always right at hand awaiting an opportunity to enter in
to make whole and to harmonize all discords in the body. Back of every
true song is a thought of joy. It is the thought that counts in the end,
because it is the thought that invites the healing Spirit. Consequently
we should sing with the thought that the Lord is right with us and that
His joy is giving our words the healing unction; as Jesus said, "that my
joy may be in you, and that your joy may be made full."

When men think a great deal about spiritual things and especially about
God as an indwelling spiritual presence, both mind and body are thrilled
with joy, a feeling of satisfaction, and a tendency to break out in
songs of gladness. This is not confined to Christians; persons
everywhere, in every age, have

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

told of an inner glory and happiness when they got into the habit of
concentrating their mind on God. The great philosopher Spinoza wrote so
much about God that he was known as the "God-intoxicated man."

Pythagoras taught that the universe is God's symphony and that all the
suns and planets sing as they swing their way through the heavens. All
nature has a language and a song for those who listen. Shakespeare says:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"And this our life, exempt from public haunt,  
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks,  
Sermons in stones, and good in everything."  
</span>

</div>

Shakespeare often quoted from the Bible, and he may have got his idea
that trees have tongues from I Chronicles 16:33: "Then shall the trees
of the wood sing for joy before Jehovah."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"My mind is cleansed by Christ;  
My life flows swift and strong;  
The peace of God wells up within,  
My soul bursts forth in song."  
</span>

</div>

Some people think it almost a sacrilege to sing when they feel bad. They
think that that is the time to groan, and they usually do. That is the
way the mortal looks at it, and that is the way you may happen to feel,
but you can quickly be released from the prison of pain or grief if you
will sing and praise and pray.

First sing in your soul--you can sing 'way down inside of yourself--then
you will soon be singing with your voice. So we lay down the
metaphysical

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

law that everybody should know how to sing. Everybody can sing. It does
not make any difference what your previous thoughts have been about your
ability to sing, it does not make any difference what you think about it
at present, and it does not make any difference whether you can sing or
not; cultivate the singing soul and you will some day break forth into a
singing voice.

This is a creative law, and it is a law that everyone should know and
use, because through the vibrations of the voice joined with high
thinking every cell in the body is set into action, and not only in the
body but out into the environing thought atmosphere the vibrations go
and break up all crystallized conditions.

The whole universe is in vibration, and that vibration is under law.
Chaos would result if the law were not supreme. Each particular thing
has its rate of vibration. Heat, light, and color are different rates of
vibration in one field of primal energy. Different colors are caused by
the different frequencies of the vibrations as they strike the eye. But
what causes vibration? We answer Mind.

The cells of the body are centers of force in a field of universal
energy. There are no solids. That which appears solid is in reality the
scene of constant activity. The eye is not keyed to the pulsations of
this universal energy and is therefore deceived into believing that
things are solid. All energy and life are governed by laws of spiritual
harmony. If the mind that receives sound vibrations is in spiritual

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

consciousness, the body responds to the higher activity. If our mind
were trained to think thoughts that harmonized with Divine Mind, we
could hear the music of the spheres.

You can drive away the gloom of disappointment by resolutely singing a
sunshine song. I believe that we could cultivate the power of music in
connection with the understanding of Truth and thus rend all the bonds
of sin, sickness, and death. The world needs a new hymnal, with words of
Truth only and music so strong and powerful that it will penetrate to
the very center of the soul.

Our body is now tuned to the divine harmony; we shall find the keynote
by listening in the silence to the singing soul.

The new life in Christ fills me with zeal to live, and I am healed.

In putting on Christ--that is, developing the supermind--every faculty
has to be raised to supermind proportions. The exact mathematical degree
of power necessary to "synchronize" oneself with the "kingdom of the
heavens" in which the supermind functions has not been revealed to human
consciousness, if indeed it can be. An eminent British astronomer says
that he has discovered that God is a great mathematician, and the
logical conclusion of all wise philosophers is that everything in the
universe both seen and unseen is under mathematical law. "The very hairs
of your head are all numbered," said Jesus.

Jesus also said that He came to bring more life

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

to slow-moving humanity. More vital force now is and always has been the
crying need of people everywhere. Disease germs run riot in anemic
persons. The cause of such conditions is mental: there is a lack of
vital interest in life and a disinclination to assume its
responsibilities.

Ralph Waldo Emerson once said that no great work was ever accomplished
without enthusiasm. Enthusiasm is another word for zeal, and zeal is a
great stimulator of man. You cannot think of or repeat the word zeal
without evoking a certain mental thrill that spurs you to action in some
direction if you repeat it over and over. This brings us back to the
point we mentioned about everything having a mathematical infusion; that
is, everything is impregnated with mathematics. Every word we speak goes
forth from our mouth charged with atomic energies that vibrate at a
definite numerical rate. According to science every atom is composed of
protons and electrons, the number of electronic elements in an atom
determining the character of the substance. Now we see that modern
science is proving the truth of Jesus' statement that we shall be held
accountable for every word we speak. Our minds determine the character
of our words and what the mind determines the mouth obediently utters,
its words loaded with constructive or destructive electrons all
mathematically arranged to build up or blow up both ourselves and our
aims and ideals. We are perfectly aware that some persons are
overzealous, that they consume their vitality by talking and acting
without

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

wisdom: "The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up." Such persons are so
enthusiastic in externals that they lose contact with the source of
things, the inner mind, and they destroy the body, the temple of the
living God. However these are the minority. The great majority lack zeal
in doing even the most ordinary things, and even the overzealous would
find a much-coveted and needed poise by linking their minds with the
Christ.

The beginning of the culture of the mind that enables it to make contact
with the realm of creative ideas is faith, and faith is superenthusiasm.
You must have such confidence in your ability to make union with
creative Mind that you fuse the two and the invisible elements melt and
fall into the mold you have made for them.

When we know that every word is mathematically linked with certain
creative ideas and that Divine Mind has made it possible for every one
of us to draw upon these ideas mentally, we have the key to all creative
processes. "Whosoever . . . shall not doubt in his heart, but shall
believe that what he saith cometh to pass; he shall have it." Here in a
nutshell Jesus has stated the law and its fulfillment. The one and only
reason that we do not always succeed in our demonstrations is that we do
not persist in our mental work. If we have never tested our faith in God
and His mathematical laws, we must begin to discipline our minds and
raise our thoughts to the point where they abandon the slow inertia of
the natural man for the speed and spring

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

of the spiritual man. This is accomplished by prayer, meditation, and
the repetition of true words. It is not the vain repetition of words
over and over, parrotlike, but the quiet realization that there is a
listening Mind and a ready host of great ideas at all

times waiting for us.

I am at peace because I trust divine justice to regulate my mind, body,
and affairs.

The mind may be compared to the sea, which is calm or stormy according
to the wind that moves it. Thought utilizes the substance of the mind
and forms that which man ideates.

A restful state of mind is greatly to be desired because of its
constructive character. When the mind is lashed by a brain storm the
cells of the whole organism are shattered and exhaustion ensues. Nervous
prostration is the result of exhausted nerve force.

Man's whole character is determined by the thoughts for which he allows
a place in his mind. A strong man or a weak man is what he is because of
repeated thoughts of strength or weakness. Steadfast affirmations of
peace will harmonize the whole body structure and open the way to
attainment of healthy conditions in mind and body. The reason that
prayers and treatments for health are not more successful is that the
mind has not been put in a receptive state by affirmations of peace.

The Mind of Spirit is harmonious and peaceful, and it must have a like
manner of expression in man's consciousness. When a body of water is
choppy with fitful currents of air it cannot reflect objects

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

clearly. Neither can man reflect the steady strong glow of Omnipotence
when his mind is disturbed by anxious thoughts, fearful thoughts, or
angry thoughts.

Be at peace and your unity with God-Mind will bring you health and
happiness.

We all should practice delightful, happy, joyous states of mind. It is
such thoughts that open the way for the ever-present Father-Mind to pour
out its splendid resources into our mind and through us into all our
affairs.

Thou art my life unfailing, and I rejoice in Thy abundant, buoyant
health.

No one can understand the real character of God without a metaphysical
study and analysis of mind and its properties. To think of God as an
enormously enlarged man, as most persons do, entangles one in a maze of
wrong conclusions concerning the nature and creative processes of Being.

Think of Being as an aggregation of ideas with potential creative
capacity but governed in its creative processes by unalterable laws.
Mentally see those ideas projected into action in a universe evolving a
self-conscious creature possessed of free will called man. As man
develops through the combination of those original ideas, behold him
arriving at a place in his evolution where he realizes his power of
self-determination and consciously begins to choose as his own field of
action the many pleasant activities of the universe and to combine them
in his own way.

This phase of man's development is symbolized

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

in the Edenic allegory as Adam and Eve eating of the fruit of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil. The tree that bears the fruit of
pleasure in the midst of man's body garden is the sympathetic nervous
system. Satan, sensation, tempts Adam and Eve--man--to appropriate or
eat of this tree without listening to the voice of wisdom, Jehovah God.
The result is unbridled and unlawful development of the sympathetic
nervous system with excess of pleasure (good) followed by a
corresponding reaction of pain (evil).

Jesus regained this lost Eden and showed us how to regain it by likewise
identifying our minds with God-Mind. His prayer was "Not my will, but
thine, be done."

Christ is the name of the God-Mind imaged in everyone. When we identify
ourselves with that image, we rise superior to the Adamic man and become
unified with the spiritual man. It is in the strength of this supermind
that we can say to the man of flesh, "I will; be thou made clean." This
is the decree of the Christ in you to your conscious mind and its
visible body; it is the exercise of the authority given to every child
of God. "Decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee."

And manifest substance flows from a realm of light, according to the
most modern conclusions of physical science. James says, "Every good
gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father
of lights." God ideas are the source of all that appears. Accept this
mighty and all-productive

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

truth and consciously connect your mind with the Father-Mind, and you
will realize abundant health and true joy.

The Holy Spirit life heals me, and I radiate health to everybody and
everything.

Some persons think that when they quit lying they are demonstrating
Truth. To quit lying is commendable but falls short of fulfilling the
complete reformation of the Spirit of truth. In chapter after chapter of
the Gospel of John, Jesus repeats the promise that He will send a
Comforter, whom He names "the Spirit of truth," to those who believe on
Him. In the 15th chapter we read, "But when the Comforter is come, whom
I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which
proceedeth from the Father, he shall bear witness of me." In the 16th
chapter we find these words: "I have yet many things to say unto you,
but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth, is
come, he shall guide you into all the truth." "And I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may be with you
for ever, even the Spirit of truth . . . for he abideth with you, and
shall be in you."

The Spirit of truth is the mind of God in its executive capacity: it
carries out the divine plan of the originating Spirit. It proceeds from
the Father and bears witness of the Son. We have in the operation of our
own minds an illustration of how Divine Mind works. When an idea is
fully formulated in our minds and we decide to carry it out, our
thoughts

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

change their character from contemplative to executive. We no longer
plan but proceed to execute what we have already planned. So God-Mind
sends forth its Spirit to carry out in man the divine idea imaged in the
Son.

It is very comforting to know that Spirit is cooperating with us in our
efforts to manifest God's law. God in His divine perfection has seemed
so far removed from our human frailties that we have lost heart. But now
we see that Jesus taught that God is intimately associated with us in
all our life's problems and that we need only ask in His name in order
to have all needs fulfilled.

The Spirit of truth is God's thought projecting into our minds ideas
that will build a spiritual consciousness like that of Jesus. The Spirit
of truth watches every detail of our lives, and when we ask and by
affirmation proclaim its presence, it brings new life into our bodies.

Again the Spirit of truth opens our minds to God's law of supply and
support, to the existence of a universal etheric thought substance
prepared for man's body sustenance by infinite Mind. We have thought
that in answer to our prayers God in some mysterious manner brought
about the marvelous demonstrations that we had. Now we see that there
has been prepared from the beginning an interpenetrating substance that,
like a tenuous bread of heaven, showers us with its abundance.

But we must not only ask but bring the Spirit into our consciousness by
affirming its abundance to

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

be the source of all our good. Then perfection will begin to be
manifested right in the face of apparent negation. Remember the
invitation of the Master "Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name:
ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may be made full."

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](jch14)
