[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](jch11)  [Next](jch13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Jesus Christ heals*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1939\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Chapter X "I Am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life" 

JEHOVAH GOD restores me to health and wholeness. Words are quickened by
those who speak them and they pick up and carry the ideas of the
speaker, weak or strong, ignorant or wise, good or ill. Thus words
descriptive of deity have been personalized in the thought stuff of the
race and those who invoke them in prayer and meditation are given a
spiritual impetus far beyond what they would receive from common words.
It is a fact that the name Jehovah came to be held in such reverence by
the rabbis that they never spoke the word aloud. Jesus said that His
words were so charged with spirit and life that they would endure longer
even than heaven and earth.

Next to Spirit the word of Spirit is the most powerful thing in
existence. The author of the Book of Hebrews says "that the worlds have
been framed by the word of God." We read in Genesis that "God said" and
it came to pass. And God said, "Let us make man in our own image, after
our likeness." Thus we see that man is the incarnate word of God, and it
logically follows that our words bring forth whatever we put into them.
Study the 1st chapter of John. Jesus said that a man will be held
accountable for his lightest word.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

Spiritually classified, the Jehovah of the Old Testament is identical
with the Christ in the New. One who heals by the power of the word
should become familiar with the inner meaning of all words and use those
that appeal to him as possessing the greatest healing potency. Jesus
promised that He would unite with the Holy Spirit in helping those who
called upon Him. Unity healers have found that this promise is fulfilled
when they concentrate in prayer and positive affirmation on the presence
of the Holy Spirit and Jesus Christ. A new and strong contact is felt
with spiritual life, as if it were a mighty battery, when the name
Jehovah God or Jehovah-rapha ("the Lord that healeth thee") is spoken
silently and audibly; then the ethers quicken with the name and shower
spiritual life on both patient and healer. The word Jehovah or Yahweh is
charged with spiritual power far above and beyond any other word in
human language.

I am raised to perfection in mind and body by the healing power of Jesus
Christ.

Quite a few Truth students ask why we emphasize Jesus Christ so strongly
in our writings and statements of Truth. Spiritual psychology proves
that the name of a great character carries his mind potency and that
wherever his name is repeated silently or audibly his attributes become
manifest. Jesus knew this and commanded His disciples to go forth in His
name. The marvelous works they did prove that they exercised power far
beyond anything warranted by their education or previous ability, power

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

springing directly from Spirit.

Every thinker who studies the life and teachings of Jesus readily admits
that He attained an understanding of spiritual things far beyond that of
any other man that ever lived. His mind touched heights far beyond those
of other advanced searchers for Truth. As we unfold spiritually we see
more and more that Jesus understood the finer shades of metaphysical
reasoning and related His mind and body to both ideas and their
manifestation.

Jesus demonstrated that He understood the healing power stored up in the
body, which He said is released through faith. "Thy faith hath made thee
whole." Jesus identified Himself and His name with the sacred name of
the Hebrew dispensation, Jehovah, and added another link to that long
chain of names and events that brought forth the perfect man ideated by
God-Mind, Jesus Christ.

As a directive head is essential in any army, militant or spiritual, so
in every forward movement of the human family there must be a leader.
The leader is chosen because of his ability as a demonstrator of the
principles adopted by the group he represents. The religious principles
taught and demonstrated by Jesus were not originated by Him, nor did He
claim them as a "discovery." He said that Moses wrote of Him, and He
often quoted Moses, but with an interpretation quite different from that
of the popular religious leaders. He told them that they studied the
Scriptures expecting through them to attain eternal life when the only
way to attain that life was through

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

Him, and they would not come to Him. Right here Jesus emphasized the
spiritual man, the I AM in man, as the only way by which man can enter
the kingdom of God.

Jesus was undoubtedly the greatest of all exponents of the impersonal I
AM, which is revealed to man when he opens up the supermind within his
own soul. Jesus Christ's real name is Jehovah, I AM. The personal man
Jesus is merely the veil or mask worn by the spiritual man Christ or
Jehovah. We are all, in our personality, wearing the mask that conceals
the real, the spiritual, I AM. Jesus shattered that mask and revealed
the spiritual man. He also taught the way by which we may all do what He
did and thus fulfill the destiny implanted in us by the parent Mind.

There are many distractions to keep us from finding the one door into
the inner kingdom and many voices calling to us that they will show us
the easy way, but Jesus Christ is the only one that appeals to those who
are grounded in principle.

Any declaration man may make in which the name Jesus Christ is used
reverently will contact the spiritual ether in which the Christ I AM
lives and will open the mind and body to the inflow of spiritual healing
rays. These healing rays are very much superior to the ultraviolet rays
that come from the sun or our best medical appliances, because they
minister to the mind as well as the body.

Thy vitalizing energy floods my whole being, and I am healed.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

The most inclusive name for Being is Jehovah God. Jehovah represents the
individual I AM and God (Elohim) the universal Principle. When man
thinks or says "I am" he is potentially giving freedom to the seed ideas
that contains in its spiritual capacity all of Being. The natural man in
his narrowed mental comprehension barely touches the seed ideas that
expand in the Christ man to infinite power. The more we dwell upon and
expand our I AM the greater looms its originating capacity before us.
When Jesus proclaimed, "Before Abraham was born, I am," He realized that
the I AM preceded all manifestation, however great, and was capable of
infinite expression.

The proposition that the seemingly insignificant individual I AM
contains infinite creative capacity appears absurd to the thoughtless,
but we have numerous examples of extraordinary capacity for expansion in
the little seeds that bring forth gigantic trees. The Scriptures plainly
teach that men may become gods. Adam was expelled from the Garden of
Eden because Jehovah realized that he might appropriate eternal life and
live forever in his ignorance.

When man realizes that "death and life are in the power of the tongue"
and begins to use his "I am" statements wisely, he has the key that
unlocks the secret chambers of existence in heaven and earth.

The Christ substance (body) and the Christ life (blood) are accessible
at all times and in all places to the one who awakens his soul to
spiritual omnipresence. The table of the Lord is spread everywhere

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

for those who believe on Him as Spirit and in their Spirit affirmation
eat of His body and blood. The appropriation by His followers of His
life and substance is the very foundation of salvation through Jesus
Christ. The mere acceptance intellectually of the teaching that we are
saved by the blood of the Lord Jesus and the partaking of the bread and
wine in a perfunctory manner will save neither mind nor body. The only
thing that will do it is the understanding that Jesus raised His body
life and substance out of the race consciousness into Spirit
consciousness and that with our minds poised in that consciousness we
can lay hold of the Spirit elements that will save us to the uttermost.

Nearly everyone needs both mind and body healing, and those who give
faithful attention to the law as it operates in man are rewarded by
demonstrations of healing. Jesus healed "all manner of disease," the
same Jesus has broadcast that healing Spirit to the uttermost ends of
the earth, and today all who will may be made whole.

The Christ life quickens and heals me.

Although millions have testified that they have felt the quickening life
of Christ, other millions doubt if such a thing as the Christ life
exists.

The unseen forces have always been an enigma to the masses, and even
those who are expecting the unseen to spring forth suddenly into some
marvelous manifestation do not recognize it when it comes to pass. It is
said that when Marconi demonstrated to a group of scientists in Paris
the power of radio waves,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

they doubted his claims and sought in various ways to discover the
concealed wires, which they were sure were being used. So every unseen
force man uses has had to prove its existence by some visible
manifestation that can be mechanically demonstrated. But are there
unseen forces that cannot be mechanically demonstrated? The answer is
that all unseen forces can be mechanically demonstrated and that they
are being demonstrated every day the world over, but scientists have not
yet recognized as mechanical all the devices through which man brings
unseen forces into manifestation; for example, his own brain and the
radio. These with many other unseen forces come under the head of
mechanism.

Brain cells are the only material things that will transmit mind, and
man has never yet been able to invent so fine a piece of mechanism
outside his own organism. But brains are mechanical, and man does build
and use them in expressing his intelligence.

The fact is that each of us builds a brain especially designed and
fitted for our individual use and for no one else's. All attempts to
turn our brains over to others in hypnosis or mediumship will prove
abortive in the end.

In radio terms your brain cells correspond to the tubes in a combined
broadcasting and receiving set, and you have tuned them to certain wave
lengths and turned on the power. If you have not been informed of your
innate ability to turn on or off the mind waves, you are functioning in
the established race programs of personality: what your ancestors

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

have thought, what other people think, and what little thought you can
conjure up yourself. Unless your mind has been quickened by the light of
spiritual understanding, you are living in a little three-dimensional
world whose beginning and end is sin or a falling short of the divine
ideal.

"If a man keep my word, he shall never see death."

"I am the resurrection, and the life."

Jesus stressed the power of words, especially His words. In the parable
of the sower He said, "When anyone heareth the word of the kingdom."
Here He referred to the Logos, the creative Word, which framed the
worlds, according to John. The creative Word or Logos is also identified
as Holy Spirit, which is carrying forward the ideas of God as they
unfold in the manifest universe.

As the Word of God, the Logos, is creating in the universe (body of God)
so man's word is creating in his universe (man's body). That is why
Jesus said that we should be judged by our words. We are creating a
little universe in which the cells of the body correspond to the planets
of the solar system. "And I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment."

The "day of judgment" to us is any day that we get the fruit in body and
affairs of some thought or word that we have expressed.

The creative power of man's word is in proportion to his understanding
of God-Mind and his unity

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

with its law. The creative power of most men does not get beyond their
own body consciousnesss, because they know very little about Spirit and
their relation to its laws. The better we realize our spiritual
relationship to creative Mind and conform our thoughts and words to its
laws the greater is the power of our words. Jesus "tuned in" to Divine
Mind until that Mind reinforced His mind and raised it to superhuman
capacity. It was in one of His moments of mental exaltation that He
declared, "The words that I have spoken unto you are spirit, and are
life."

We have thought that we were to be saved by Jesus' making personal
petitions and sacrifices for us, but now we see that we are to be saved
by using the creative principles that He developed in Himself, and that
He is ever ready to co-operate with us in developing in ourselves by
observing the law as He observed it. "I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be perfected into one."

Thus we see that when Jesus said, "If a man keep my word, he shall never
see death," He meant that we should realize the life-giving properties
of the creative words of God as He had realized them, that we should
have no consciousness of death.

I have new life in Christ and I am healed.

To attain this realization of the word of life we must create currents
of life in our bodies as Jesus did in His. Of all man's possessions the
most valuable is life. "For what shall a man be profited, if he shall
gain the whole world, and forfeit his life? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his life?"

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

When Jesus uttered these words He was explaining to His disciples that
He was about to pass through a transformation in which He would give up
His physical life, though He would continue His manifestation in a
spiritual life. They did not understand Him, and Peter "began to rebuke
him." Jesus told them they did not understand the things of God "but the
things of men." Up to this day the passing over of the natural life into
the spiritual life is not fully understood by Christians. It is almost
universally interpreted as something that takes place after the death of
the body, while in fact it is a transformation of the issues of life
while the body is intact. Paul said, "I die daily." So Jesus could not
have appeared after His crucifixion in the same body if He had not daily
given up the physical life and daily put on the Christ life. It is a
step-by-step or cell-by-cell transformation.

What did Jesus mean when He said, "If a man keep my word, he shall never
see death"? Did He mean death of the soul? There is nothing in His
teaching to warrant such a conclusion. He meant that we shall escape
physical death if we identify ourselves with the creative Word in Him,
the Logos.

Then to understand the new life in Christ we must give attention to that
mystical Word or Logos, because in it are wrapped the principles that,
planted in our minds, will spring into new life in mind and body.

Eternal life and strength are here, and I am made whole through Jesus
Christ.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

Among the seven sacred names given to Jehovah by the Hebrew priesthood
is "Jehovah-shammah," meaning "Jehovah is there." Jehovah is the name of
the ever-living I AM. When the mystic desired to commune with the
omnipresent life he did not speak the name aloud but silently intoned,
"Jehovah-shammah!" This pervasion of his I AM with the ever-living I AM
harmonized the spiritual man with his source, and the individual was
merged with the universal.

A certain mystery has always accompanied the use of the sacred name, and
the priesthood gained their ascendancy over the people by performing
marvelous works through the silent and audible intoning of words charged
with thoughts of spiritual power.

However a priest must undergo discipline to acquire mastery of the
elemental forces that function in mind and body. A cursory reading of
Exodus conveys the idea that for forty years Moses was a shepherd,
tending the flocks of his father-in-law Jethro, priest of Midian. But
his mastery of nature, as evidenced by his works in Egypt, plainly shows
that he understood the control of matter by mind better than did the
magicians of Egypt, although he was versed in their magic.

The followers of Jesus did marvelous works in His name, but that name
was also used by those who were not His immediate disciples, and they
succeeded in casting out demons so well that John complained about it.
Jesus said, "Forbid him not: for he that is not against you is for you."
So we find that a person's

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

name identifies him with his character. If that character is mighty in
spirituality and power, he who invokes it in his prayers is
automatically raised into a like sphere of power and what he says comes
to pass. "And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that
the Father may be glorified in the Son."

Salvation through Jesus Christ is not accomplished by looking forward to
freedom but by realizing that we are now free through His freeing power,
which we are using to cut the bonds with which our thoughts have bound
us. Then we have only to establish ourselves in real life and strength
by understanding that these attributes of Being are omnipresent and that
our affirmations of that presence, will cause us to become conscious
that we do now and here live, move, and have our being in eternal life
and strength.

In the name and by the power and authority of Jesus Christ I am made
every whit whole.

Man gives a name--that is, "character"--to every idea that comes into
consciousness, and whatever he conceives a thing to be, that it becomes
to him. So it is written in Genesis: "Whatsoever the man called every
living creature, that was the name thereof."

Jesus taught and demonstrated that man is master of a kingdom far beyond
the consciousness of the natural man, but accessible to those who open
their mind to its laws and observe those laws in thought and act.

The official declarations of a representative of a country are
recognized by all as worthy of credence.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Jesus represented the kingdom of the heavens, and we, His agents, take
possession of that kingdom in His name and declare that we are vested
with authority to bring spiritual forces to bear that will restore man
to his primal perfection.

In the 3d chapter of Acts is recorded the healing by Peter of a man lame
from his birth; and Peter says, "In the name of Jesus Christ of
Nazareth, walk. . . . and immediately his feet and ankle-bones received
strength. And leaping up, he stood, and began to walk; and he entered
with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God."

When the people were greatly astonished at this marvelous healing and
gathered around Peter and John, Peter explained, "Ye men of Israel, why
marvel ye at this man? or why fasten ye your eyes on us, as though by
our own power or godliness we had made him to walk? . . . And by faith
in his name hath his name made this man strong."

Shakespeare says, "Good name in man and woman . . . is the immediate
jewel of their souls." But even Shakespeare, with his psychological
insight, never realized how good a name would be or to what heights of
power it could lift one who applies the laws of Spirit in its use.

Those who have searched diligently to know God and His Son Jesus and
have prayed for the light of Spirit find that they possess a certain
confidence and faith in the very name Jesus Christ and that to the one
who speaks it the name draws creative forces far beyond mental
comprehension.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

Hence we should have confidence in the promises of Jesus that those who
in faith use His name shall do the marvelous wonders that He did and
even greater works of a spiritual character.

Read in the 16th chapter of Mark what are the signs of a real follower
of Christ and see if you are measuring up to them: "And these signs
shall accompany them that believe: in my name shall they cast out
demons; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents,
and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall in no wise hurt them; they
shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover."

By the grace of God through Christ Jesus I am made whole.

Jesus knew what He had accomplished in breaking the mortal mesmerism of
the race, and He boldly proclaimed His ability to help all those who
join Him in seeking to effect a direct union with creative Mind.

As Jesus healed in Galilee so He is healing in the same spiritual realm
of radiant health today. "To him that overcometh, to him will I give to
eat of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of God." "I am the
way, and the truth, and the life."

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](jch13)
