[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](am02)  [Next](am04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRE4BU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Amish*, by A.M. Aurand, \[1938\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### QUAINTNESS OF HAIR STYLES AND DRESS ATTRACT ATTENTION

**General Appearance**.—The Amish garb is peculiar to him and his kind.
It is dictated in style by their old leaders and deviations are rare.

Jews, Catholics and the plain people alike prefer not to let any other
faith get a hold on their off-spring until after they have lived through
formative years.

The plain people garb themselves not in the manner of the Jew, (whom
they unconsciously imitate in many ways—as do all Christians), but after
the priests and nuns. The older leaders of the plain people imitated the
Catholic clergyman in dress and in discipline, representative of a
section of Europe following the Reformation.

**Hooks and Eyes** instead of buttons are used by Old Order Amish as a
church regulation. Their clothes are plainer than those of the plainest
Quaker, but the severity of regulations is somewhat modified among the
Meeting House Amish.

The men's hats are a distinctive, broad, stiff-brimmed type—one looking
just like another—dust and all!

It is the usual thing for Old Order Amish boys to wear their hats nearly
all of the time, except while in school. At recess they cannot be
persuaded to doff them while at play.

The trousers of an Amishman do not open in the middle by means of a fly,
as do those of most every other male American. The plain man's pants
open toward the sides, almost at the side seams, with a resultant wide
flap in the front. They are called "broad fall."

Men may shine their shoes (if they wish), and the women may buy and wear
polished machine-made footwear.

If one could get into a friendly and understanding discourse with men of
this faith, as has been done occasionally, one would learn that buttons
on the backs of coats, or on coat sleeves, were actually places for the
"devil to hang

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

'somesing' on." Buttons are made from the bones of animals, and this is
one reason for their declining to use them.

Belts, neckties, sweaters and caps are taboo. Their coats are without
the usual well-known collar. Some wear capes in cold weather, or perhaps
great overcoats; at any rate they are monstrous garments—covering all
like the top of a buggy covers the individual.

**Women's Garb**.—Women may be seen dressed in bright purple apron,
orange neckerchief, or (on Sunday) white caps without ruffle; or borders
and white neckerchiefs with gowns of sober woolen stuff, and all wearing
aprons. Even a dark-eyed maiden of three years might have her sweet face
encircled by the plain muslin cap, the little figure dressed in plain
gown.

It is not compulsory for the young girls to wear their bonnets
constantly, either at home, at school, or away from home.

Necessary jewelry, even gold eye-glasses, is allowed. The young girls
are expected not to want to own or wear gold watches. Should they use
them, discipline would follow.

Dress peculiarities grew out of an effort to follow Divine injunction,
"Be not conformed to this world."

The drawers of the conservative plain women are very long, and quite
tight. Seldom seen by non-Amish, at first glance they look like relics
from the middle ages, rather than a convenience or need for the present.

The youngsters are dressed exactly after the pattern of their
grandfathers and grandmothers, and it does seem strange to see such
"little ladies" out and at play with a vigor found in boys—and in
children of the care-free-world. But they wear dresses reaching to their
shoe-tops, as soon as they are able to walk; a white cap, and white
shoulder kerchief and a white apron add their unique touch.

Any children, neatly groomed to look like their parents at their hest,
have a chance of looking "cute."

There is only one style of wearing the hair among the Amish women, and
that bears very little improvement. It is parted exactly in the middle
and combed smoothly down toward the temples, where two plaits

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

are started, carried around and gathered into a knot just under the edge
of the white mull cap above the nape of the neck.

**Hair and Whiskers**.—One or two Amish countrymen, when seen in
Lewistown, Lancaster or Ephrata, create little excitement, but when
fifty or a hundred get together in a world outside their own, that's
news.

Young men, as well as old, have their hair and whiskers neatly trimmed,
and it seems always about the same color for all ages. Sandy, reddish,
may we call it, and ruddy cheeks predominate. The hair is cut very
neatly in a bang in front, or parted in the middle and slicked over the
side to cover the ears.

The moustache is shaved off for the purpose of cleanliness in eating.
Two verses from Leviticus settle the question: "Ye shall not round the
corners of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the corners of they
beard." (Lev. xix, 27; xxi, 5).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amish In Mifflin County Accounted Leading Conservatives](am04)
