[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](am03)  [Next](am05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRE4BU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Amish*, by A.M. Aurand, \[1938\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AMISH IN MIFFLIN COUNTY ACCOUNTED LEADING CONSERVATIVES

The Amish of the Mifflin County Area are severely plain in
"back-sections;" often without any modern conveniences; no blinds at
windows or doors; no rugs; simple wearing apparel, home-made, or perhaps
ordered through a specialist in the making thereof.

An informant says that these people have no pictures on the walls—only
mottoes and gaudy calendars.

A woman of mature years, having a new home erected, on entering it one
day discovered modern plumbing devices had been installed, and she
forthwith ordered removal of same.

They eat enough, and of good variety, and their complexions appear quite
superior to the "healthy appearances" obtained from boxes and jars which
may be purchased in drug stores.

Church rules are not a matter of printed or written record, but of oral
delivery or tradition among the Old Amish. It is not impossible that
this condition may lead to unpleasant and unlooked-for results some day,
if perhaps such has not been the case in more instances than have
generally come to light.

If any of the young of the Old Amish marry outside the "faith,"
expulsion from membership will, and loss

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of inheritance may follow, unless the non-member also adopts the faith
and garb. This applies only to the Meeting House Amish in cases where
marriage takes place into families which are not non-resistant.

**Five "Varieties."**—Among the Amish in Mifflin county, Pennsylvania,
there are five "varieties." They include the very conservative, known as
the "Nebraskas," their women still wearing the old Shaker hats and
avoiding bonnets, and whose men are not permitted to wear suspenders—to
the branch that worships in regular meeting houses, and who have
discarded nearly all restrictions, except the bonnet.

Then there are the "Peacheyites" (named for one of their number), who
may wear a single suspender, if home-made. A group organized by Abe
Zook. Another group is permitted to wear store suspenders to hold up
their trousers, but few other so-called "sinful pleasures of life."

These distinctions, they say, do not apply to Lancaster county Amish in
this day and generation.

We are, however, familiar with the "one suspender" type.

**Children Sometimes Backward**.—Conditions among these people sometimes
really require sympathy, especially among the young who sometimes hide
themselves from the sight of "English" persons, making use of
corn-shocks, or whatever they find handy.

This practice is not unusual among children of some other persuasions,
where the parents have too much stunted their natural mental
developments; but then, too, we do know it to be a too-common-practice
of our "English" people to ridicule people of other origins. Persons,
not of the Amish order, are English.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amish and Mennonites Are World-Famed Agriculturalists](am05.md)
