[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](am04)  [Next](am06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRE4BU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Amish*, by A.M. Aurand, \[1938\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AMISH AND MENNONITES ARE WORLD-FAMED AGRICULTURALISTS

**The Amish and Mennonites** are generally agriculturalists, which
include grain, vegetables and that "horrible weed" tobacco! They are
adepts at all they undertake and when drying season for tobacco is on
their barns are testimony in this direction, at least.

**Plow Deep**.—If God has not been entirely responsible for the success
of these people, the answer must lie in the fact that when they plowed,
they plowed deeper, to keep the soil mellow; and when they cleared

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

away forest land they went to work on the hardiest of the trees as well
as the smaller growth.

They didn't merely scratch the surface like the "despised Yankee," or
"scotch" the larger trees like the Scotch-Irish and wait a few years for
the tree to die!

Hard work and little play has made them at least some "jack," and
working mostly in the soil they can more easily commune with their
Creator.

They spurn hired help, perhaps for two or more reasons. One, they do not
like to be masters of men; they would rather serve; two, servants are
likely to lag and loaf, and not keep up with men interested in life and
salvation—hence, no laborers, no labor difficulties.

**Their Barns**.—The barn is one of the most important spots on a plain
man's property, if he be a farmer. Here he must store all his crops, and
if the latter be bountiful as they usually are, the barns may be too
small.

Depending as to what sect he adheres to, the barn may be the "meeting
place" for all of his neighbors of the same "meeting." This may well be
crowded, for the loads brought by fifty to sixty buggies would naturally
make some con-course of people—and they generally are regular
attendants.

The barn may be kept even better than the house, for the latter is only
a place in which to eat and sleep, say the usual daily prayers, and
occasionally have the meeting there instead of the barn.

**The Moon** plays a great part in the planting of the crops, placing of
fence-posts, shingling of barns and houses, etc. It is a recognized fact
among scientists that there may be more to the lore relative to the
moon, than they have yet found out. Certainly the crops and general
results of moon observance among these and other Pennsylvania Germans is
too well-known to get worked-up over.

The almanac, with all the signs of the zodiac, and all the special days
of the year, has an important place in the home.

**Buggies**.—One visitor tells about a meeting at one of the Amish
homes. In the barn-yard stood some sixty-five yellow canvas-covered
wagons or buggies, as nearly alike as two peas in a pod. The sight was
suggestive of a wagon-factory—all models of the same pattern.

On inquiring from several of the owners, just how they distinguished one
from another so nearly alike,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

one fellow replied: "Oh, we joost look at ’em; we know ’em!"

One said he could tell his wagon because the back of it was peppered
full of shot-holes, a souvenir of a shooting-match his boys had one day
at home—too near the barn. Another had a block nailed to the floor of
his wagon for the comfort of his short-legged wife.

And so on and on, until the whole sixty-five were distinctly different
one from the other. They carried no whips, other than hickory switches
which were kept more or less hidden from sight.

**Freeholders**.—There is probably more property owned outright, among
the plain peoples in the southern and sect-populated counties per
capita, than perhaps among any others of like character in the State.

They generally do not borrow money, or, if they do, it is loaned without
interest, for among them they have no desire to obtain interest thereon.
It is rare that money is withheld if one needs it, and inquires from one
who has it to spare.

Plain people have numerous notions in common. It appears that they have
little time for either Negroes, lawyers or rum. They also believe that
bad fences (poorly kept) cause trouble between neighbors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Religious Services Are Held In Their Houses and Barns](am06.md)
