[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](am06)  [Next](am08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRE4BU/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Amish*, by A.M. Aurand, \[1938\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BUNDLING AND MARRIAGE CUSTOMS ARE INTERESTING AND UNIQUE

**Births**.—Upon the birth of a son they make much ado, because he may
be a plowman or a wagoner; if it is a girl there will be another one to
milk the

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

cows, or a lass who will get herself a husband who will be a good Amish
or Mennonite amongst them. "To fear God and to love work" is the first
lesson they teach their children.

When a man marries he asks not of the girl: "How much dowry can you
bring with you?" but "Are you fit to be a good, industrious housewife
and mother?"

**Bundling, or Courting in Bed**. <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1)—The
late Thaddeus Stevens once remarked that for every case of "bundling" in
Lancaster county there were twenty cases in Vermont. Perhaps Thad. was
qualified to make the statement, having lived a full and complete life
of his own. But we wonder whether his statistics are reliable. Perhaps
he just wanted to be quoted.

Bundling was condoned in the Old Testament, if one takes the time to
look up the Book of Ruth to prove it; and if it was the custom then
among the Jews for "men and women to lie on the same bed, as lovers,
without undressing," then we have little doubt but that our plain
friends used the same methods for getting couples into a convivial mood
and a convenient embrace.

Our New England friends said that "bundling" was an "economic necessity"
we prefer to believe that their prudishness made them say that, when in
their hearts they knew that bundling was economically "convenient."

The plain people could have safely used several methods prescribed for
bundling boys and girls in bed

(Please turn to page [19](#page_19))

(illustrations are placed at the back of the etext, see [p.
15](am15.htm#page_15))

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

together before they were married, because these young boys do not start
out in their love affairs with worldly ideas of getting "special favors
from girls" before they are married.

Hence, when we have it on good authority from the Amish direct that they
bundle, and from Mennonites that they bundle, then we suppose it is fair
to presume that they do so.

**Bundling in Mifflin County**.—Referring to the author's pamphlet
"Bundling Prohibited," (The Aurand Press, 1929), we note briefly that
"Bundling existed in Mifflin county, Pa., in 1928." The girl sleeps
under the covers; the boy on top of the covers. In the same
neighborhood, should illegitimate births occur, not necessarily the
result of any bundling episodes, the mother is required to go before the
church body, and there confess to the various incidents of her past—with
whom, when and where. (This compares with legal processes in courts
today when the issue is without "benefit of the law and clergy"). Such
confessions are made freely, no persuasion being necessary; it is said
that marriages readily take place just after such confessions. There
seems to be less of the "sinfulness" thus attached to an honest
confession, than would be the case among non-Amish.

These people are human; they know the emotions and passions of life and
the method of reproduction, and are they to be censored for an
occasional misstep in nature, when others constantly are enjoying the
conjugal bed without the benefit of "license?"

The authorities governing the church naturally attend to all these
cases, and numerous others falling within the scope of their "meeting."
The civil law is within reach of all of them, but the wise ones avoid
the law as long as they can.

A Mennonite college professor told the author some years ago that
bundling is practiced among his people, not only in the States, but also
in Canada, and that they bundle in the "good old-fashioned way"—the
manner of which we shall leave to the imagination of the reader.

What is true of Canada, goes for Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana and other
states. Bundling in the old manner is more difficult to locate nowadays
than formerly, because the "professional bundlers," or the travelling
salesmen are not visiting the sections where it may be found—hence the
"news" is harder to "get out."

**Blue Gates**.—With reference to the "blue painted gates" in Lancaster
county, there is a word to he said. Many persons speak of the "blue
gate" as though they were speaking of a house of ill-fame, when they
tell

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

you that "where the blue gate is, there is a marriageable (virgin)
daughter." Perhaps there is, but it just wouldn't necessarily follow
that every blue gate told the same thing.

The Mennonites and some of the Amish just cannot help having their
homes, their yards and front fences looking spic and span. What else
would keep the latter in better condition than fresh paint? Blue is a
favorite color and it has religious significance. So where there is a
blue gate there may be a girl eligible for marriage.

Bundling is a convenient way to court—not necessarily the "last straw"
to get rid of a daughter. It is an honorable custom, and has been
practiced in all countries and in all ages.

The custom at one time was to place the girls in bags and to allow their
"fellows," or beaux, to crawl into bed with them. Certainly it must have
been a lot more comfortable to "court a girl in bed" than on an old sofa
or an old, hard, wood-box!

**Marriages** usually take place on Tuesday or Thursday, at the home of
the bride. It is customary, although not obligatory, to announce a
contemplated marriage usually two weeks before-hand, probably to afford
her more time for removing "hope chests" and such other items as a plain
girl would have collected, to her new home, and to allow her the extra
preparations for the wedding dinner.

A wedding means, besides the marriage ceremony, a day of feasting and
good times lasting into the night. This practice seems to conform to
practices among the Jews. A sermon also is delivered at the wedding, at
which time certain knowledge and information is imparted to the
newly-weds. Now this is not an "invention" of these people!

The marriage feast should be a big one, and on occasion there have been
prepared for a repast, as many as 10 turkeys, 10 chickens, 50 lbs. of
beef, 100 pies, 10 cakes, besides the "extras" without number.

Sometimes games of several sorts are played in the house, or outside,
preferably in the barn where the accommodations were sufficient for such
large numbers. Since it is usually the younger element that likes its
fun, and particularly in the barn, it was extremely fortunate that a
wedding ceremony in Mifflin county involved an older couple, instead of
a young one. Smallpox unfortunately came to this wedding, and had it
been that younger folks would have attended in goodly numbers, and had
they gone afterwards to the barn to play their exciting games, one can
sec an epidemic among them

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="small">of telling effect. A number of people in the
vicinity and elsewhere in the State and nearby states were
affected.</span>

**An Amish Wedding** in Mifflin county just a few years ago must have
been interesting to behold, and we tell it as nearly as we can, as told
to us.

Two weeks prior to the wedding the bride and the groom are "published"
(wedding announced). From that time until the wedding the groom drives
from farm to farm in his buggy, inviting those whom he wishes to have
attend.

The marriage ceremony was held in a neighbor's home of the bride. The
parents of neither the bride or groom attended the ceremony, according
to ritual. The bride and groom were taken by the main preacher (who
unites them in marriage), to a room by themselves and asked them
questions—(would these have to deal with sex as we note to be the case
with Jews?)—then in about fifteen minutes he returned with them to the
room (singing taking place during the instruction period). Then
following them were two bridesmaids and two best men.

The services lasted about three-and-a-half hours, and three or four
preachers spoke, then called on different others. After that the big
meal!

The meal, or dinner, is always at the bride's home; everything you want
to eat or look at. The bride's table, of course, always has the nicest
food, and more of a variety. They have what they call the corner table;
after they are through with most of the eating (they sit and eat until
3, or 3.30 o'clock), the bride cuts her cake and sends pieces to her
best friends at different tables.

For dinner they had roast turkey, chicken and duck.

They sing a lot from noon until 3.30. Then they go to the barn and play
party games, similar to English games. After exercises of this kind they
are ready for supper at 5 o'clock, when each of the "Dutch" boys leads a
girl by the hand, to the supper. This meal is prepared with leftovers
from dinner, but warmed; plus lemon pie and baked oysters (in season).

They sang during and after supper, which may last, as it did at this
wedding, until 9 o'clock, then

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

they went to the barn again! Here they played games and sang until the
wee hours of the morning.

The older folks do the work; men and women both wait on tables. They
have committees, and each has its appointed work to do. In this case the
father of the bride tended to the roast chickens.

**Divorces Are Forbidden**; but if one of a couple dies, the survivor
may remarry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[14:\*](am07.htm#fr_1) At the time this pamphlet
was first issued it was impossible to obtain certain information
relative to the subject of "bundling" among the "plain people," and
particularly those included in our scope. Since the original edition,
however, important phases on this subject have come to us, and they have
been included in another pamphlet devoted entirely to that subject:
"Little Known Facts About Bundling in the New World," (The Aurand
Press). This admittedly interesting account (proved by the very large
number sold), should readily silence the skeptic, for it recounts the
"experiences and emotions" of one of the "plain people" who "bundled,"
but who now raises serious questions as to the methods practiced—morals,
theology, etc., excerpted from one of their most important church
papers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Funerals and Superstitions Attract Outside Interest](am08)
