[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Americana](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](am10)  [Next](am12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002HRE4BU/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Amish*, by A.M. Aurand, \[1938\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE GERMAN LANGUAGE AND "DUTCH" DIALECT FAMILIAR TO ALL

**Are They "Dumb Dutch?"**—These people are not ignorant—that is they
are well able to read and write, either in German or English. But they
are not generally educated to what we call "our modern ideas." They shun
these and learn what they want to, and keep on searching after the
information relative to the teachings of their kind.

Generally the German of three hundred years ago is the language of their
religious meetings and sermons. Their services may last several hours
and usually are largely attended by every one belonging thereto resident
in their community. Either English, or Pennsylvania-"Dutch," so-called
by the English in lieu of "Deutsch" is the language of the home and for
general purposes, if desired.

**Reasoning Powers**.—One advantage the average plain man has over
others of his worldly neighbors is that he knows both English and German
tongues. This gives him opportunity to reason in both and when his
thoughts are put into words the grammatical construction leaves much to
be desired at times. He is not at a disadvantage due to these
"handicaps."

**Dialect Advantages**.—It has been the writer's personal experience to
carry on a conversation at length in our plain, simple, Pennsylvania
"Dutch," not only with members of the plain "sects," but with Germans
from any and every section of this or any other State, settled by those
who originally came from Germany or adjacent countries, and whose
children and their children blazed trails to all points of the compass.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

The writer has also used successfully enough, our simple "dialect" to
speak to, and to be understood by, German-born students, scholars and
professors; Jews born in Germany, Roumania, Latvia and elsewhere;
Austrians, whether of the pre-war, or post-war period. There is still
enough of the original German flavor in our dialect after more than two
hundred years' use and abuse, to satisfy the daily needs of many plain
people and others of German extraction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Account of the Amish and the Mennonites](am12.md)
