[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca09)  [Next](ntca11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

## Chapter VIII Initiation Ceremonies (Continued) the Engwura Ceremony

**Five phases of the Engwura—Summoning the members of the tribe to the
Engwura—Plan of the ground on which the ceremonies were held—Division of
the tribe into two moieties—Disposal of the Churinga in two
corresponding groups—General remarks on the ownership and names of the
ceremonies—Control of the Engwura—First phase—Performance of two
ordinary corrobborees—Passing on of corrobborees from one group to
another—Building of the *Parra* on the Engwura ground—Separation of the
younger men from the women—Second phase—Performance of sacred
ceremonies—Description of the last eight days of the second phase—The
making of a *Nurtunja*—Examination of Churinga—“Singing” the
ground—Various ceremonies—Handing over of Churinga which had been taken
care of by a neighbouring group during the temporary extinction of the
group to which they belonged—The making and meaning of a
*Waninga*—Making the younger men *abmoara* to certain of the older
ones—The younger men are now called *Illpongwurra*.**

THE Engwura, or, as it is called in some parts of the tribe, Urumpilla,
is in reality a long series of ceremonies concerned with the totems, and
terminating in what may be best described as ordeals by fire, which form
the last of the initiatory ceremonies. After the native has passed
through these he becomes what is called *Urliara*, that is, a perfectly
developed member of the tribe. We cannot fully translate the meaning of
either term, but each of them is formed, in part, of the word *ura*,
which means fire. The natives themselves say that the ceremony has the
effect of strengthening all who pass through it. It imparts courage and
wisdom, makes the men more kindly natured and less apt to quarrel; in
short, it makes them *ertwa murra oknirra*, words which respectively
mean “man, good, great or very,” the word good being, of course, used
with the meaning attached to it by the native. <span id="page_272">p.
272</span> Evidently the main objects of it are, firstly, to bring the
young men under the control of the old men, whose commands they have to
obey implicitly; secondly, to teach them habits of self-restraint and
hardihood; and thirdly, to show to the younger men who have arrived at
mature age, the sacred secrets of the tribe which are concerned with the
Churinga and the totems with which they are associated.

The Engwura may be performed in various places, but, as it is a ceremony
at which men and women gather together from all parts of the tribe, and
sometimes also from other tribes, a central position is preferred if it
be intended to carry it out on a large scale. It is, indeed, a time when
the old men from all parts of the tribe come together and discuss
matters. Councils of the elder men are held day by day, by which we do
not mean that there is anything of a strictly formal nature, but that
constantly groups of the elder men may be seen discussing matters of
tribal interest; all the old traditions of the tribe are repeated and
discussed, and it is by means of meetings such as this, that a knowledge
of the unwritten history of the tribe and of its leading members is
passed on from generation to generation. Not only this, but while the
main effect is undoubtedly to preserve custom, yet, on the other hand,
changes introduced in one part of the tribe (and, despite the great
conservatism of the native such changes do take place) can by means of
these gatherings, become generally adopted in much less time than would
be the case if they had to slowly filter through, as it were, from one
locality to another.

Some idea of the importance of the ceremony may be gathered from the
fact that the one which we witnessed commenced in the middle of
September, and continued till the middle of the succeeding January,
during which time there was a constant succession of ceremonies, not a
day passing without one, while there were sometimes as many as five or
six within the twenty-four hours. They were held at various hours,
always one or more during the daylight, and not infrequently one or two
during the night, a favourite time being just before sunrise.

Whilst the whole series of ceremonies followed one another <span
id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> without a
break, yet there were five clearly marked phases, each of which was
characterised by certain important features peculiar to it, and these
phases we will describe in succession. They may be briefly outlined as
follows:—

Phase 1. Sending out the messengers. Assembling of the tribe.
Performance of introductory corrobborees. Building of the *Parra* on the
Engwura ground, and the commencement of the sacred ceremonies. The
characteristic feature of this phase is the holding of ordinary dancing
corrobborees at night-time, in which the women take part. When once
these are over, which takes place between two and three weeks from the
start, the women take no further share until close to the end of the
ceremonies.

Phase 2. The men are separated from the women and live on the Engwura
ground, where sacred ceremonies are performed day and night. This
extends over, perhaps, six weeks, and lasts until the men who are being
initiated are made *abmoara* to certain elder men who take charge of
them. After this they are called *Illpongwurra*.

Phase 3. The sacred ceremonies are continued, the *Illpongwurra* being
distinguished by wearing twigs of a special shrub, and may not speak to
their *abmoara* men. This phase lasts until a special ceremony
connected, in this instance, with the frog totem is performed, to
witness which the young men are brought on to the Engwura ground to the
accompaniment of the sound of bull-roarers, which, after this, are much
used. This phase extends over about eight days.

Phase 4. The *Illpongwurra* are taken out of camp in the morning and
brought in at night-time by old men who carry bull-roarers. This is the
most important phase, and during its continuance the fire ceremonies are
passed through. It extends over two weeks or more, and after the final
ceremony of this phase the initiated men rank as *Urliara*.

Phase 5. The newly-made *Urliara* are kept out in the bush.
Corrobborees, in which women take part, are held at night-time, and at
intervals sacred ceremonies are performed in connection with the removal
of the ban of silence between those who are *abmoara* to one another.
This phase lasts an indefinite length of time, but after its
commencement the <span id="page_275">p. 275</span> camp breaks up and
the different members begin to return to their respective localities.

When it has been decided by any particular group to hold an Engwura,—and
the initiation rests with the Alatunja, the latter, after consultation
with the older men, sends out messengers to other groups. Each of these
carries with him one or two *Churinga irula*, that is, wooden Churinga,
carefully concealed from view in a casing of emu feathers. The Engwura
messenger is called *Ilchinkinja*, a term derived from the two words
*ilcha*, a hand, and *ilkinja*, to raise or lift up, so that it may
perhaps be best rendered by the phrase “the beckoning hand.” In the
normal condition of the tribe no native dare disobey the summons thus
received under penalty of most serious ill to himself, which would be
certain to ensue should he neglect to follow the Churinga. Sometimes the
one set of messengers passes through from group to group, sometimes each
Alatunja, to whom the Churinga comes, provides fresh men, and so, in
course of time, after having travelled many hundreds of miles, the
Churinga at last returns to the original sender.

When a messenger reaches any group he shows the Churinga as an emblem of
his *bona fides* to the Alatunja and elder men, and then delivers his
verbal message, saying when and where the tribe will assemble. Amongst
the Arunta and Ilpirra there is no such thing as a message stick in the
true sense of the term, that is, there is no such thing as a stick cut
with notches or other marks for the purpose of reminding the bearer of
the message, such as is frequently met with amongst other Australian
tribes.

Gradually the various local groups begin to arrive at the chosen spot,
the group inhabiting which has meanwhile been gathering in stores of
food such as grass seed, or *munyeru*. A spot is chosen for the Engwura
ground which is more or less secluded, and so placed that the women and
children who are in the main camp cannot see what is taking place on it.
The plan on the following page shows the arrangement of the camp during
the Engwura. In the particular instance now described the ground was a
level stretch bounded on the east by the river Todd, with its belt of
low scrub and gum trees, <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> and on the
west by a rough quartzite range. At the base of the range ran a small
creek, in the bed of which—for there was, as usual in Central Australia,
no water in either river or creek—the performers were decorated without
any risk of their being seen by any one who had no right to do so.

The natives who assembled came from all parts of the tribe, some
travelling a distance of two hundred miles to be present, and a few of
them came from the Ilpirra tribe, which lies immediately to the north of
the Arunta, and in which a ceremony similar to the Engwura is held.

As the various contingents reached Alice Springs, each one <span
id="page_277">p. 277</span> comprising men, women and children, camps
were formed on the eastern side of the creek, the position of any camp
indicating roughly the locality of its owner. Thus the southern men
camped to the south and the northern men to the north, and, as is always
the case, Bulthara and Panunga men on the one hand, and Kumara and
Purula men on the other hand, camped close together. A very noticeable
feature also was the disposal of the Churinga. Those belonging to the
Panunga and Bulthara men were all placed together on a small platform
which was built in a mulga tree on the hill-side at the south-west end
of the camp, where they were under the immediate charge of the Alatunja
of the Alice Springs group, who is himself a Bulthara man. Those
belonging to the Purula and Kumara men were under the charge of a Purula
man, and were placed on a small platform at the northern end of the
ground. To this storing place of the Churinga during the Engwura the
name of *thanunda* is given.

This division of the tribe into two moieties, which stands out so
clearly on the occasion of a ceremony such as the Engwura, points to the
fact of the original division of the tribe into two halves, each of
which has again divided into two; as a matter of fact the division has
gone on to a greater extent, with the result that in the northern
section of the tribe we find eight divisions, four corresponding to each
of the original moieties.

We were hoping that on the occasion of the Engwura, when the two
moieties were so markedly distinct from one another, it might be
possible to discover the original names applied to them prior to their
division, but this was not the case, nor were we able to discover any
meaning attached to the present names of the divisions.

For the purpose of making things clear we may briefly refer again to the
constitution of the tribe. The whole area over which it extends is
divided up into a large number of localities, each of which is owned and
inhabited by a local group of individuals, and each such locality is
identified with some particular totem which gives its name to the
members of the local group. The term used by the native, which is here
translated by the word totem, is *Oknanikilla*. If you <span
id="page_278">p. 278</span> ask a man what is his *Oknanikilla* he will
reply Erlia (emu), Unchichera (frog), Achilpa (wild-cat), &c., as the
case may be.

Special men of the Alcheringa are associated with special localities in
which they became changed into spirit individuals, each associated with
a Churinga, and with each locality are associated also certain
ceremonies which in the Alcheringa were performed by these individuals,
and have been handed down from that time to the present. Each local
group has also, as already described, its own *Ertnatulunga*, or sacred
storehouse, in which the Churinga are kept. The men assembled at the
Engwura represented various local totem groups, and they—that is, the
older men of each group—had brought with them numbers of the Churinga
from the storehouses.

Each totem has its own ceremonies, and each of the latter may be
regarded as the property of some special individual who has received it
by right of inheritance from its previous owner, such as a father or
elder brother, or he may have, in the case of the men who are supposed
to possess the faculty of seeing and holding intercourse with the
*Iruntarinia* or spirits, received it as a gift directly from the
latter, who have at some time, so he tells his fellows, performed it for
his benefit and then presented it to him. This means either that he has
had a dream during which he has seen a ceremony acted, which is quite as
real a thing to him as actually seeing it when awake, or that being of a
more original and ingenious turn of mind than his fellows—as the men
skilled in magic certainly are—he has invented it for himself and has
then told the others, who implicitly believe in his supernatural powers,
that the spirits have presented it to him. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[1](#fn_121)

Each ceremony, further, is not only connected with some totem, but with
a particular local group of the totem, and its name indicates the fact.
Thus we have the Quabara Unjiamba

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

of Ooraminna, <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122) which is a
performance connected with the Unjiamba or Hakea flower totem of a place
called Ooraminna, the Quabara Ulpmerka of Quiurnpa, which is a ceremony
concerned with certain *Ulpmerka*, or uncircumcised men of the plum tree
totem of a place called Quiurnpa, and so on.

Naturally the ceremonies performed at any Engwura depend upon the men
who are present—that is, if at one Engwura special totems are better
represented than others, then the ceremonies connected with them will
preponderate. There does not appear to be anything like a special series
which must of necessity be performed, and the whole programme is
arranged, so to speak, by the leading man, whose decision is final, but
who frequently consults with certain of the other older men. He invites
the owners of different ceremonies to perform them, but without his
sanction and initiation nothing is done. Very often the performance is
limited to one or perhaps two men, but in others a larger number may
take part, the largest number which we saw being eleven. The man to whom
the performance belongs may either take part in it himself, or, not
infrequently, he may invite some one else to perform it, this being
looked upon as a distinct compliment. The performer, or performers, need
not of necessity belong to the totem with which the ceremony is
concerned, nor need they of necessity belong to the same moiety of the
tribe to which the owner does. In some cases while preparations are
being made for the ceremony only the members of one moiety will be
present, but very often there is no such restriction as this. In many
instances those who are present during the preparation are the men who
belong to the district with which the ceremony is associated. Frequently
we noticed, for example, that the men from a southern locality would be
associated in preparing for a ceremony connected with a southern
locality, and, in the same way, men from the north would be present
during the preparations for a ceremony concerned with a northern
locality.

Not infrequently two performances would be prepared

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

simultaneously, and when this was so one of them would be a ceremony
concerned with Panunga and Bulthara men and the other with Purula and
Kumara men. Under these circumstances one group would consist of the one
moiety and the other of the other moiety, and they would be separated by
some little distance and so placed in the bed of the creek that they
could not see one another.

Speaking generally, it may be said that every man who was a member of
the special totem with which any given ceremony was concerned would have
the right of being present during the preparation, but no one else would
come near except by special invitation of the individual to whom it
belonged, and he could invite any one belonging to any class or totem to
be present or to take part in the performance. The mixture of men of all
groups is to be associated with the fact that the Engwura is an occasion
on which members of all divisions of the tribe and of all totems are
gathered together, and one of the main objects of which is the handing
on to the younger men of the knowledge carefully treasured up by the
older men of the past history of the tribe so far as it is concerned
with the totems and the Churinga.

On this occasion everything was under the immediate control of one
special old man, who was a perfect repository of tribal lore. Without
apparently any trouble or the slightest hitch he governed the whole
camp, comprising more than a hundred full-grown natives, who were taking
part in the ceremony. Whilst the final decision on all points lay in his
hands, there was what we used to call the “cabinet,” consisting of this
old man and three of the elders, who often met together to discuss
matters. Frequently the leader would get up from the men amongst whom he
was sitting, and apparently without a word being spoken or any sign
made, the other three would rise and follow him one after the other,
walking away to a secluded spot in the bed of the creek. Here they would
gravely discuss matters concerned with the ceremonies to be performed,
and then the leader would give his orders and everything would work with
perfect regularity and smoothness. The effect on the younger men was
naturally to heighten their respect for the old men and to bring them
<span id="page_281">p. 281</span> under the control of the latter. With
the advent of the white man on the scene and the consequent breaking
down of old customs, such a beneficial control exercised by the elder
over the younger men rapidly becomes lost, and the native as rapidly
degenerates. On the one hand the younger men do not take the interest in
the tribal customs which their fathers did before them, and on the other
the old men will not reveal tribal secrets to the young men unless they
show themselves worthy of receiving such knowledge.

After these few general remarks we may pass on to describe more in
detail certain of the ceremonies which will serve to illustrate the long
series.

The first phase of the proceedings was opened by the Alice Springs
natives performing the *Atnimokita* corrobboree, which occupied ten
evenings. As a mark of respect and courtesy it was decided by the
Alatunja of the group, after, as usual, consultation with the older men,
that this corrobboree should be handed over in a short time to the man
who took the leading part in the Engwura and who belonged to a more
southern group. When once this handing over has taken place, it will
never again be performed at Alice Springs. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123) As soon as the *Atnimokita* performance
was concluded, another called the *Illyonpa* was commenced, and this
also occupied ten nights. Two days after it had begun the old leader of
the Engwura went down to the ground which had been chosen—the
corrobborees mentioned taking place at a separate spot visited by men
and women alike—and digging up the loose, sandy soil he made a low mound
called the *Parra*, measuring about thirty feet in length, two feet in
width and one foot in height. It was ornamented with a row of small gum
tree boughs, which were fixed one after the other along the length of
the mound, and is said to represent a tract of country, but, despite
long inquiry, we have not

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

been able to find out what is the exact meaning of the word *Parra*. All
that the men could tell us was that it had always been made so during
the Engwura—their fathers had made it and therefore they did—and that it
was always made to run north and south, because in the Alcheringa the
wild cat people marched in that direction. On the level flat to the
western side of this *Parra* the sacred ceremonies forthwith began to be
performed.

When the *Illyonpa* corrobboree had come to an end, no more ordinary
dancing festivals were held until the close of the whole proceedings
some three months later. From this time onwards, and until the last act
of the Engwura is performed, the younger men who are passing through the
ceremony must separate themselves completely from the women, and are
entirely under the control of the older men. They must obey the latter
implicitly. Their days are spent either in hunting, so as to secure
food, the greater part of which is supposed to be brought in to the
older men who remain in camp, or in watching the ceremonies, or in
taking part in them under the guidance of the old men, and their nights
are spent on, or close to, the Engwura ground.

With the opening of the second phase, the performance of the sacred
ceremonies concerned with the totems began in earnest, and as
descriptive of this, we may relate what took place during the last eight
days of the five weeks which it occupied.

About ten o'clock on the morning of the first day it was decided to
perform a ceremony called the Quabara Unjiamba of Ooraminna. This is
concerned with certain women of the Unjiamba or Hakea totem, who in the
Alcheringa came down from the north and marched southwards as far as a
spot called Ooraminna, about twenty-five miles to the south of Alice
Springs. The head man of the local group is the owner of this ceremony,
and together with six Purula men and one Panunga man, he repaired to the
bed of the small creek, where they all sat down under the shade of a
small gum tree. The other men remained in various places round about the
Engwura ground, but no one came near to the place where the preparations
were being made.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

On occasions such as this every man carries about with him a small
wallet, which contains the few odds and ends needed for decoration in
the performance of the various ceremonies. The wallet consists of a
piece of the skin of some animal, such as one of the smaller marsupials,
with the fur left on, or else some flat strips of a flexible bark tied
round with fur string are used. In one of these wallets will be found a
tuft or two of eagle-hawk and emu feathers, bunches of the tail feathers
of the black cockatoo, some porcupine-grass resin, pieces of red and
yellow ochre and white pipe-clay, an odd flint or two, balls of human
hair and opossum fur string, a tuft or two of the tail tips of the
rabbit-kangaroo, and not least, a dried crop of the eagle-hawk filled
with down.

The men squat on the ground, and their wallets are leisurely opened out.
There is no such thing as haste amongst the Australian natives. On this
occasion the owner of the Quabara had asked his younger brother to
perform the principal part in the ceremony. He was a Purula man of the
Hakea totem, and he had also invited another man who was a Panunga of
the Achilpa or wild cat totem, to assist in the performance. The reason
why the latter man was asked, though he belonged neither to the same
moiety nor totem as those to which the owner of the ceremony did, was
simply that his daughter had been assigned as wife to the owner's son,
and therefore it was desired to pay him some compliment. After some
preliminary conversation, carried on in whispers, which had reference to
the ceremony, the performers being instructed in their parts, and also
in what the performance represented, a long spear was laid on the
ground. One or two of the men went out and gathered a number of long
grass stalks in which the spear was swathed, except about a foot at the
lower end which was left uncovered. Then each man present took off his
hair waist-girdle and these were wound round and round until spear and
grass stalks were completely enclosed, and a long pole, about six inches
in diameter and about eight feet in length, was formed. Then to the top
of it was fixed a bunch of eagle-hawk and emu feathers. When this had
been done one of the men by means of a sharp bit of flint—a splinter of
glass, if obtainable, <span id="page_284">p. 284</span> is preferred—cut
open a vein in his arm, which he had previously bound tightly round with
hair string in the region of the biceps. The blood spurted out in a thin
stream and was caught in the hollow of a shield, until about half a pint
had been drawn, when the string was unwound from the arm and a finger
held on the slight wound until the bleeding ceased. Then the down was
opened out and some of it was mixed with red ochre which had been ground
to powder on a flat stone. Four of the Purula men then began to decorate
the pole with alternate rings of red and white down. Each of them took a
short twig, bound a little fur string round one end, dipped the brush
thus made into the blood, and then smeared this on over the place where
the down was to be fixed on. The blood on congealing formed an excellent
adhesive material. All the time that this was taking place, the men sang
a monotonous chant, the words of which were merely a constant repetition
of some such simple refrain as, “Paint it around with rings and rings,”
“the *Nurtunja* of the Alcheringa,” “paint the *Nurtunja* with rings.”
Every now and again they burst out into loud singing, starting on a high
note and gradually descending, the singing dying away as the notes got
lower and lower, producing the effect of music dying away in the
distance. Whilst some of the men were busy with the *Nurtunja*, the
Panunga man taking no part in the work beyond joining in the singing,
another Purula man was occupied in fixing lines of down across six
Churinga, which had been brought out of the Purula and Kumara store for
the purpose of being used in the ceremony. Each of them had a small hole
bored at one end, and by means of a strand of human hair string passed
through this it was attached to the pole from which, when erect, the six
hung pendant. Of the Churinga the two uppermost ones were supposed to
have actually belonged to the two Hakea women who in the Alcheringa
walked down to Ooraminna. Of the remaining four, two belonged to women
and one to a man of the same totem, and the remaining one was that of a
man of the Achilpa totem.

The decorated pole which is made in this way is called a *Nurtunja*, and
in one form or another it figures largely <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> in the sacred ceremonies, especially in the case of those
which are associated with northern localities. Its significance will be
referred to subsequently.

As soon as the *Nurtunja* was ready, the bodies of the performers were
decorated with designs drawn in ochre and bird's down, and then, when
all was ready, the *Nurtunja* was carried by the Purula man to the
ceremonial ground, and there, by the side of the *Parra*, the two men
knelt down, the hinder one of the two holding the *Nurtunja* upright
with both hands behind his back. It is curious to watch the way in which
every man who is engaged in performing one of these ceremonies walks;
the moment he is painted up he adopts a kind of stage walk with a
remarkable high knee action, the foot being always lifted at least
twelve inches above the ground, and the knee bent so as to approach,
and, indeed, often to touch the stomach, as the body is bent forward at
each step.

The Purula man who had been assisting in the decoration now called out
to the other men who had not been present to come up. This calling out
always takes the form of shouting “*pau-au-au*” at the top of the voice,
while the hand with the palm turned to the face, and the fingers loosely
opened out is rapidly moved backwards and forwards on the wrist just in
front of the mouth, giving a very peculiar vibratory effect to the
voice. At this summons all the men on the ground came up at a run,
shouting as they approached, “*wh'a! wha! wh'r-rr!*” After dancing in
front of the two performers for perhaps half a minute, the latter got up
and moved with very high knee action, the *Nurtunja* being slowly bent
down over the heads of the men who were in front. Then the dancers
circled round the performers, shouting loudly “*wha! wha!*” while the
latter moved around with them. This running round the performers is
called *Wahkutnima*. Then once more the performers resumed their
position in front of the other men, over whose heads the *Nurtunja* was
again bent down, and then two or three of the men laid their hands on
the shoulders of the performers, and the ceremony came to an end. The
*Nurtunja* was laid on one side, and the performers, taking each a
little bit of down from it, pressed <span id="page_286">p. 286</span>
this in turn against the stomach of each of the older men who were
present. The idea of placing hands upon the performers is that thereby
their movements are stopped, whilst the meaning of the down being
pressed against the stomachs of the older men is that they become so
agitated with emotion by witnessing the sacred ceremony that their
inward parts, that is, their bowels, which are regarded as the seat of
the emotions, get tied up in knots, which are loosened by this
application of a part of the sacred *Nurtunja*. In some ceremonies the
*Nurtunja* itself is pressed against the stomachs of the older men, the
process receiving the special name of *tunpulilima*.

The whole performance only lasted about five minutes, while the
preparation for it had occupied more than three hours. As soon as it was
over the performers sat on the ground; the down was removed from their
bodies and preserved for future use and the *Nurtunja* was dismantled,
the hair string being carefully unwound and returned to its respective
owners.

The ceremony refers to two Alcheringa women of the Unjiamba or Hakea
totem. As they travelled they kept close to the tracks of one party of
Achilpa or wild cat men, but do not appear to have ever seen or come in
contact with the men, who were travelling in the opposite direction. It
is a remarkable fact that in some way or other the Achilpa and Unjiamba
totems seem to be connected together, but what the exact connection is
we have been unable to discover. The Unjiamba women referred to followed
as they travelled close by, but not actually along, the track of one of
the main Achilpa parties, and the two groups walked in opposite
directions. Again, very many of the Achilpa ceremonies refer to the men
eating Unjiamba, a feature which is not met with in the ceremonies of
any other totem, and it will further be noticed that in the ceremony
just described, out of six Churinga attached to the Nurtunja, no fewer
than five belonged to Unjiamba individuals.

When the ceremony was over there was a rest for an hour or two, and
then, early in the afternoon, two lots of Churinga were brought in from
the Panunga and Bulthara store to be <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
<span id="page_288">p. 288</span> examined. Men of all groups—about
fifteen in number—gathered together in the bed of the creek, with the
Churinga in the middle of the group. The first lot belonged to the
Achilpa of Ooraminna, the second to the Irritcha, or eaglehawk men of a
place called Undoolya, out to the east of Alice Springs. During the
examination certain of the younger men were present, and in this
instance the Churinga, which were bound up in parcels tied tightly round
with human hair string, were unpacked by the sons of the Alatunjas of
the two localities to which they respectively belonged. While this was
taking place the men sang as usual, pausing every now and then while
some old man leant over to whisper in the ear of some one opposite to
him. No loud talking was allowed, and every one looked as solemn as
possible. The Churinga having been at last unpacked—for in these
ceremonies everything is done with the utmost and, to the onlooker,
often exasperating deliberation—they were taken up one by one by the
Alatunja, in whose charge they were, and after a careful examination of
each he pressed them in turn against the stomach of some one or other of
the old men present. The man thus honoured held the Churinga, gazing
down upon it, while a whispered conversation was kept up with regard to
each one and its former possessor. Amongst them was one which was the
*Churinga nanja* of one of the wives of the Alatunja of the Alice
Springs group, and this was handed over to the woman's son for him to
carefully examine.

When the examination was complete they were all carefully wrapped up and
taken back to the store, and then preparations were made for another
ceremony. Previous to this, however, at a signal from the head man, all
the Purula and Kumara men had left the ground with the exception of two
old ones, who were the *Gammona* of the head man and who were especially
invited by him to stay and watch.

The Quabara to be performed was one associated with the *Ulpmerka* of
Quiurnpa, the latter being a group of men belonging to the Akakia or
plum tree totem; the men are called *Ulpmerka* because in the Alcheringa
they were, as will be explained in another chapter, left
uncircumcised—that is, <span id="page_289">p. 289</span> they remained
*Ulpmerka,* or boys. The materials having been opened out, singing
began, the burden being a constant repetition of the words “the sand
hills are good.” This Quabara was in the possession of the Alatunja of
Alice Springs, and he invited a man to perform it who was a tribal son
to himself, belonging to the Panunga division and to the Irriakura
totem. First of all the Alatunja's eldest son went over to where the man
sat and rubbed his forehead against the latter's stomach, then embraced
him round the neck and ended by rubbing his stomach against that of the
man in question. Then a Bulthara man came up, that is a tribal father,
and the same process of embracing was repeated. The meaning of this was
that the young man had expressed a sense of his unfitness to undertake
the duty, but when he <span id="page_290">p. 290</span> had once been
embraced in this way by men who were especially associated with the
ceremony it was impossible for him to refuse any longer. As soon as this
was over the Alatunja of Alice Springs at once went over to where he sat
and began to decorate his head. Twigs of a species of Cassia were fixed
on to the top of his head enclosing his hair, which was gathered into a
bunch so as to form, with the twigs, a long rounded structure about two
and a half feet in length, projecting upwards and slightly backwards on
the top of his head. The twigs were bound round and round with hair
string. The Alatunja of the Undoolya group, who was the father of the
performer, bled himself, the blood being taken on this occasion, as it
very often was, from the subincised urethra, which was probed with a
sharp pointed piece of wood. As the decorations proceeded—that is, while
the head-dress was being covered with a design in white and red down,
the men sitting around sang of the hair top-knot of Kukaitcha, the
latter being a celebrated man of the Alcheringa associated with the plum
tree totem, the top-knot having reference to the manner in which the
hair is worn previous to the boys passing through the ceremony of
circumcision.

“Yai yai Kukai

Ul lal arai

Yai yai Kukai

Yai yai Acheri

Malarai.”

Time after time some such simple refrain was repeated while the down was
fixed on to the performer's head-dress and body. When all was ready the
performer, preceded by an old man, walked in a crouching attitude along
the creek bed until he came opposite to the *Parra,* when he ran
straight across and squatted in front of and close beside it.

It was just sunset as he came on to the ground, and at the same moment
the arrival of a fresh contingent of natives from the south was
announced. They had come into camp on the other side of the river and
had, according to strict etiquette, sat down there for some little time
apart from the other men. By way of welcome a party of the natives with
spears, shields and boomerangs ran across to where they sat <span
id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span id="page_292">p. 292</span> and, with
the usual high stepping action, danced round and round them, brandishing
spears and boomerangs and shouting loudly; suddenly they turned, crossed
the river and came, still running, up the bank, threw their weapons on
one side amongst the bushes and, without stopping, came on and circled
round and round the performer, shouting *“wah! wah!”* After a short time
two Purula men went and sat down, one in front of and one behind the
performer; then a third came and, as he bent forward over the front one,
the three placed their hands on the shoulders of the performer and he
ceased the quivering and wriggling movements which he had been
executing, while the men danced round him. The performer then got up and
embraced the older men one after the other, this being done to assuage
their feelings of emotion.

The evening was spent, as it usually was, singing on the ground close to
the *Parra.* During all the first six weeks a <span id="page_293">p.
293</span> considerable length of time was always occupied during the
night in what was called “singing the ground.” The young men who were
passing through the Engwura for the first time stood up forming two or
three lines close behind one another, like lines of men in a regiment of
soldiers, and, led by one or two of the older men, either moved in a
long line parallel to the *Parra* mound, shouting *“wha! wha!”*
alternating this at intervals with a specially loud *“whrr-rr-rr,”* when
with one accord they bent forwards and, as it were, hurled the sound at
the *Parra,* or else they would sometimes rush closely round and round
the mound in a single line, shouting in just the same way. The noise was
deafening, and the loud *“wha,”* and still more penetrating cry of
*“whrr-rr-rr,”* could be heard a mile or two away echoing amongst the
bare and rocky ranges surrounding the Engwura ground. When this singing
was over—that was about midnight—they all lay down around their camp
fires, and for a <span id="page_294">p. 294</span> few hours there was a
welcome silence. Usually at night there were a few of the men awake
preparing, by the light of scattered fires, for ceremonies which often
took place in the dead of the night or else just before the day broke.

The morning of the second day was entirely occupied with the examination
of Churinga. Early in the afternoon the Quabara Iruntarinia Irritcha was
performed. This will serve as a good example of what is called an
Iruntarinia ceremony, that is, one which is supposed to have been
imparted to a special individual by the *Iruntarinia* or spirits. The
favoured person to whom this particular one had been shown was a
celebrated medicine man, or *Railtchawa*, the son of the Alatunja of an
Irritcha or eagle-hawk locality, but who was himself an Udnirringita or
witchetty grub man. The *Iruntarinia* can present Quabara to whomsoever
they choose to honour in this way, quite regardless of the recipient's
totem. The latter may retain possession of the ceremony himself or he
may pass it on, as a gift, to some other man, but in that case the
individual must be of the totem with which the ceremony is concerned.
Naturally the possession of such a ceremony is a mark of distinction,
and it also gives the possessor a peculiar advantage over others, not
only because he is so favoured by the spirits, but because he has
something in his possession which enables him to confer a favour on some
other man to whom he may decide to hand on the Quabara. On this occasion
the recipient had handed on the ceremony to his own father, who was the
head of the eagle-hawk group, and from whom, in course of time, it will
descend to an eagle-hawk son.

Two men were invited to perform, both of them being sons of the
Alatunja, and they were respectively of the eagle-hawk and emu totems.
Only Panunga and Bulthara men were present during the preparations. The
hair of each man was bunched up and, together with a conical crown of
Cassia twigs, was bound round and round with hair string. Then blood,
drawn in the usual way, was smeared over the front part of the
head-dress and across the body in the form of a broad band round the
waist and a band over each shoulder, the two uniting back and front.
Each band was <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span id="page_296">p.
296</span> about six inches broad, and had the form when the decoration
was complete of a solid mass of pink down, edged with a line of white.
Into the hair-girdle behind was fixed a large bunch of the black
feathers of the eagle-hawk, and into the top of each man's head-dress
were fixed three Churinga, decorated with close rows of down coloured
alternately red and white, each Churinga being about three feet in
length and decorated at its end with a tuft of eagle-hawk feathers. In
his mouth one man carried a small cylindrical mass, about eight inches
in length and two in diameter, made of grass surrounded with hair string
and covered with lines of down.

When the decoration was complete they came into the open and each of
them sat down on his haunches on the convex side of a shield, so that
they faced one another at a distance of about eight feet. Each man had
his arms extended and carried a little bunch of eucalyptus twigs in his
hands. They were supposed to represent two eagle-hawks quarrelling over
a piece of flesh which was represented by the downy mass in one man's
mouth. At first they remained squatting on their shields, moving their
arms up and down, and still continuing this action which was supposed to
represent the flapping of wings, they jumped off the shields and with
their bodies bent up and arms extended and flapping, began circling
round each other as if each were afraid of coming to close quarters.
Then they stopped and moved a step or two at a time, first to one side
and then to the other, until finally, they came to close quarters and
began fighting with their heads for the possession of the piece of meat.
This went on for some time and then two men stepped out from amongst the
audience and took away the Churinga, which were a great weight and must
have caused a considerable strain on the head, especially in the great
heat of the afternoon sun, for it must be remembered that it was now
well on into the summer. Then once more they began going round and round
each other flapping wings, jumping up and falling back just like
fighting birds, until finally they again came to close quarters, and the
attacking man at length seized with his teeth the piece of meat and
wrenched it out of the other man's mouth. The acting in this ceremony
was especially good, the actions <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> and
movements of the birds being admirably represented, and the whole scene
with the decorated men in front and the group of interested natives in
the background was by no means devoid of picturesqueness.

Later on in the afternoon there was performed the Quabara Unjiamba of
Ooraminna. In this ceremony, we again find, as in the one already
described, the close connection between the Unjiamba and Achilpa totems.
The two men who performed, and neither of whom belonged to the totems,
were <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> decorated each with a broad band
round the waist, and one passing over each shoulder and joining, back
and front, in the middle line. The area occupied by these bands was
first of all rubbed with grease and then with powdered wad, an ore of
manganese which gives, when used in this way, a peculiar pearl-gray
tint, which harmonises well with the chocolate-coloured skin and stands
out in strong contrast to the edging of white down which everywhere
margins the bands. Over each ear was suspended a tuft of the tail tips
of the rabbit-bandicoot. One of the two men carried a large Churinga on
his head, fixed into the usual helmet made of twigs bound round with
string. During the preparation the natives sang chants concerning the
*Kauaua* (a sacred pole about which there will be more said
subsequently) and referring also to the carrying round of the
*Nurtunja.*

Both of the performers represented Achilpa men and they sat down
immediately facing one another near to the *Parra*, the man carrying the
Churinga having a shield in front of him, and in his hands a few twigs
supposed to represent the flowering Hakea—that is the Unjiamba. These he
pretended to steep in water so as to make the decoction of Hakea flower
which is a favourite drink of the natives, and which the man sitting
opposite to him pretended to suck up with a little mop made of a twig
with fur string tied round it. While they did this the other men ran
round and round them shouting “*wha! wha!*” Suddenly, the man who had
been drinking sprang round so as to place his back just in front of the
other man, who then put the shield behind his back with his arms holding
it there, and the two for a few moments swayed from side to side
slightly raising themselves from their squatting position as they did
so. Those who were running round dropped out one by one until only three
were left and they then put their hands on the performers' shoulders and
the performance was at an end. The same ceremony was enacted about
eleven o'clock at night, and then after the usual “singing” of the
ceremonial ground the day's work came to a close.

On the morning of the third day the Quabara Achilpa of Urapitchera was
performed. This was a ceremony concerned <span id="page_299">p.
299</span> with a group of wild cat men who in the Alcheringa walked
across from south to north of the eastern side of the country now
occupied by the Arunta tribe; whilst doing so they camped for a time at
a spot called Urapitchera on the Finke River. The ceremony is now in the
possession of the Alatunja of the Imanda group of men of the emu totem
and he received it from his father who was a wild cat man. At the
request of the owner it was performed by an old Purula man who was the
head of the Elkintera, or large white bat totem, at a spot close to
Imanda which itself lies on the Hugh River. In this performance two
*Nurtunjas*, each of them <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> about ten
feet in length, were prepared. Unlike most of the *Nurtunjas* there was
no central support such as a spear, but the whole structure was made of
a very large number of flexible grass stalks bound round with hair
string and decorated with the usual rings of red and white down, so that
each of them was somewhat flexible. The performer was decorated with
lines and bands of down passing from his head along either shoulder and
then down the body as far as the knees. On the *Parra* ground the
*Nurtunjas* were arranged so that one end of each was under the man's
waist-girdle, while the other, ornamented with a bunch of eagle-hawk
feathers, rested on the ground, the two diverging from each other. Then
the other men were called up and began running round and shouting and
then all passed under the *Nurtunjas* which the performer lifted up for
the purpose, the men with their hands and shoulders helping to support
them, for they had been carried in that way in the Alcheringa. Finally,
the old Purula man to whom the ceremony belongs came up and embraced the
old performer, who was in fact about the oldest man upon the ground and
almost blind, but as full of energy as the youngest man present.

In the afternoon of the same day a remarkable ceremony was performed
which had no special relationship to the Engwura inasmuch as, though
owned by the head man of a particular totem—the Ullakuppera or little
hawk—it had no reference to either his or any other totem, but was a
performance representing the doings of certain *Kurdaitcha* men. The
description of it is therefore given in connection with that of the
*Kurdaitcha* custom to which it more properly belongs. We could not find
out why it was given during the Engwura at all, but it was evidently a
favourite one with the natives, by most of whom it seemed to be
well-known, and the opportunity was taken, while a large number were
gathered together, to show it to those who had not previously seen it.
It was repeated at a later date and was the only ceremony which was
performed which had no special significance as regards the Engwura.

Early on the morning of the fourth day a very special examination of
Churinga took place. Some years ago there <span id="page_301">p.
301</span> was a small group of Echunpa or large lizard men who lived
about twelve miles to the west of Alice Springs. Gradually the group
became extinct until finally no man was left to inherit and take care of
the sacred storehouse containing the Churinga belonging to the group.
Under these circumstances, the extinct group having consisted mainly of
Panunga and Bulthara men, a contiguous group which was *nakrakia* with
the extinct one, that is consisted mainly of the same moiety of the
tribe, entered into possession. The totem of this group <span
id="page_302">p. 302</span> was Unchalka, or little grub, and its head
man, as no other lizard men lived anywhere near, took charge of the
storehouse and of its contents. Some years later it chanced that the
wife of a man of the Alice Springs group conceived a child in the old
lizard locality and so, in the person of her son, the local Echunpa
group was resuscitated. The lizard man had now arrived at maturity and
advantage was taken of the Engwura to hand over to him, in the presence
of representatives of the tribe, the Churinga of his ancestors.

On the evening before, the head man of the Unchalka had sent out special
messengers to bring in the Churinga, and about nine o'clock in the
morning they brought them into camp and handed them over to their
custodian, who at once took them down into the creek where a number of
the older men were gathered together as well as some of the younger
ones, amongst whom was the man to whom they were to be handed over.
First of all, the Alatunja of the Unchalka totem and those of the two
important witchetty-grub groups, the one at Undoolya and the other at
Alice Springs, knelt over towards one another and held a lengthy
whispered conversation which was now and again shared in by other older
men in the group, the most solemn silence being, as usual, observed by
all the rest. The purport of this conversation was the holding of an
Echunpa or lizard ceremony as soon as the present business had been
carried through, so far, that is, as it was to be carried that day. When
this matter, and the performers, had been decided upon, the old Unchalka
man retired to the edge of the group. Then the Churinga were laid on
shields and small boughs cut from the gum tree under which they sat;
there were about sixty of them all together, and as soon as they were
all unpacked, the man to whom they were being handed over was called up
and took his seat along with the older men next to the Churinga. A long
conversation, again carried on in whispers and with much solemnity, then
ensued between the recipient and the two old men who told the former
what the Churinga meant and whom they had belonged to. When this was
over the new possessor rubbed his hands over the forehead of the
Alatunja of the Undoolya group, who was a very old man, and then
embraced him and having done <span id="page_303">p. 303</span> this went
down on his knees and rubbed the old man's stomach with his forehead. It
may be noted here that the deference paid to the old men during these
ceremonies of examining the Churinga is most marked; no young man thinks
of speaking unless he be first addressed by one of the elder men and
then he listens solemnly to all that the latter tells him. During the
whole time the presence of the Churinga seems to produce a reverent
silence as if the natives really believed that the spirits of the dead
men to whom they have belonged in times past were present, and no one,
while they are being examined, ever speaks in tones louder than a
whisper.

The old man just referred to was especially looked up to as an
*Oknirabata* or great instructor, a term which is only applied, as in
this case, to men who are not only old but are learned in all the
customs and traditions of the tribe, and whose influence is well seen at
ceremonies such as the Engwura where the greatest deference is paid to
them. A man may be old, very old indeed, but yet never attain to the
rank of *Oknirabata.*

When the young man had rubbed the stomach of the *Oknirabata*, the
latter went over to where the Alatunja of the Unchalka sat and did the
same to him in acknowledgment of the fact that he had safely kept the
Churinga. The reason for this action on the part of the *Oknirabata* lay
in the fact that he was the oldest *Oknia* or father of the young man.
Then he went to an old Okira or kangaroo man and did the same. The
territory of this man's group lay close to that of the Unchalka men, but
not being *nakrakia* with the extinct lizard men he and his people could
not go in and inherit the land. Still the local relationship, which
enters in a vaguely defined but unmistakable way into the customs
concerned with the totems, found on this occasion its expression in this
act of courtesy paid to the head of a neighbouring group by the father
on behalf on his son. The natives said that this was done to keep the
old kangaroo man from being jealous and unfriendly. As the handing over
of the Churinga was a matter of great importance it could not be
properly carried through at one sitting and so, after a long time had
been spent <span id="page_304">p. 304</span> in their examination, the
completion of the ceremony was postponed to another day.

The preparation for the lizard ceremony then began. The old *Oknirabata*
was to perform it, and after his head had been encased in a strong
helmet, the whole of this, as well as his face and the upper part of his
body and arms, were covered with a dense mass of white down, two half
rings of which also adorned the front of each thigh. A large bunch of
eagle hawk feathers was fastened behind into his waistband, and on his
head he carried no fewer than seven large Churinga belonging to the
totem, two of them being remarkable from the fact that they were curved
in shape like a boomerang. These were the only ones of this shape on the
Engwura ground, and they were evidently very old ones, <span
id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124) as the original pattern with which they
had been ornamented was almost entirely obliterated by the innumerable
rubbings to which they had been subjected in course of time. When
decorated the performer went at first some distance along the creek bed
so as to be out of sight of the other men, who assembled not far from
the *Parra* at a spot where they spread out a small patch of gum boughs.
Standing behind this they waited for a few minutes, after which the
lizard was seen in the distance throwing up clouds of dust as he came up
from his hiding place in the creek and approached the ground. He came on
slowly in a zig-zag course, stooping down and assuming a variety of
attitudes, always of course with the high knee action. The younger man,
to whom the Churinga were being handed over, now appointed two men to go
and meet him. This they did about thirty or forty yards away from the
group, after which the performer pretended every now and then to turn
back, whereupon the two men circled round him holding their arms up as
if to prevent him from going away while they cried out *“chrr-chrr,”*
and did their best to encourage him to come on to where the group of men
stood waiting. Gradually he came on, and, when close to, the men forming
the audience went to the boughs and spread them out as if inviting him
to sit down, which he did after a short time,

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

and then shouting *“wha! wha!”* they circled round him in the usual way.
The two men who went to meet him represent little birds called
*Thippa-thippa,* which tradition says are the descendants of Alcheringa
men who came and watched and ran round and round some lizard men who
were travelling along towards Simpson's Gap. The *Thippa-thippa* changed
into birds of the same name, who ever afterwards became the mates of the
lizard people.

The night was spent as usual singing on the ground.

On the morning of the fifth day we were introduced to a new form of
ceremony. As might have been expected amongst a tribe occupying such an
extent of territory as does the Arunta, there are certain features in
regard to the ceremonies which vary in different parts. Not only do the
Arunta extend in a north and south direction for more than three hundred
miles, but at their southern limit they are in contact with tribes whose
customs vary much from their own and in <span id="page_306">p.
306</span> which the social organisation is radically different. Where
two such tribes come into contact with one another each has a certain
influence upon the other, and thus we find that the southern Arunta have
gained certain things from their southern neighbours which are not found
in the north, and *vice versa.* We have already pointed out that the
*Nurtunja* in one form or another plays an important part in the sacred
ceremonies. When we come to the southern Arunta its place is taken to a
large extent by what is called the *Waninga.* This is a structure which
varies much in size and form, but consists essentially of a framework of
sticks which in its simplest form has the shape of a cross, and to which
are fixed lines of string. We will describe first the ceremony as
performed at the Engwura, and will then add a few general remarks on the
subject of the *Waninga.* On this occasion it was used in connection
with the Quabara Quatcha of Idracowra, that is a rain ceremony
associated with what is called by white men Chambers Pillar, not far
from the Finke River. Idracowra is a corruption of the native words
*iturka wura,* the native name for the pillar.

Two men, one a Purula the other a Bulthara, both of them belonging to
the emu totem, were decorated for the ceremony with white bands of down,
two on each side of the body. On the top of their heads each wore a
bunch of parings of gum tree wood smeared with human blood. The front
man had a freshly cut gum stick about two and a half feet in length with
the green bark still on, and, like the parings, smeared with blood. This
he carried across his shoulders, one hand holding it at either end. His
back was adorned with a bunch of eagle-hawk feathers fixed in to his
waist girdle. The other man, who walked immediately behind him, carried
the *Waninga,* which he grasped with both hands at the back of his neck.
The strain on his arms must have been very great, as it was carried in
an upright position. With particularly high knee action, and with their
bodies quivering, they came up out of the bed of the creek while the
audience sat on the ground by the side of the *Parra,* the front row of
men, who belonged to the southern district from which the *Waninga*
came, beating the ground with boomerangs. The performers <span
id="page_307">p. 307</span> advanced slowly for about thirty or forty
yards, stopping every now and then, until finally they came close to the
seated men. Then a Kumara man got up and took the *Waninga* away, and
placed it carefully on one side. The performers then simply walked up to
the group, sat down, and were pressed upon the shoulders in the usual
way.

In this instance the *Waninga* was made out of a long desert-oak spear
ten feet in length; at right angles to its length were fixed two sticks
about three feet in length, each of them at a distance of two and a half
feet from one end of the spear. Between the two, and running parallel to
the length of the spear, were strung tightly, and very close together,
lines of human hair-string. Each line took a turn <span id="page_308">p.
308</span> round the transverse stick at either end, and then passed off
in a slanting direction to the central spear round which it was passed,
and then ran back again to the transverse bar; from here it was carried
back along the length of the structure, between the two bars, close by
the side of the first line, and so on, time after time, until the whole
space between the two bars was filled in with closely-set parallel bands
of string. At either end the strands passing off to the central spear
formed a triangular-shaped structure. A certain number of lines forming
a band an inch and a half in width, and running all round, about the
same distance, within the margin, were made of opossum fur string
whitened with pipeclay, the same width of string on each side of it
being red-ochred, while the remainder was left in its normal black
colour. Tufts of the red-barred tail feathers of the black cockatoo were
attached to the upper end of the spear and to each end of the transverse
bars, and finally a number of bands of white down were attached in
roughly parallel lines across the length of the lines of string, little
masses of the same material covering the bases and tips of the feathers.
The whole structure took several hours to prepare, and showed no little
ingenuity and a considerable amount of artistic capacity on the part of
its makers.

The various parts of the *Waninga* have their different meanings, but it
must be remembered that the same structure will mean one thing when it
is used in connection with one totem and quite a different thing when
used in connection with another. This particular *Waninga* was
emblematic of the Quatcha, or water totem. The red string represented
thunder, the white band lightning, and the ordinary uncoloured string
was the rain falling. The white patches and bands of down naturally
represented clouds, while the red of the feathers and the blood smeared
on the parings of wood worn on the men's heads represented the masses of
dirty brown froth which often float on the top of flood waters.

This was the only occasion on which, during the Engwura, the *Waninga*
was used, the reason being that in perhaps the greater part of the
tribe, and certainly in the northern half, the *Nurtunja* is most
largely employed in totemic ceremonies <span id="page_309">p. 309</span>
with, it must be remembered, precisely the same significance as the
*Waninga,* that is, in each instance the *Waninga,* or the *Nurtunja,*
as the case may be, is emblematic of the particular totem with which the
ceremony being performed is associated. As we pass right into the south
the *Nurtunja* completely disappears and the *Waninga* takes its place.
At Charlotte Waters, for example, or Crown Point on the lower part of
the Finke River, no *Nurtunja* is ever used; when the rite of
circumcision is practised a *Waninga* is made, and after it has been
used in the performance of a sacred ceremony it is fixed up in the
ground and the novice embraces it. <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125)
Occasionally a kind of compound one is made in which a small one is
attached to the top of a larger one, in much the same way in which a
small *Nurtunja* is sometimes attached to the top of a larger one.

The use of the *Waninga* extends far south, right down, in fact, to the
sea coast at Port Lincoln, and it evidently passes out westwards, but
how far it is impossible to say. At Charlotte Waters various totems use
it, such as the Irrunpa or lizard (the equivalent of the Echunpa of the
north), Okira or kangaroo, Arunga or euro, and Quatcha or water. The
Irrunpa *Waninga* is similar in structure to that of the Quatcha, but
the parts have an entirely different significance; the projecting end
represents the head, the triangular part following this the neck, the
top transverse bar the fore limbs, the main part the body, the lower bar
the legs, and the bottom end of the spear the tail. Exactly as in the
case of the different marks on the Churinga, so in the *Waninga* the
different parts represent entirely different objects according to the
totem with which the particular one is associated.

In connection with this ceremony and the use of the *Waninga,* we
learned the following particulars with regard to the wanderings of
certain Okira, or kangaroo men, in the Alcheringa, which we insert here
to give some idea of the nature of the instruction with respect to the
doings of their ancestors in the Alcheringa, which is given by the old
men to the younger ones during the performance of the Engwura.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

Somewhere out from the far west there came two kangaroo men who carried
with them a large *Waninga*. They stayed for some time, first of all at
a spot close to Idracowra, at a water-hole called Umbera-wartna, and
there they formed an *Oknanikilla*, that is they deposited some of the
Churinga which they carried in the ground, and so left behind spirit
individuals of the kangaroo totem; then they walked on down the Finke
River to a place called Urpunna, where they erected their *Waninga* and
formed another *Oknanikilla*. Then, carrying the *Waninga*, they went
underground and crossed beneath the Lilla Creek which enters the Finke
from the west, and on the southern side they met a mob of kangaroos and
euros who came to look at them. Travelling on they came out of the
ground at a group of hills called by the natives Amanda, and probably
identical with what is now called Mount Watt, one of a group of silurian
sandstone hills which rise out of the level plains and sand hills about
forty-five miles to the south-west of the junction of the Finke and
Lilla. Here they rested for some time and formed an *Oknanikilla*. Then
they turned south-east, and travelling underground crossed beneath the
Wichinga (now called the Hamilton) creek, and then on under the Alberga,
until once more they emerged at Marpinna, where they formed an
*Oknanikilla*, and where also they opened veins in their arms and
allowed the blood to stream out over the ground, and so made a great
level clay plain which has remained to the present time. Then, after
going still further south and passing out of what is now the country of
the Arunta, they turned to the west and made a big circuit through the
sand hill country now occupied by a part of the Luritcha tribe, until
finally, turning north, they came to the George Gill Range, and crossed
this so as to reach a spot now called Tempe Downs, where they formed an
*Oknanikilla*. Then following this to its junction with the Palmer they
went a little way up the latter, and, together with their *Waninga*,
they ceased from wandering, and went down into a well-known water-hole
called Illara, where they stayed, forming an important *Oknanikilla* of
the kangaroo totem. The importance of the traditions relating to the
wanderings of the <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> Alcheringa ancestors
has already been pointed out in connection with the discussion of the
totems. It must be remembered that it is during the Engwura ceremony
especially that a knowledge of these matters is imparted by the elder to
the younger men, on whose memory the traditions are firmly fixed by
means, to a large extent, of the ceremonies, each one of which is
associated with some special spot and some special individual or group.

On the sixth day the ceremonies opened with one relating to *Ulpmerka*
men who belonged to the Inguitchika (a grass seed) totem of a place
called Imiunga, on the Jay River. This particular ceremony belonged to a
Purula man, who invited a Bulthara man, assisted by a Panunga, to
perform it; the former belonged to the witchetty-grub and the latter to
the emu totem. The Bulthara man was son of an Inguitchika woman, the
other performer being the son of a woman of the Illonka (little yam)
totem, the locality of which adjoined that of the former. The man to
whom the ceremony belonged <span id="page_312">p. 312</span> was
*Witia*, or younger brother, of the Inguitchika woman, and has charge of
her *Churinga nanja*.

For the performance two sticks were taken, each about four feet long;
when swathed in grass stalks and bound round with hair-string, each of
them was about nine inches in diameter. The ends were ornamented with
bunches of white and pink cockatoo feathers and eagle hawk. The two were
bound together tightly in the form of a cross, and each was further
ornamented with rings of down. The whole structure formed a *Nurtunja*.
During the performance the two men squatted down close to one another,
each carrying in his hand a small twig of gum tree, the *Nurtunja* being
fixed on to the head of the hinder of the two men, who simply swayed
their bodies about from side to side while the other men ran round and
round them, except two old men who squatted down to one side singing
about the walking about of the *Ulpmerka* men in the Alcheringa.

During the evening of this the sixth day, the men seated by the side of
the *Parra* began to sing about the *Kulchia* or fur armlets being bound
around the arms of the young men who were passing through the Engwura,
and also began singing about the *Kauaua*, or sacred pole, which was to
be erected later on.

On the seventh day an important Quabara of the *Ulpmerka* of Quiurnpa
was performed. In this there were seven performers, three of whom
represented boys who wore top-knots on their heads—the usual style of
doing a boy's hair. Two others, who represented an individual called
Kukaitcha, the leader of the *Ulpmerka*, wore decorated Churinga
fastened as usual into a head-dress, which was made of twigs bound round
with hair-string. One represented an *Ulpmerka* man, and wore a large
tuft of eagle hawk-feathers on his head, while the last man had an
enormous head-dress two feet six inches in height, made in the usual way
and decorated with broad bands of down. Through this was stuck a bent
stick about four feet in length, carrying at each end a tuft of
feathers, while from the head-dress were suspended four *Ulpmerka*
Churinga, two of them belonging to women and two to men.

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

Each of the performers was profusely decorated with bands of yellow
ochre, charcoal or wad, edged with down. The preparation for the
performance took between two and three hours, and was under the
superintendence of the Alatunja of Alice Springs, in whose charge at
present are all the Churinga belonging to this group of *Ulpmerka* men
of the plum tree totem. They will some day be handed over to the only
living representative of the totem, who is at present too young to
receive them.

During the preparations the men sang of putting twigs on to the head of
Kukaitcha, of the *Paukutta*, or top-knots of the boys, and of the
walking of the *Ulpmerka* in the Alcheringa. The man with the special
head-dress was supposed to represent a great Alcheringa Kukaitcha, and
the head-dress itself was a form of *Nurtunja*, which in this case
represents a plum tree, the stick which passed through it representing
the branches. When all was ready the performers divided into three sets.
One of the Kukaitchas went to a spot at the north-east end of the
ground; the man with the *Nurtunja* was led by the Alatunja up to the
*Parra*, beside which he squatted, while the other five went to the
north-west end of the ground. Of the latter the three representing boys
sat down in a line, two facing one way and one the other. At the end of
the line, where the first mentioned sat, stood one of the Kukaitchas
with two Churinga in his hands which he kept beating together, the idea
being that he was teaching the boys to sing. At the other end stood the
*Ulpmerka* man pretending to knock plums off a tree, which the boy in
front of him picked up and ate. When all the performers were ready in
their allotted places, the other men, who had meanwhile remained out of
sight in the bed of the creek, were called up on to the ground. They
were supposed to represent a mob of *Ulpmerka* men, and coming at a run
on to the ground they went first of all to the solitary Kukaitcha man
and danced, shouting, around him; then suddenly, accompanied by him,
they ran across to where the five men were arranged, acting as already
described. After the usual dancing, shouting, and laying-on of hands,
the whole party ran across to where the great Kukaitcha sat, and <span
id="page_314">p. 314</span> all joined in a dance round him while he
swayed about from side to side. The usual embracing of the old men by
the performers brought the ceremony to an end.

There is a curious tradition of the natives which is concerned with this
special group of *Ulpmerka* men, with which we were acquainted before
the Engwura took place, and with part of which this ceremony is
concerned. About fifteen miles to the S.S.E. of Alice Springs is a plum
tree totem locality. In the Alcheringa the totem included a number of
men who were designated *Ulpmerka* of the plum tree totem <span
id="page_315">p. 315</span> for the simple reason, as explained
elsewhere, that they had not been circumcised. In the same way it may be
remarked that we meet with *Ulpmerka* men of other totems such as the
grass seed. The plum tree *Ulpmerka* men had, so says tradition, only
two women amongst them, who both belonged to the bandicoot totem, and
had joined the *Ulmerka* party after wandering alone for some time over
the country. At first they were considerably alarmed at the *Ulpmerka*
men, but the latter made a large *Nurtunja*, and after the women had
been shown this, then, for some reason, they were no longer afraid. The
younger woman was then gorgeously decorated with down, a small, bluntly
conical *Nurtunja* was placed on her head, and the men then danced round
her shouting, *“wah! wah!”* Then she was taken and laid down by the side
of the large *Nurtunja*, which was fixed upright in the ground, and the
operation of *atna ariltha-kuma*, the equivalent ceremony to that of
*pura ariltha-kuma* as practised upon the men, was performed by means of
a large stone knife, after which all the men had access to her. The two
women were then taken to the camp of the Kukaitcha, who was the headman
of the local *Ulpmerka* men, and who claimed the women as his own, but
allowed the others to have access occasionally to the woman who had been
operated upon as just described. After a time a special messenger or
*Inwurra*, who was also named Kukaitcha, came down from the north—from
the country, as the natives say, of the *Quatcha alia*—that is the salt
water. He called the men to him and told them that they were to leave
their own country and follow him. Then he took the two women away from
the local Kukaitcha, and a start was made for the north. After
travelling as far as a place now called Wigley Springs, four miles to
the north of Alice Springs, the *Nurtunja* which they carried with them
was erected, and the elder of the two women was operated upon. All the
men as before had access to her; and the party remained at this spot for
some little time. Then they went on towards what is now Bond Springs,
close to which they camped, and here one man, a Kumara, was left behind.
His name was Kukaitcha, and at the present day his reincarnation is
living at Alice Springs. <span id="page_316">p. 316</span> and his
*Nanja* stone is a small block which arose to mark the spot where his
Alcheringa ancestor went down into the earth, leaving behind him his
spirit part in his Churinga. From this spot they went on to the Burt
Plain close to, and camped at, Allan Waters, after which they went up
into the sky and continued in a northerly course for some twenty-five
miles, camping at Umbaltna-nirrima, and here it is related that the
*Ulpmerka* played with pieces of bark just as boys do now. Travelling
on, they again performed *ariltha-kuma* on the younger woman, to whom,
by permission of Kukaitcha, all had access. The women always travelled
along with Kukaitcha, at a little distance to the side of the main
party. At Ulathirka one man, named Apallana, had intercourse without
permission with the younger woman, and accordingly he was killed, but,
though thus killed, his spirit part remained in his Churinga. At the
same spot a Purula man was left behind, and his descendant is now
living, but as yet he is only a young boy not initiated. Halting at
various places, they travelled northwards until at length they came to
the country of the salt water, where they remained ever afterwards.

The ceremony, which has been described as it was performed during the
Engwura, represents the *Ulpmerka* men of the south being collected
together round the Kukaitcha from the north prior to their accompanying
him. First of all there were two performances in which the *Ulpmerka*
men were shown dancing round their own Kukaitcha, who was the head of
the local group, and then all of them went and joined together
afterwards in dancing round the Kukaitcha from the north, signifying, as
it were, that they regarded him as the greater man and as their leader.

In the afternoon the Quabara Interpitna of a place called Uratinga on
the Finke River, between Henbury and Idracowra, was performed. The
Interpitna is a fish totem, the particular form being known locally as
the bony bream (*Chatoessus horni*), which is plentiful in the water
holes, such as the one at the spot known to white men as the Main camp,
with which the totem is associated. The possessor, and also in this case
the performer, of the Quabara was an old Panunga <span id="page_317">p.
317</span> man of the Obma or snake totem, who had inherited it from his
father. His hair was done up as usual, and the whole front of the
head-dress, as well as his face, was covered with a mass of white down,
above which stood out in strong contrast a large bunch of black
eagle-hawk feathers. His body was decorated with bands of charcoal,
edged with white down. Squatting on the ground, he moved his body and
extended his arms from his sides, opening and closing them as he leaned
forwards, so as to imitate a fish swelling itself out and opening and
closing its gills. Then he moved along, imitating by means of twigs in
his hands the action of a man driving before him, with boughs, the fish
in a small waterhole, just as the natives do. Four men, all from the
same southern locality as himself, but of different totems, squatted
down to one side of him singing, while one of them beat time with a
stick on the ground. Suddenly one of the latter jumped across and sat
down in front of him, gradually approaching <span id="page_318">p.
318</span> nearer and nearer, until he came close enough to put his
hands on the old man's shoulders.

Late on at night just before midnight another Quabara of the *Ulpmerka*
of Quiurnpa was performed, representing three men eating plums.

On the eighth day a Quabara of the Irriakura totem of a place called
Oknirchumpatana, on what is now called Soda Creek, was performed. The
Irriakura is a favourite food of the natives, and is the name given to
the bulbs of *Cyperus rotundus.* One man only was decorated, but the
design was a very quaint and striking one. A ring of grass stalks bound
firmly together with human hair-string, and measuring about two feet in
diameter, was made and covered with white down. On the shoulders,
stomach, and arms of the performer were drawn broad bands of a light
pearl colour, made by rubbing on some wad; each band was edged with
white down. The hair was done into a head-dress, all the front of which,
as well as the man's face, was covered with down. Then, when he had been
thus ornamented, the ring was put over his head and, rested slanting
forwards and downwards, on his shoulders. A large number—not less than a
hundred—little bunches of the red-barred tail feathers of the black
cockatoo had been prepared, half of them tipped with red and half with
white down, and these were stuck into the ring so as to radiate outwards
all round it, while numbers of others were stuck into his head-dress and
beard. The dark chocolate colour of the skin, the black and red
feathers, the gray bands on the body and the white and pink down,
together with the light yellow sand on which the man sat, formed a
striking mixture of colours which was by no means unpleasing, and the
whole decoration was extremely quaint. The man seated himself in front
of a dozen bunches of cockatoo tail feathers, decorated with down, just
like those on his person, and arranged in a straight line in the sand.
Then, moving slightly from side to side, he scooped at intervals, and
one after another, the bunches up with both hands, pausing every now and
then to look around him and to put himself into the most ridiculous
attitudes, as if he heard something which frightened him, but could not
tell what or where it was. The tufts of <span id="page_319">p.
319</span> feathers represented the growing Irriakura, which he was
supposed to be gathering. The other men sat to one side watching the
performance and singing about Unatunpika, the name of the man whom the
ceremony represented, and which was also in this instance the Churinga
name of the performer. With the uprooting of the last of the tufts, the
ceremony came to an end, and then the ring called *Ilyappa* was taken
off and put in turn on the heads of the other Irriakura men who were
present, and also on those of other of the older men. The tradition
connected with this performance is as follows. In the Alcheringa,
Unatunpika sat <span id="page_320">p. 320</span> down eating Irriakura
at the other side of Oknirchumpatana, when suddenly he heard the
*Irripitchas,* that is the ringnecked parrots, who were the mates of the
Irriakura men, cry out to warn him that a mob of strange men were coming
up. He dropped his Irriakura and came across to Oknirchumpatana. The
mob, which also consisted of Irriakura men, left two individuals there,
whose reincarnations are now living in the form of two individuals,
called respectively Irrturinia and Irriakura. Then they went on to the
other side of the Jay River, to a place called Unbanjun, where they
formed the *Oknanikilla,* from which sprung, amongst others, some of
whom are women, an individual now living at Alice Springs, called
Tukerurnia.

After midnight there was performed the Quabara Akakia (plum-tree), of a
place called Iliakilia in the Waterhouse Range. This was acted by four
men, who were respectively Purula and honey-ant totem; Purula and
“native pheasant”; Purula and white bat; Bulthara and *illonka*. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126) First of all one man came up to where
the audience was sitting by the *Parra.* He pretended to knock plums
down and to eat them, and after a short time he sat down amongst the
audience. Then two others came up, one of whom remained standing, while
he knocked down imaginary plums, which were eaten by the other man, who
seated himself on the ground. This over, both of the men went and joined
the audience, and the fourth man came and went through the same pretence
of knocking down and eating plums. The interesting point in connection
with this and many other very similar ceremonies lies in the fact that
the Alcheringa ancestors are so frequently represented as freely eating
the animal or plant, from which they derive their totemic name. <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127) At the present time the conditions with
regard to this point are markedly different from those which evidently
obtained in times past.

During the evening close by the *Parra* a dense group was formed with
the older men standing in the centre, and the

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

younger ones on the outside. In this way, as closely packed as possible,
they sang together for some two hours, the group as a whole swaying
backwards and forwards without ceasing. Then towards midnight they all
sat down, and in this position, still closely packed together, they
continued singing till between one and two o'clock, when the old men
decorated the heads of the younger men with twigs and leaves of an
Eremophila shrub. This material, which is worn from now till the end of
the ceremonies, is called *wetta.* The old men who did the decorating
were *Urliara,* who had already been through the Engwura, and to each
one of these, four or five young men had been allotted by the presiding
old man. There were no restrictions as to the relationship of the men;
for example, a Panunga man could take charge of men of any class, but,
until the end of the ceremonies, the young men who <span
id="page_322">p. 322</span> had been decorated became *ab-moara* to the
man who had charge of them, and he to them. They might not either speak
to, or in the presence of, the old man without his permission.

From this time on right to the very end of the ceremonies the young men
were called collectively by the name *Illpongwurra*, which means not
smeared with grease or colour; and with this the second phase of the
Engwura came to an end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[278:1](ntca10.htm#fr_121) Attention may be
drawn to the fact that in the Arunta tribe the men who are supposed to
be able to hold intercourse with the spirits and to receive these
ceremonies from them are quite distinct from those usually called
“medicine-men,” and that both the former and the latter are
characteristically the reverse of nervous or excitable in temperament.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[279:1](ntca10.htm#fr_122) In the case of names
such as this which are in ordinary use, and are indicated on maps, we
retain the accepted spelling, though this word, for example, as
pronounced by the natives, should be spelt Urüminna.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[281:1](ntca10.htm#fr_123) Mr. Roth has
described this same handing on of corrobborees from group to group in
the case of the Queensland tribes, and, as he has already pointed out,
the result is that the words are, as a general rule, quite
unintelligible to the performers, the corrobboree performed on any
occasion having probably originated in a distant tribe speaking a
different language. For a full description of one of these ordinary
dancing corrobborees, the general features of which are much the same
over the whole continent, Mr. Roth's work may be consulted.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[304:1](ntca10.htm#fr_124) Amongst many hundred
Churinga examined we have only seen five of this shape, and, curiously,
all of them belonged to a lizard totem.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[309:1](ntca10.htm#fr_125) Ceremonies in which
the *Waninga* is used are described in connection with the rite of
*Lartna,* Chapter VII.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[320:1](ntca10.htm#fr_126) *Illonka* is the
fruit of a species of Marsdenia.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[320:2](ntca10.htm#fr_127) The performers in
each ceremony represent, of course, individuals of the totem with which
the ceremony is concerned. In this instance each of the four men
represented, for the time being, a plum-tree man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Initiation Ceremonies (Continued) the Engwura
Ceremony (Concluded)](ntca11)
