[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca05)  [Next](ntca07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

## Chapter IV The Totems

**Every individual is born into some totem—Variations in the
significance of the totems in different parts of Australia—Totems of the
Urabunna tribe—The child takes the mother's totem—Totems of the Arunta
tribe—No relationship of necessity between the totem name of the child
and that of the father and mother—Marriage not regulated by
totem—Examples of totem names as they exist in particular
families—Though differing much from one another in many points, there is
a fundamental unity in customs, sufficient to indicate the origin of all
Australian tribes from ancestors who practised certain customs which
have been developed along different lines in different
localities—Ceremonies of the Engwura serving to show the way in which
each individual acquires his or her totemic name—The Alcheringa
times—The ancestral members of certain totemic groups restricted wholly,
or almost so, to members of one moiety of the tribe—The wanderings of
certain groups of Alcheringa ancestors, each of whom carried one or more
sacred Churinga, with each of which is associated the spirit part of an
individual—Where the Churinga are deposited there local totem centres
are formed, the native name of which is *Oknanikilla*—Each *Oknanikilla*
is associated with one totem, and when a child is born it is one of the
spirit individuals resident at a particular spot which goes inside a
woman, and therefore its totem is the totem of the spirits associated
with that spot—Examples of how a child gets its totemic name—Totem never
changes, but the class may—The totems are local in their distribution.**

EVERY individual of the tribes with which we are dealing is born into
some totem—that is, he or she belongs to a group of persons each one of
whom bears the name of, and is especially associated with, some natural
object. The latter is usually an animal or plant; but in addition to
those of living things, there are also such totem names as wind, sun,
water, or cloud—in fact there is scarcely an object, animate or
inanimate, to be found in the country occupied by the natives which does
not gives its name to some totemic group of individuals.

Much has been written with regard to the totems of the Australian
natives since the time when Grey first described them under the name of
Kobong, which, it must be remarked, is only of local application in
certain parts of the west, the <span id="page_113">p. 113</span> word
being entirely unknown over the greater part of the continent. As might
have been expected, when we take into account the vast area of land over
which the Australian tribes are spread, and the isolation by physical
barriers of those occupying the Central area from the tribes living on
the east and west, there have arisen, in respect to the totemic system,
variations of so important a character that it is by no means possible
to describe that which is found in any one tribe or group of tribes and
regard it as typical of Australian natives generally. The Arunta,
Ilpirra and Luritcha tribes, and there is little doubt but that the same
holds true of other tribes to the north, such as the Waagai, Iliaura,
Bingongina, Walpari, and Warramunga, differ in important respects from
the tribes which either now do, or formerly did, inhabit the east and
south-eastern parts of the continent, and to whom nearly all our
knowledge of totems in Australia has been confined. Between these
central and the southern and south-eastern tribes a sharp line can be
drawn, so far as their totemic systems are concerned; indeed it looks
very much as if somewhere a little to the north-west of Lake Eyre we had
a meeting-place of two sets of tribes, which migrated southwards,
following roughly parallel courses, one across the centre of the
continent, while the other followed down the course of the main streams
on the east, and then turned slightly northward on the west side of Lake
Eyre; or, possibly, in their southern wanderings, part of this eastern
group spread round the north, and part round the south end of the lake
(Fig. 1).

We find, so far as their organisation is concerned, a sharply marked
line of difference between the Urabunna tribe, the members of which are
spread over the country which lies to the west and north-west of Lake
Eyre, and the Arunta tribe, which adjoins their northern boundary. The
Urabunna tribe is associated with the migration along the eastern side,
while the Arunta is the most southern of the Central tribes.

In the Urabunna and the adjoining Dieri tribe, as well as in those which
spread northwards on the east side of Lake Eyre towards the borders of
Queensland, and in others who lived along the shores of Spencer Gulf and
along the southern <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> coast, we find that
descent is counted in the female line. In the Urabunna, for example, we
find that all the members of the tribe are divided into two classes,
which are called respectively Matthurie and Kirarawa, and each of these
again contains a certain number of totems, or, as the natives call them,
*Thunthunie*. The same totem name is only to be found in one or other of
the two classes, but not in both. Thus, for example, among the Matthurie
we find the following totems—Inyarrie (wild duck), Wutnimmera (green
cicada), Matla (dingo), Waragutie (emu), Kalathura (wild turkey), Guti
(black swan); whilst amongst the Kirarawa are such totems as Kurara
(cloud), Wabma (carpet snake), Kapirie (lace lizard), Urantha (pelican),
Kutnichilie (water-hen), Wakala (crow). <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

Now not only must a Matthurie man take as wife a Kirarawa woman, but he
must only take one of some particular totem. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md) Thus a wild duck Matthurie man marries a
snake Kirarawa woman, a cicada marries a crow, a dingo a water-hen, an
emu a rat, a wild turkey a cloud, and a swan a pelican. Every child,
male or female, of a wild duck Matthurie man belongs to the class
Kirarawa, and to the totem snake to which his mother belonged. Thus in
every family the father belongs to one class and totem, while the mother
and all the children belong to another. We have already dealt at length
with certain aspects of the social organisation of the Urabunna tribe,
and enough has now been said to show that it is a typical example of one
of the many Australian tribes in which the totem of the child is simply
determined by that of the mother.

Passing northwards from the Urabunna into the Arunta tribe, we are
brought into contact with a very different organisation, but with one
which, in regard to the class names, is typical of tribes which occupy
an area extending north and south for some 800 miles, and east and west
for perhaps

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

between 200 and 300. We find also essentially the same system in tribes
inhabiting other parts of Australia, such as the Turribul, living on the
Maryborough river in Queensland. <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md)
Without entering here into details, which will be fully explained
subsequently, we may say that, so far as the class is concerned, descent
is counted in the male line. The totem names are, however, at first
sight decidedly perplexing. Just as in the Urabunna tribe, every
individual has his or her totem name. In the first place, however, no
one totem is confined to the members of a particulars class or subclass;
in the second place the child's totem will sometimes be found to be the
same as that of the father, sometimes the same as that of the mother,
and not infrequently it will be different from that of either parent;
and in the third place there is no definite relationship between the
totem of the father and mother, such as exists in the Urabunna and many
other Australian tribes—in fact perhaps in the majority of the latter.
You may, for example, examine at first a family in which the father is a
witchetty grub and the mother a wild cat, and you may find, supposing
there be two children, that they are both witchetty grubs. In the next
family examined perhaps both parents will be witchetty grubs, and of two
children one may belong to the same totem, and the other may be an emu;
another family will show the father to be, say, an emu, the mother a
plum-tree, and of their children one may be a witchetty grub, another a
lizard, and so on, the totem names being apparently mixed up in the
greatest confusion possible.

We give below the actual totem names of five families, selected at
random, who are now living in the northern section of the Arunta tribe,
and these may be taken as accurately representative of the totem names
found in various families throughout the tribe. After making very
numerous and as careful inquiries as possible, always directly from the
natives concerned, we can say that every family shows the same features
as these particular examples do with regard to the totems, the names of
the latter varying, of course, from family to family and in different
parts of the country, certain

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

totems predominating in some, and others in other parts. You may, for
example, find yourself in one district of more or less limited area and
find one totem largely represented; travelling out of that district, you
may meet but rarely with that particular totem until you come into
another and perhaps distant part, where—it may be 40 or 50 miles away—it
again becomes the principal one. The reason for, or rather the
explanation of, this curious local distribution of totem names, as given
by the natives, will be seen presently.

Family 1. Father, little hawk. Wife No. 1, rat; daughter, witchetty
grub. Wife No. 2, kangaroo; no children. Wife No. 3, lizard; two
daughters, one emu, the other water.

Family 2. Father, eagle-hawk. Wife No. 1, Hakea flower; no children.
Wife No. 2, Hakea flower; four sons, who are respectively witchetty
grub, emu, eagle-hawk, elonka; two daughters, both witchetty grubs.

Family 3. Father, witchetty grub. Wife No. 1, lizard; two sons, one
lizard, the other witchetty grub. Wife No. 2, lizard.

Family 4. Father, emu. Wife, munyeru; two sons, one kangaroo, the other,
wild cat; one daughter, lizard.

Family 5. Father, witchetty grub. Wife, witchetty grub; two sons, one,
kangaroo, the other, witchetty grub; one daughter, witchetty grub.

Taking these as typical examples of what is found throughout the whole
tribe, we can see that while, as already stated, marriages are strictly
regulated by class rules, the question of totem has nothing to do with
the matter either so far as making it obligatory for a man of one totem
to marry a woman of another particular one, or so far as the totem of
the children is concerned. The totem name of the child does not of
necessity follow either that of the father or that of the mother, but it
may correspond to one or both of them. Whether there ever was a time
when, in the Arunta and other neighbouring tribes, marriage was
regulated by totem it is difficult to say. At the present day it is not,
nor can we find any evidence in the full and numerous traditions
relating to the doings of their supposed ancestors which affords
indications of a time when, as in the Urabunna tribe, a man might only
marry a woman of a totem different from <span id="page_117">p.
117</span> his own. In their curious totem regulations, the Arunta and
Ilpirra tribes agree, as we know from personal observation, while we
have reason to believe that large and important tribes living to the
north of them—viz. the Kaitish, Warramunga, Waagai, Iliaura, Bingongina
and Walpari—are in accord with them on all important points. The
difference in this respect between the tribes whose customs and
organisation are now described, and those of other tribes which have
been dealt with by able and careful investigators, such as Grey, Fison,
Howitt, Roth and others, will serve to show that various tribes and
groups of tribes, starting doubtless from a common basis, but isolated
from one another during long periods of time by physical barriers, have
developed along different lines. Except, perhaps, in the extreme north
and north-east, Australia has had for long ages no intercourse with
outside peoples, and such as it has had has only affected a very small
and insignificant coastal fringe of the continent, and even there the
influence has been but very slight. What we have to deal with is a great
continental area, peopled most probably by men who entered from the
north and brought with them certain customs. We are not here concerned
with the difficult question of exactly where the ancestors of the
present Australian natives came from. The most striking fact in regard
to them at the present day is that over the whole continent, so far as
is known, we can detect a community of customs and social organisation
sufficient to show that all the tribes inhabiting various parts are the
offspring of ancestors who, prior to their migrating in various
directions across the continent, and thus giving rise to groups
separated to a great extent from one another by physical barriers,
already practised certain customs and had the germs of an organisation
which has been developed along different lines in different localities.

The class and totem systems, variously modified as we now find them in
different tribes, can only be adequately accounted for on the hypothesis
that, when the ancestors of the present natives reached the country,
they spread over it in various directions, separated into local groups,
and developed, without the stimulus derived from contact with outside
<span id="page_118">p. 118</span> peoples, along various lines, each
group retaining features in its customs and organisation such as can
only be explained by supposing them all to have had a common
ancestry. <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63.md)

However, to return to the totems of the Arunta. It was while watching
and questioning closely the natives during the performance of the
Engwura ceremony—a description of which will be found in a later
chapter—that we were able to find out the way in which the totem names
of the individuals originate and to gain an insight into the true nature
of their totemic system.

The Engwura ceremony, which forms the last of the initiatory rites
through which the Arunta native must pass before he becomes what is
called *Urliara*, or a fully developed native, admitted to all the most
sacred secrets of the tribe, consisted in reality of a long series of
ceremonies, the enacting of which occupied in all more than four months.
Those with which we are here concerned were a large number, between
sixty and seventy altogether, which were connected with the totems and
were performed under the direction of the old men, who instructed the
younger men both how to perform them and what they represented.

The native name for these ceremonies is Quabara, <span
id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_64.md) and each one is known as a Quabara of a
certain totem associated with a particular spot. Thus we have, for
example, the Quabara Unjiamba of Ooraminna, which means a ceremony of
the Unjiamba or Hakea flower totem of a place called Ooraminna; the
Quabara Achilpa of Urapitchera, which means a ceremony of the wild cat
(a species of *Dasyurus*)

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

totem of a place called Urapitchera on the Finke River; the Quabara
Okira of Idracowra, which means a ceremony of the kangaroo totem of a
place called Idracowra on the Finke River, or, to speak more correctly,
of a special spot marked by the presence of a great upstanding column of
sandstone, called by white men Chamber's pillar, of the native name for
which, Idracowra is a corruption; the Quabara Unchichera of Imanda,
which means a ceremony of the frog totem of a spot called by the natives
Imanda, and by the white men Bad Crossing on the Hugh River. Each
ceremony was thus concerned with a special totem, and not only this, but
with a special division of a totem belonging to a definite locality,
and, further, each ceremony was frequently, but by no means always, in
the possession of, and presided over by, an old man of the totem and
locality with which it was concerned. It will shortly be seen that the
totems are strictly local, but that we have what may be called local
centres of any one totem in various districts of the wide area over
which the Arunta tribe is scattered. For our present purpose, which is
the explanation of the way in which each individual gets his or her
totemic name, the following general account will suffice.

The whole past history of the tribe may be said to be bound up with
these totemic ceremonies, each of which is concerned with the doings of
certain mythical ancestors who are supposed to have lived in the dim
past, to which the natives give the name of the “Alcheringa.”

In the Alcheringa lived ancestors who, in the native mind, are so
intimately associated with the animals or plants the name of which they
bear that an Alcheringa man of, say, the kangaroo totem may sometimes be
spoken of either as a man-kangaroo or as a kangaroo-man. The identity of
the human individual is often sunk in that of the animal or plant from
which he is supposed to have originated. It is useless to try and get
further back than the Alcheringa; the history of the tribe as known to
the natives commences then.

Going back to this far-away time, we find ourselves in the midst of
semi-human creatures endowed with powers not possessed by their living
descendants and inhabiting the same <span id="page_120">p. 120</span>
country which is now inhabited by the tribe, but which was then devoid
of many of its most marked features, the origin of which, such as the
gaps and gorges in the Macdonnell Ranges, is attributed to these
mythical Alcheringa ancestors.

These Alcheringa men and woman are represented in tradition as collected
together in companies, each of which consisted of a certain number of
individuals belonging to one particular totem. Thus, for example, the
ceremonies of the Engwura dealt with four separate groups of Achilpa or
wild cat men.

Whilst every now and then we come across traditions, according to which,
as in the case of the Achilpa, the totem is common to all classes, we
always find that in each totem one moiety <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) of the tribe predominates, and that,
according to tradition, many of the groups of ancestral individuals
consisted originally of men or women or of both men and women who all
belonged to one moiety. Thus in the case of certain Okira or kangaroo
groups we find only Kumara and Purula; in certain Udnirringita or
witchetty grub groups we find only Bulthara and Panunga; in certain
Achilpa or wild cat a predominance of Kumara and Purula, with a smaller
number of Bulthara and Panunga.

At the present day no totem is confined to either moiety of the tribe,
but in each local centre we always find a great predominance of one
moiety, as for example at Alice Springs, the most important centre of
the witchetty grubs, where, amongst forty individuals, thirty-five
belong to the Bulthara and Panunga, and five only to the other moiety of
the tribe.

These traditions with regard to the way in which the Alcheringa
ancestors were distributed into companies, the members of which bore the
same totem name and belonged, as a general rule, to the same moiety of
the tribe, are of considerable importance when we come to consider the
conditions which now obtain with regard to totems. It is not without
importance to notice that the traditions of the tribe point back to a
time when, for the most part, the members of

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

any particular totem were confined to one moiety of the tribe, in face
of the fact that at the present day it seems to be a characteristic
feature of many tribes—such as the Urabunna, which are in a less highly
developed state than the Arunta, Ilpirra and certain other tribes of
Central Australia—that the totems are strictly confined to one or other
of the two moieties of the tribe, and that they regulate marriage. At
the same time it may again be pointed out that the totems in no way
regulate marriage in the tribes mentioned, and, further still, we can
find no evidence in any of the traditions, numerous and detailed as they
are, of a time when marriage in these tribes was ever regulated by the
totems.

If now we turn to the traditions and examine those relating to certain
totems which may be taken as illustrative of the whole series, we find
that they are concerned almost entirely with the way in which what we
may call the Alcheringa members of the various totems came to be located
in various spots scattered over the country now occupied by the tribe
the members of which are regarded as their descendants, or, to speak
more precisely, as their reincarnations. We will take as examples the
following totems—Achilpa or wild cat, Unjiamba or Hakea flower,
Unchichera or frog, and Udnirringita or witchetty grub. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_66.md)

In the Alcheringa there appear to have been four companies of wild cat
men and women who, tradition says, appeared first in the southern part
of the country. It has been already pointed out that, in the native
mind, the ideas of the human and animal nature of these individuals are
very closely associated together. Starting from the south out to the
east of Charlotte Waters, one of these companies, consisting in this
case of Bulthara and Panunga individuals, marched northwards, keeping as
they did so considerably to the east of the River Finke. A second and
larger party, consisting of Purula and Kumara individuals, came from the
south-west and, at a place not far from Henbury on the Finke River,
divided into two parties. One of them crossed the Finke and went on
northwards to the Macdonnell Ranges, which were traversed

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

a little to the east of Alice Springs, and then passed on northwards.
The other half, forming the third party, followed up the Finke for some
distance, crossing it at a spot now called Running Waters, after which
the Macdonnell Ranges were traversed some twenty or twenty-five miles to
the west of Alice Springs, and then the party passed on to the north in
the direction of Central Mount Stuart. The fourth party, consisting of
Purula and Kumara individuals, started from far away to the south-east,
and travelled northwards, crossing the Range at Mount Sonder, and
continued its course northwards, so says tradition, until it reached the
country of the salt water.

The principal traditions with regard to the Unjiamba or Hakea flower
totem refer to the wanderings of certain women. In one account, two
women of this totem are described as coming from a place about 35 miles
to the north of Alice Springs, where they had a sacred pole or
*Nurtunja*. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md) Starting southwards,
they travelled first of all underground, and came out at a place called
Arapera. Here they spent their time eating Unjiamba. Then leaving here
they took their sacred pole or *Nurtunja* to pieces and travelled
further on until they came to Ooraminna, in the Macdonnell Ranges, where
there is a special water-hole close beside which they sat down and died,
and two great stones arose to mark the exact spot where they died. In
their journey these two women followed close by the track taken by one
of the Achilpa parties, but did not actually come into contact with the
latter, which was travelling in the opposite direction.

In addition to these traditions of the wanderings of various companies
of men and women belonging to different totems, we meet with others
which refer to the origin of special individuals, or groups of
individuals, who did not wander about but lived and died where they
sprang up. Thus, for example, an Inarlinga or “porcupine” (Echidna) man
is supposed to have arisen near to Stuart's waterhole on the Hugh River,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

while at the Emily Gap, near to Alice Springs, tradition says that
certain witchetty grubs became transformed into witchetty men, who
formed a strong group here, and who were afterwards joined by others of
the same totem, who marched over the country to the Gap.

Each of these Alcheringa ancestors is represented as carrying about with
him, or her, one or more of the sacred stones, which are called by the
Arunta natives Churinga, <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md) and each of
these Churinga is intimately associated with the idea of the spirit part
of some individual. Either where they originated and stayed, as in the
case of certain of the witchetty grub people, or else where, during
their wanderings, they camped for a time, there were formed what the
natives call *Oknanikilla*, each one of which is in reality a local
totem centre. At each of these spots, and they are all well known to the
old men, who pass the knowledge on from generation to generation, a
certain number of the Alcheringa ancestors went into the ground, each
one carrying his Churinga with him. His body died, but some natural
feature, such as a rock or tree, arose to mark the spot, while his
spirit part remained in the Churinga. At the same time many of the
Churinga which they carried with them, and each one of which had
associated with it a spirit individual, were placed in the ground, some
natural object again marking the spot. The result is that, as we follow
their wanderings, we find that the whole country is dotted over with
*Oknanikilla*, or local totem centres, at each of which are deposited a
number of Churinga, with spirit individuals associated with them. Each
*Oknanikilla* is, of course, connected with one totem. In one part we
have a definite locality, with its group of wild cat spirit individuals;
in another, a group of emu; in another, a group of frog, and so on
through the various totems; and it is this idea of spirit individuals
associated with Churinga and resident in certain definite spots that
lies at the root of the present totemic system of the Arunta tribe.

As we have said, the exact spot at which a Churinga was

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

deposited was always marked by some natural object, such as a tree or
rock, and in this the spirit is supposed to especially take up its
abode, and it is called the spirit's *Nanja*. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md)

We may take the following as a typical example of how each man and woman
gains a totem name. Close to Alice Springs is a large and important
witchetty grub totem centre or *Oknanikilla*. Here there were deposited
in the Alcheringa a large number of Churinga carried by witchetty grub
men and women. A large number of prominent rocks and boulders and
certain ancient gum-trees along the sides of a picturesque gap in the
ranges, are the *Nanja* trees and rocks of these spirits, which, so long
as they remain in spirit form, they usually frequent. If a woman
conceives a child after having been near to this gap, it is one of these
spirit individuals which has entered her body, and therefore, quite
irrespective of what the mother's or father's totem may chance to be,
that child, when born, must of necessity be of the witchetty grub totem;
it is, in fact, nothing else but the reincarnation of one of the
witchetty grub people of the Alcheringa. Suppose, for example, to take a
particular and actual instance, an emu woman from another locality comes
to Alice Springs, and whilst there becomes aware that she has conceived
a child, and then returns to her own locality before the child is born,
that child, though it may be born in an emu locality, is an Udnirringita
or witchetty grub. It must be, the natives say, because it entered the
mother at Alice Springs, where there are only witchetty grub spirit
individuals. Had it entered her body within the limits of her own emu
locality, it would as inevitably have been an emu. To take another
example, quite recently the lubra or wife of a witchetty grub man, she
belonging to the same totem, conceived a child while on a visit to a
neighbouring Quatcha or water locality, which lies away to the east of
Alice Springs, that child's totem is water; or, again, an Alice Springs
woman, when asked by us as to why her child was a witchetty grub (in
this instance belonging to the same totem as both of its parents), told
us that one day she was taking a drink

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

of water near to the gap in the Ranges where the spirits dwell when
suddenly she heard a child's voice crying out, “*Mia, mia!*”—the native
term for relationship which includes that of mother. Not being anxious
to have a child, she ran away as fast as she could, but to no purpose;
she was fat and well favoured, and such women the spirit children
prefer; one of them had gone inside her, and of course it was born a
witchetty grub. <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md)

The natives are quite clear upon this point. The spirit children are
supposed to have a strong predilection for fat women, and prefer to
choose such for their mothers, even at the risk of being born into the
wrong class. We are acquainted with special, but somewhat rare cases, in
which a living man is regarded as the reincarnation of an Alcheringa
ancestor whose class was not the same as that of his living
representative. At Alice Springs there is a man who is an Uknaria
belonging to the lizard totem, and is regarded as the reincarnation of a
celebrated Purula lizard man of the Alcheringa. The spirit child
deliberately, so the natives say, chose to go into a Kumara instead of
into a Bulthara woman, and so the man was born Uknaria instead of
Purula. Though the class was changed, the totem could not possibly be.

Such examples could be multiplied indefinitely; but these, which may be
taken as typical ones, will serve to show that, though at first sight
puzzling, yet in reality the totem name follows a very definite system,
if once we grant the premises firmly believed in by the Arunta native.

One point of some interest is brought out by this inquiry into the
origin of the totem names, and that is that, though the great majority
of any one totem belong to one moiety of the tribe, yet there may be,
and in fact always are, a certain number of members who belong to the
other moiety. Just as in the Alcheringa, all the witchetty grub men were
Bulthara and Panunga, so at the present day are the great majority of
their descendants who inhabit the local areas in which the mythical
ancestors formed witchetty totem centres. So, in

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the same way, all the Alcheringa emu ancestors were Purula and Kumara,
as now are the great majority of their descendants, but, owing to the
system according to which totem names are acquired, it is always
possible for a man to be, say, a Purula or a Kumara and yet a witchetty,
or, on the other hand, a Bulthara or a Panunga, and yet an emu.

Two things are essential—first a child must belong to the totem of the
spot at which the mother believes that it was conceived, and, second, it
must belong to the moiety of the tribe to which its father belongs. Its
totem never changes, but its class may. Once born into a totem, no
matter what his class may be, a man, when initiated, may witness and
take part in all the sacred ceremonies connected with the totem, but,
unless he belong to the predominant moiety, he will never, or only in
extremely rare cases, become the head man or Alatunja of any local group
of the totem. His only chance of becoming Alatunja is by the death of
every member of the group who belongs to the moiety to which the
Alcheringa men belonged.

What has gone before will serve to show what we mean by speaking of the
totems as being local in their distribution. The whole district occupied
by the Arunta, and the same holds true of the Ilpirra and Kaitish
tribes, can be mapped out into a large number of areas of various sizes,
some of which are actually only a few square yards in extent, while
others occupy many square miles, and each of which centres in one or
more spots, for which the native name is *Oknanikilla*—a term which may
be best rendered by the phrase “local totem centre.” Each of these
represents a spot where Alcheringa ancestors either originated or where
they camped during their wanderings, and where some of them went down
into the ground with their Churinga, or where they deposited Churinga.
In any case the Churinga remained there, each one associated with a
spirit individual, and from these have sprung, and still continue to
spring, actual men and women who of necessity bear the totem name of the
Churinga from which they come.

We shall, later on, deal in greater detail with the traditions which are
concerned with the wanderings of the ancestors of <span id="page_127">p.
127</span> the local totem groups, and also with certain points of
importance, such as the various ceremonies connected with the totems and
the relationship existing between the individual and his totem. It will
be evident from the general account already given that the totemic
system of the Arunta and other Central Australian tribes differs in
important respects from those of other tribes which have hitherto been
described. It is based upon the idea of the reincarnation of Alcheringa
ancestors, who were the actual transformations of animals and plants, or
of such inanimate objects as clouds or water, fire, wind, sun, moon and
stars. To the Australian native there is no difficulty in the assumption
that an animal or a plant could be transformed directly into a human
being, or that the spirit part which he supposes it to possess, just as
he does in his own case, could remain, on the death of the animal,
associated with such an object as a Churinga, and at some future time
arise in the form of a human being.

The account which the Arunta native gives of the origin of the totemic
names of the various members of the tribe is to him a perfectly feasible
one. What gave rise in the first instance to the association of
particular men with particular animals and plants it does not seem
possible to say. The Arunta man accounts for it by creating a series of
myths, according to which he is the direct descendant of the animal or
plant, and weaves in and around these myths details of the most
circumstantial nature.

We shall have to return to the question of the totems after certain of
these myths of the Alcheringa have been related; meanwhile it may be
said that, though different in certain respects from that of other
Australian tribes, yet the totemic system of the Arunta shows us the one
essential feature common to all totemic systems, and that is the
intimate association between the individual and the material object, the
name of which he bears.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[114:1](ntca06.htm#fr_60.md) The organisation of
the Dieri tribe, as well as its marriage customs, have been described by
Mr. Howitt in his monograph “On the Organisation of Australian Tribes,”
*Trans. R. S. Vict.*, vol. i., pt. 2, 1889., p. 124, which may be
regarded as embodying generally our knowledge of the organisation of
Australian tribes up to the present day.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[114:2](ntca06.htm#fr_61.md) See in connection with
this the footnote on p. 60.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[115:1](ntca06.htm#fr_62.md) Howitt. *op. cit*. p.
102.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[118:1](ntca06.htm#fr_63.md) The evidence in favour
of this is strikingly shown in regard to the details of the ceremonies
concerned with the knocking out of teeth. In some parts of the continent
this is retained as the important initiation rite, while in other parts
it has lost this significance, and yet in all cases agreement in
important details shows the common origin of the custom. Further
evidence in regard to this will be dealt with in connection with the
account of the ceremonies attendant on the knocking out of teeth.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[118:2](ntca06.htm#fr_64.md) This is not a
corruption of the word corrobboree, which is a term used only,
originally, by a tribe of the eastern coast, but now generally by whites
to describe the ordinary dancing ceremonies, which are entirely
different from the sacred ceremonies of the Arunta and other tribes. The
word Quabara belongs to the Arunta tongue. Corrobboree is a word which
in many parts has been adopted by the natives after hearing the white
men use it.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[120:1](ntca06.htm#fr_65.md) As stated in
connection with the description of the organisation of the tribe, the
latter can be divided into two moieties, one comprising the Panunga and
Bulthara, and the other the Purula and Kumara, or the equivalents of
these.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[121:1](ntca06.htm#fr_66.md) A detailed account of
the wanderings of these ancestral groups is given in Chapters X. and XI.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[122:1](ntca06.htm#fr_67.md) Various forms of
*Nurtunja* will be described in the account of the Engwura ceremony.
Each consists of a central support, made most often of one or more
spears and wound round with human hair string, which is then decorated
with down.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[123:1](ntca06.htm#fr_68.md) This Churinga is the
equivalent of the bull-roarer or whirler of other authors. It has such a
special significance amongst these tribes that we shall use the local
name.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[124:1](ntca06.htm#fr_69.md) Further details with
regard to this, and the relationship of the spirit to the *Nanja*, are
given in Chapter XV.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[125:1](ntca06.htm#fr_70.md) Spirit children are
also supposed to be especially fond of travelling in whirl-winds, and,
on seeing one of these, which are very frequent at certain times of the
year, approaching her, a woman will at once run away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Churinga or Bull Roarers of the Arunta and Other
Tribes](ntca07.md)
