[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca19)  [Next](ntca21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_561">p. 561</span>

## Chapter XVIII Myths Relating to Sun, Moon, Eclipses, Etc.

**The sun regarded as female, the moon as male—Tradition with regard to
the origin of the sun—Sacred ceremony connected with the sun totem—Myths
with regard to the moon—Names applied to phases of the moon—The evening
star a woman whose *Nanja* stone lies to the west of Alice
Springs—Eclipses associated with *Arungquiltha*—The Magellanic
clouds—Pleiades.**

THROUGHOUT the Arunta tribe the sun, which is called *Alinga* or
*Ochirka*, is regarded as female and the moon as male. At Alice Springs
there is a tradition that in the Alcheringa the sun came out of the
earth at a spot now marked by a large stone in the country of the Quirra
or bandicoot people at Ilparlinja, about thirty miles north of Alice
Springs. It was in the form of a spirit woman, accompanied by two other
Panunga women, who were sisters and were called *Ochirka*, just as the
sun itself is. The descendants of these two women are both now alive,
though one of them, when undergoing reincarnation, having chosen an
Appungerta mother, is now an Ungalla. We have before drawn attention to
the fact that the spirit individual is regarded as free to enter any
woman, though as a general, but by no means invariable, rule, as shown
in the present instance, a woman of the right division is selected.

The elder of the two women is represented as carrying with her an
*Ambilyerikira*, or newly-born child. Leaving the women at Ilparlinja
the sun ascended into the sky, and has continued to do so every day,
though at night time it pays a visit to the old spot whence it rises in
the morning. In that spot it may be actually seen at night time by very
gifted persons such as clever medicine men, and the fact that it cannot
be seen by ordinary persons only means that they are not gifted with
<span id="page_562">p. 562</span> sufficient power, and not that it is
not there. The women remained in the country of the bandicoot people, by
whom however they were not seen, being very careful to hide themselves,
and these two women gave rise to a local centre of the sun totem to
which they belonged.

The sun is regarded as having a definite relationship to each individual
member of the various divisions. Thus to a Bulthara it is *Uwinna*, to a
Panunga it is *Ungaraitcha*, to a Kumara *Mia*, and to a Purula man
*Unawa*—terms which simply imply that it is regarded as belonging to the
Panunga division, as did the spirit individual whom it represents.

The following ceremony called the *Quabara Alinga* of Ilparlinja is
associated with the two women and the newly-born child left at
Ilparlinja by the sun when she came out of the earth at that spot in the
Alcheringa. The performers were two old men who were brothers, one being
a Panunga of the lizard totem and the other a Panunga of the bandicoot
totem. Their father was a bandicoot man and their sister is the living
representative of one of the two women with whom the ceremony is
concerned. The two performers, while decorating, were assisted by an old
Panunga man and several Purula and Kumara men of the same locality, and
during the decorating they sang of the *Ambilyerikira*, The performers
sat facing each other; the lizard man representing the elder woman, held
between his thighs an oblong bundle made of grass and hair-string and
decorated with alternate red and white circles of down. This represented
the child. From his head hung long strings, made of many strands of
fur-string and covered with rings of down with a bunch of tail-tips at
the end. These strings were supposed to represent the kidneys and fat of
the bandicoot upon which the women fed. The bandicoot man represented
the younger sister and carried on his head a weighty, disc-shaped bundle
made of twigs, which were covered with many yards of hair and fur-string
and decorated with a design of alternate red and white circles of down.
This was supposed to represent the sun itself. The performance consisted
of the usual quivering and swaying about of the bodies of the two men,
while the others present ran round. When it was over the head-dress
<span id="page_563">p. 563</span> <span id="page_564">p. 564</span> was
removed and pressed against the stomach of all the Panunga and Bulthara
men, but not against any of the other moiety, though several were
present. It was then handed back to the old man who had worn it during
the ceremony, and the latter called up a young Ungalla man of the
locality, who had not been present at the decorating, and, while telling
him about the woman, kept the head-dress pressed up against the young
man's stomach.

THE MOON

 

The following two myths refer to the moon which, as above stated, is
regarded as of the male sex, and is spoken of as *Ertwa Oknurcha*, or a
big man, its name being *Atninja*.

The first of these describes how, before there was any moon in the
heavens, a man of the Anthinna or opossum totem died and was buried, and
shortly afterwards arose from his grave in the form of a boy. His people
saw him rising and were very afraid and ran away. He followed them
shouting, “Do not be frightened, do not run away, or you will die
altogether; I shall die but shall rise again in the sky.” He
subsequently grew into a man and died, reappearing as the moon, and
since then he has continued to periodically die and come to life again;
but the people who ran away died altogether. When no longer visible it
is supposed that the moon man is living with his two wives who dwell far
away in the west.

The second myth describes how in the Alcheringa a black-fellow of the
opossum totem carried the moon about with him in a shield as he went out
hunting for opossums to eat. All day long he kept it hidden in a cleft
in the rocks. One night another blackfellow of the Unchirka, a seed
totem, came up by chance to where he saw a light shining on the ground.
This proved to be the moon lying in the man's shield, which he had
placed on the ground while he climbed up a tree in search of an opossum
which he had seen in the branches. The Unchirka man at once picked up
the shield and the moon in it and ran away with them as hard as he
could. The opossum man came down from the tree and ran after the thief,
but he <span id="page_565">p. 565</span> had got such a start that he
could not catch him. When he found that pursuit was hopeless and that he
could not get the moon back again, he was very angry and shouted out
loudly that the thief should not keep the moon, but that the latter was
to go up into the sky and give light to every one at night time. Then
the moon went up out of the shield into the sky and there it has
remained ever since.

The following distinctive names are applied to the different phases of
the moon—

The new moon is *Atninja quirka utnamma*.

Half moon is *Atninja quirka iwuminta*.

Three-quarter moon is *Atninja urterurtera*.

Full moon is *Atninja aluquirta*.

THE EVENING STAR

 

The name of the evening star is Ungamilia. Amongst the natives of the
Alice Springs district the evening star is supposed to have been a
Kumara woman in the Alcheringa who had a *Nurtunja* and lived alone. She
is associated with a large white stone which arose at a place near to
what is now called Temple Bar—a gap in the Macdonnell Ranges—to mark the
spot where she went into the earth and left behind, along with her
Churinga, her spirit part. Every night the evening star is supposed to
go down into this stone which lies away to the west of Alice Springs. It
is situated in the middle of a strip of country which belongs to the big
lizard totem. If a woman believes that she conceives a child when at
this stone, then the child belongs to the Ungamilia or evening star
totem, but if it be conceived anywhere in the adjoining country, even
close at hand but not actually at the stone, then it is an Echunpa or
big lizard. Ungamilia is supposed to have fed in the Alcheringa upon
*Owadowa*, a kind of grass seed, just as did the group of lizard people
amongst whom she dwelt. There is, as usual, a special performance
connected with this woman which is now in the possession of an Uknaria
man of the lizard totem, the woman's Churinga being kept in the
storehouse at Simpson's Gap which belongs to the lizard totem. <span
id="page_566">p. 566</span> Ungamilia has at the present time a living
descendant, and during the Engwura the ceremony was performed by the man
in whose possession it now is.

ECLIPSES, ETC.

 

Eclipse of the sun is called *Ilpuma*, and is attributed to the presence
therein of *Arungquiltha*, the general term used in reference to an evil
or malignant influence, which is sometimes regarded as personal and at
other times as impersonal. This particular form of *Arungquiltha* is
supposed to be of the nature of a spirit individual living away to the
west who has the power of assuming the form of any animal. The natives
have a very great dread of eclipses, they have naturally no idea of the
distance away of the sun, believing it to be close to the earth, and the
visible effects of *Arungquiltha* so close at hand, and so patent, cause
them great fear. They believe that the eclipse is caused by the periodic
visits of the *Arungquiltha*, who would like to take up his abode in the
sun, permanently obliterating its light, and that the evil spirit is
only dragged out by the medicine men who on this occasion withdraw the
*atnongara* stones from their bodies and throw them at the sun while
singing magic chants—always with success.

The Magellanic clouds they regard as endowed with *Arungquiltha*, and
believe that they sometimes come down to earth and choke men and women
while they are asleep.

Mushrooms and toadstools they will not eat, believing them to be fallen
stars and endowed with *Arungquiltha*.

The Pleiades are supposed to be women who in the Alcheringa lived at a
place called Intitakula, near to what is now called the Deep Well. They
went up into the sky and there they have remained ever since.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Clothing, Weapons, Implements, Decorative
Art](ntca21.md)
