[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca16)  [Next](ntca18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

## Chapter XV the Iruntarinia and Arumburinga, or Spirit Individuals

**The spirit part of an Alcheringa individual and the *Nanja* tree or
rock—From the *Nanja* issues a second spirit, which is the
*Arumburinga*—The spirit individuals are collectively the
*Iruntarinia*—They are aggregated into local groups just as the living
members of the tribe are—When a spirit goes into a woman there remains
the *Arumburinga* which is its double—Relationship between an individual
and his *Arumburinga*—When a man dies his spirit is called
*Ulthana*—This goes finally to the *Nanja* spot and joins the
*Arumburinga*—Certain gifted individuals can see the
*Iruntarinia*—Habits of the *Iruntarinia*—Carrying off women—Presenting
sacred ceremonies to particular men—Native feeling with regard to
them.**

IN the Arunta tribe there is a firm belief in the existence of spirit
individuals, between whom and the individual members of the tribe there
exists a very definite relationship.

As we have already seen when dealing with the Churinga, every individual
is supposed to be the reincarnation of an Alcheringa being. Now these
Alcheringa beings are very closely indeed associated with the animals or
plants whose name they bear; indeed, some of them are regarded as having
remained in the form of animals, such, for example, as the celebrated
kangaroo called Ultainta. We can distinguish three forms of Alcheringa
individuals, (1) those who were the direct transformations of animals or
plants into human beings; (2) those who were at first *Inapertwa*, and
who were transformed into men and women by the *Ungambikula*; and (3)
those who, like the kangaroo mentioned, were never actually transformed
into human beings, but were endowed with powers not possessed by the
ordinary animal, and were practically animal-men. In all cases the
Alcheringa individuals were possessed of powers far greater than those
<span id="page_513">p. 513</span> exercised by living men; they could
travel on, or above, or beneath the ground; by opening a vein in the arm
each of them could flood whole tracts of country or cause level plains
to arise; in rocky ranges they could make pools of water spring into
existence or could make deep gorges and gaps through which to traverse
the ranges, and, where they planted their sacred poles, there rocks or
trees arose to mark the spot. In regard to one point of fundamental
importance they all agreed—each of them carried about some sacred
object, a stick or stone called Churinga, with which was associated
their spirit part. When, as happened to all of them sooner or later,
they died and went into the earth, that Churinga remained behind and
along with it the spirit part. At the same time there always arose some
natural object, a rock or tree, to mark the spot where the Alcheringa
being went into the earth, and this natural object was henceforth the
*Nanja* rock or tree of the spirit of that particular individual whom it
represented. From that *Nanja* there issued another spirit being whom
the natives speak of as the *Arumburinga* of that particular individual.
The spirit of each Alcheringa individual, when resident in the Churinga,
is thus closely associated with, indeed watched over by, an
*Arumburinga*, so that at each *Oknanikilla*, or local totem centre, we
have a group of what are called the *Iruntarinia*, each of whom is
either a spirit associated with a Churinga or else the *Arumburinga* of
one of these spirits.

The *Iruntarinia* are especially given to wandering during the summer
time, as they do not like the cold of the winter nights; in fact, during
the latter period they spend most of their time in underground caves,
where are streams of running water and perpetual sunshine, the two great
desiderata of the Arunta native, as the one implies a plentiful food
supply, and the other the warmth of which, being himself fond, he
naturally supposes that the spirits are so too. Each local group has its
group of *Iruntarinia* who are supposed to be associated with that
special locality and its inhabitants, and of course bear the name of the
Alcheringa individuals with whom they are each one associated, that is,
the *Iruntarinia* are aggregated in local totemic groups just as <span
id="page_514">p. 514</span> the living members of the tribe are. Close
to Alice Springs is an ancient hollow tree which is supposed to form a
favourite entrance of the *Iruntarinia* of that district to the caves,
which, according to native belief, stretch out for many miles
underground.

When a spirit individual goes into a woman there still remains the
*Arumburinga*, which may be regarded as its double, and this may either
dwell along with the *Iruntarinia*, of whom it is of course one, or may
at pleasure follow the spirit which is within the woman, or may attend
the woman's husband as he goes out hunting. The *Iruntarinia* are,
indeed, supposed to have their likes and dislikes as regards the human
members of the group to which they belong. Some men who are popular
amongst them will often be followed as they go out hunting by perhaps
two or three of the spirit people who will assist them by driving prey
towards them. A man's *Arumburinga* is not, however, supposed to watch
over him continuously, but only in a more or less general kind of way.
The idea in this respect is a vague one; but if, say, to take a special
example, a man be out hunting and has his eye fixed on his prey, and for
some reason, apparently without any cause, he suddenly looks down and
sees a snake just where he was about to tread, then he knows at once
that his *Arumburinga* is with him and prompted him to look down
suddenly. The *Arumburinga* can of course travel over long distances
with ease, and though they spend most of their time at the *Nanja* tree
or rock, still if their human representative lives far away, as he may
do, they will frequently visit him, and if he be gifted with the power
of seeing spirits, will make themselves visible to him, or if not, then
they sometimes send him a message through a man who is thus gifted.

When a man or woman dies and the body is buried, there remains the
spirit part or *Ulthana*, that is, practically what may be called the
equivalent of the ghost of the dead person, which is supposed to haunt
the burial place and at night time to come into the camp, or it may go
back to its old *Nanja* rock or tree; but at all events for a period it
is supposed to spend a considerable time either around the grave or in
the <span id="page_515">p. 515</span> camp. The name *Ulthana* is given
to the spirit until such time as the *Urpmilchima* ceremony has been
performed and it has ceased to regularly haunt the camp and burial
ground. The *Ulthana* is supposed to be capable, like other spirits, of
hurting its enemies, and the sure sign of an attack by one of them is
the presence of human teeth in the body of the victim. Medicine men will
sometimes extract these, which are regarded as an infallible indication
of an attack by an *Ulthana*.

Finally, when all the mourning ceremonies have been carried out, the
*Ulthana* is supposed to leave the grave and to return to its *Nanja*,
where it rejoins and lives along with its *Arumburinga*. After a time it
gets itself another Churinga, with which it becomes associated, just as
before it was associated with the Alcheringa Churinga, and then, after
the lapse of some time, but not, it is supposed, until even the bones
have crumbled away, it may once more be born again in human form.

To sum up the Arunta belief we have (1) the spirit part of an Alcheringa
being in connection with a Churinga; (2) the *Arumburinga* which arises
from the *Nanja* tree or rock, which marks the spot where the Alcheringa
being went into the earth; and (3) the *Ulthana* or spirit part of the
dead man or woman, and which is, in reality, identical with (1). The
*Arumburinga* is changeless and lives for ever; the spirit part of the
Alcheringa individual also lives for ever, but from time to time
undergoes incarnation.

There are certain ideas with regard to the spirits or *Iruntarinia* with
which we may conveniently deal here.

In addition to the medicine men, who have the power of seeing and
communicating generally with the *Iruntarinia*, there are others to whom
this privilege is granted. It is believed that, so say the natives,
children who are born with their eyes open, or, as it is called, *alkna
buma* (*alkna*, eye; *buma*, open), have this power when they arrive at
maturity, provided always that they grow up sedate, for the
*Iruntarinia* much dislike scoffers, frivolous people, and chattering
men and women, and will not show themselves to such on any account. Men
and women who are what is called irkun <span id="page_516">p. 516</span>
oknira (*irkun*, chattering; *oknira*, much) are supposed to annoy the
spirits. Children who are born with the eyes closed, *alkna bunga*,
cannot communicate with the spirits when they grow up unless they become
medicine men.

In general appearance the *Iruntarinia* are supposed to resemble human
beings, but they are always youthful looking, their faces are without
hair, and their bodies are thin and shadowy. They are fond of decorating
themselves with down or *undattha*, of which they are supposed to have
unlimited supplies, some of which, as it is highly prized amongst the
natives, they every now and again present to specially favoured
individuals.

As a general rule they only go about at night time, and only make
themselves visible when men or women are alone. They are fond of
prowling about the camp, and sometimes, when successful in evading the
notice of the camp dogs, who have the gift of seeing them at all times,
they steal hair and fur string, or other material, which after a time is
as mysteriously returned to its owner as it disappeared in the first
instance. It is, so the natives say, no uncommon thing for a man to wake
in the morning, or even after a sleep in the middle of the day, and find
that his spare string has disappeared. He looks around for tracks, but
finds none, and at once concludes that the *Iruntarinia* have been
visiting him. He must not be angry or else he would offend them, and,
moreover, he feels that his *Arumburinga*, who has most likely taken the
string, needed it for some special purpose, and will return it safely
when done with. Sooner or later he will awake to find it by his side.
What may be the real meaning of this belief it is difficult to see,
unless, what is not by any means impossible, the explanation lies in the
fact that one of the so-called *Iruntarinia* men has cunningly taken the
articles, and then after a time returned them, his object being to keep
up the belief in the existence of the spirits, owing to his supposed
power of interviewing whom he is held in considerable respect.

The spirits kill and eat all manner of game, but always uncooked, for
they are not supposed to have any fires, and not seldom they steal game
which has been wounded, but not <span id="page_517">p. 517</span> killed
on the spot, by men. For instance a kangaroo which has been speared but
not killed will perhaps run away out of sight of the hunter, who tracks
it up for some time and then loses all trace of it, and when this is so
he knows that the *Iruntarinia* have taken it.

It is a matter of tradition that now and again they have carried off
women who have wandered too far away from their camp after dark; in
fact, it is not considered safe for a woman to go about too much alone,
as there is always the danger of the *Iruntarinia* seizing her and
carrying her away to be imprisoned in the depth of a cave. This fear,
which is ever present with the women, acts as a wholesome check upon
their wandering about alone too much. Not very long ago at a place
called Undoolya, a woman strayed some distance from her husband's camp
in the dusk, and he was only just in time, when attracted by her cries,
to prevent her being carried off by the *Iruntarinia*, who had seized
upon and were dragging her away when he came upon the scene.

There is a tradition that long ago, before any of the oldest men now
living were born, a party going to the south from the Macdonnell Ranges
was met at the Edith Range, near to Ooraminna water-hole, about
twenty-five miles distant from Alice Springs, by a host of
*Iruntarinia*, who drove the party back with great slaughter.

The *Iruntarinia* are also supposed to possess a number of Churinga,
which are of both wood and stone, and occasionally they present one or
two to specially favoured individuals. The men amongst the natives who,
in addition to the medicine men, can communicate with them are held in
considerable esteem, and to some of them the spirits impart sacred
ceremonies. An example of one of these ceremonies, which is associated
with the eagle-hawk totem, is described in connection with the Engwura.
Another very characteristic *Iruntarinia* ceremony may be described
here, as it is concerned with one of the important features in regard to
the character of the spirits and their relation to men. This particular
ceremony was shown to a medicine man of the witchetty grub totem by the
*Iruntarinia* of a Hakea tree totem, for, as we have already said, the
*Iruntarinia* naturally <span id="page_518">p. 518</span> have their
totems just as the men do whose doubles they in reality are, though at
the same time, unlike the men, the *Iruntarinia* are endowed with the
powers characteristic of the Alcheringa individuals.

<span id="page_519">p. 519</span>

The important feature of the ceremony consisted of a cross, each of the
two arms of which were about six feet in length, one being fastened
across the other at a distance of eighteen inches from what was the
upper end when it was fixed upright in the ground. There were three
performers, decorated as usual with lines of down, and each one of them
wore in his head-dress two pointing sticks or *Ullinka*, arranged as if
they were horns projecting in front. The curious cross is called
*Umbalinyara*, and when the *Iruntarinia*, whose totem was the same as
that of the medicine man's mother, showed it to the man, he told the
latter to go and show it to his companions, and to tell them that no
medicine man, however clever he might be, could possibly extract the
cross if once the *Iruntarinia* had placed it in the body of a man. At
first only one of the performers sat beside the cross and moved about,
quivering in the usual way; then he stood to one side and from some
little distance the other two were seen approaching, while the onlookers
sang of how the *Iruntarinia* walked about in the Alcheringa and kept
hiding out of sight, as the two performers pretended to do. They were
performing all kinds of antics, causing the audience much amusement;
finally they reached and sat down by the cross, round which they
shuffled with their legs bent under them; after a short time the third
man joined them, and then the audience rushed round and round them,
shouting “*Wah! Wah!*” until, with a final prolonged quiver, the
performance came to a close.

It is not at all necessary for the *Iruntarinia* to give the ceremony to
a man of any particular totem; but, if the recipient wishes to hand it
on as a compliment to some other man, which he frequently does, then
that man must belong to the totem to which the ceremony refers.

It is again the *Iruntarinia* who are supposed frequently, but not
always or of necessity, to communicate in dreams to the Alatunja of any
group the time at which it is right for him to perform the ceremony of
*Intichiuma*. They themselves perform similar ceremonies; and if a
plentiful supply of, say, witchetty grub or emu appears without the
performance of *Intichiuma* by the peoples of the respective totems,
then the <span id="page_520">p. 520</span> <span id="page_521">p.
521</span> supplies are attributed to the performance of *Intichiuma* by
friendly *Iruntarinia*.

To the native the *Iruntarinia* is a very real personage, who, as a
general rule, is a beneficent being, though at times capable of great
cruelty; he is in fact a man of the Alcheringa endowed with all the
powers possessed by such an one. If he be offended, then he may place in
the body of the offender one of his pointing sticks, or *Ullinka*, which
as a general rule is a barbed stick a few inches in length and attached
to a string, the malicious pulling of which causes severe pain, and the
stick can only be removed by the aid of a very skilled medicine man.

There is always the feeling that it is well to be careful not to offend
the *Iruntarinia*, or to tempt them by going out too much after dusk,
when there is almost sure to be an odd spirit or two in search of lonely
wanderers on whom they may at least play some unpleasant prank. On the
other hand, the *Arumburinga* is supposed to keep a general watch over
his human representative, and though he does not personally do the
latter any harm, quite in fact the reverse, yet he cannot always shield
him from the capricious malice of some other individual spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. The Making and the Powers of Medicine Men; Various
Forms of Magic](ntca18)
