[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca12)  [Next](ntca14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

# Chapter XI <span id="fr_149"></span>[\*](#fn_149) Traditions Dealing with the Origin of the Alcheringa Ancestors of the Arunta Tribe and with Particular Customs (Continued.md)

**The Udnirringita totem—Alice Springs group consists of forty
individuals at the present day—Emily Gap the centre of the
totem—Wanderings of Udnirringita people from various places into the
Gap—The wanderings of two women—A handicoot woman performs *Ariltha* on
an Unjiamba woman, and then changes the totem of the latter—Two women
join the wandering *Ulpmerka* men and travel on with Kukaitcha
northwards—Wanderings of the wild dogs—Two young men steal the two
Churinga of an old man, who pursues them to Mount Gillen—They kill and
eat wild dog people—The old man is killed on Mount Gillen—The young men
travel to the north and go down into the ground—Wanderings of two
Unjiamba women—Travel southwards and stop at Ooraminna—Wanderings of
emu, honey-ant and lizard men—The *Unthippa* women—Give rise to deposits
of red ochre—Line of hills arise to mark their route—The *Unthippa*
dance at circumcision—Tradition of *Erkincha*—Tradition of the snake of
Imyunga—The fire totem—Origin of fire—The *Orunchertwa* and the
*Oknirabata*—Association of birds with particular totems.**

THE UDNIRRINGITA OR WITCHETTY GRUB TOTEM

 

THE most important group of the Udnirringita totem is located in the
neighbourhood of Alice Springs in the northern part of the Macdonnell
Ranges, and consists all told—men, women and children—of forty
individuals, which is the largest number, in any one local group, with
which we are acquainted. The totemic name is derived from that of a grub
or larva, which in turn derives its name from a bush called
*Udnirringa*, upon which the insect feeds and deposits its eggs. The
bush bears a berry of which emus are very fond.

The Udnirringita people in this locality occupy a tract of country which
is about 100 square miles in extent, and through the centre of which
runs a range of often lofty hills,

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

amongst which occur the gaps or gorges with which they are especially
associated. The western boundary of their country is co-terminous with
the eastern wall of the gap called by the natives Untariipa, and by the
whites the Heavitree Gap. The eastern boundary is formed by the
Adnurinia or Jessie Gap.

At various places throughout this district Udnirringita people
originated in the Alcheringa from their animal ancestors, and these
Alcheringa people deposited Churinga at various spots during the course
of their wanderings, or where they originated. The Alcheringa
Udnirringita people, both men and women, are supposed to have been full
of eggs, which are now represented by rounded water-worn stones, many of
which are stored in the *Ertnatulunga* at the various gaps, and are
called *Churinga Unchima*. Every prominent, and many insignificant
natural features throughout this strip of country—the most picturesque
part of the great central area of the continent—has some history
attached to it. For example, a gaunt old gum tree, with a large
projecting bole about the middle of the trunk, indicates the exact spot
where an Alcheringa man, who was very full of eggs, arose when he was
transformed out of a witchetty grub. When he died his spirit part
remained behind along with his Churinga, and used to especially frequent
this tree, and therefore, when that spirit went inside a woman of the
local group and was reincarnated in the form of a man who died a few
years ago, that special tree was the *Nanja* tree of that man. An
insignificant looking splinter of black, gneissic rock, projecting from
the ground at another spot, indicates the exact place at which a woman
of the Alcheringa arose whose living reincarnation—an old woman—is now
to be seen at Alice Springs.

Emily Gap, or, as it is called by the natives, Unthurqua, is, probably,
owing to its central position, the most important spot in the
Udnirringita country. It is a narrow gorge not more than a hundred yards
from end to end and about thirty in width, hemmed in by precipitous
rocks of red quartzite, and runs from north to south right across the
long ridge which, for some 200 miles, bounds the Horn or Mercenie valley
<span id="page_425">p. 425</span> on its southern side. Within a radius
of two miles of this gap there are eight or ten holes, varying from
three to five feet in depth, which are supposed to have been sunk, in
the first instance, by the Alcheringa men. They are called *Ilthura*,
and are strictly tabu to women and children, who must not on any
pretence go near to them, and their exact locality is well known to all
of the members of the local group. Each hole contains, carefully covered
over, one large stone called *Churinga Uchaqua*, which represents the
witchetty in its chrysalis stage, and a smaller, more rounded stone,
called *Churinga Unchima*, which represents the egg stage.

It was just within the northern entrance to the gorge, at a spot marked
now by a large stone, close to which stands the trunk of an old and long
since dead gum tree, that the great Alcheringa leader of the
witchetties, who was named Intwailiuka, sprang into existence. With him
and with the people whose leader he was many of the natural features of
the gorge are, as we shall shortly see, associated in tradition.

The stone has since been associated with the spirit, not only of the
dead Intwailiuka, but also with one or two men who have been regarded as
his successive reincarnations, the last of whom was the father of the
present Alatunja of the group. A number of smaller stones close by
represent men who sat there with him, for during his life he spent much
time in this spot, which he chose because, owing to its position, he
could easily guard the approach to the gap and at the same time keep
watch over the sacred store-house of the Churinga, which was always
located in one of the many clefts which he made in the rocks for this
purpose.

In the western wall of the gap is situated the sacred cave which is
called the *Ilthura oknira*, or the great *Ilthura*, at which he
performed the ceremony called *Intichiuma*, the object of which was
then, as at the present day, to increase the number of the Udnirringita
grub on which he and his companions fed. Directly opposite to this, but
low down on the eastern wall of the gap, is the sacred *Ilkinia*, a
drawing on the rocks which it is believed sprang up spontaneously to
mark the spot where the Alcheringa women painted themselves, and stood
peering up and watching while Intwailiuka and his men <span
id="page_426">p. 426</span> performed *Intichiuma*. This spot is called
the *Erlukwirra*, or camp of the women, in the Alcheringa, and one of
the drawings is supposed to represent a woman leaning on her elbow
against the rocks and gazing upwards. In this, as in many other
instances, we meet with traditions showing clearly that in past times
the position of women in regard to their association with sacred objects
and ceremonies was very different from that which they occupy at the
present day, when, for example, no woman dare to venture near to the
sacred spot while *Intichiuma* was being performed there. About 200 feet
below the *Ilthura*, a steep, broad belt band of quartzite, less
weathered than the surrounding rock, stands out and dips steeply down
into the bed of the creek. This is called *Alknalinta*, which means
“eyes painted around,” and indicates where, in the Alcheringa,
Intwailiuka stood in the bed of the creek at the base of the rock.
Standing here he threw numbers of *Churinga Unchima*, or eggs, up the
face of the rock, just as is now done during the *Intichiuma* <span
id="page_427">p. 427</span> ceremony. Here also he used to sit while he
pounded up large quantities of the grub. On the northern edge of the
rock is a long, deep, ridge-shaped depression, which looks as if the
stone had been cut out with a great knife, and this marks the spot where
the special *pitchi* of Intwailiuka rested while he poured into it the
pulverised grubs. A high precipitous wall of rock rises abruptly from
the top of the *Alknalinta*, and in a line with the mass of rock an old
pine tree stands and marks the spot where *Churinga Unchima* were stored
by Intwailiuka for *Intichiuma* purposes, and where they are still
stored by his successors. These special Churinga represent the eggs
which the Alcheringa people carried in their bodies, and at the present
day every man belonging to the totem has a few of these which he
believes were carried thus by his Alcheringa ancestors, and when he dies
they are buried with him. Any round pebble found in the vicinity of the
gap may <span id="page_428">p. 428</span> be one of these Churinga, but
only the old men are able to tell whether it is genuine or not.

Looking south from the spot last referred to, a group of stones can be
seen which mark the spot where a group of men coming into the gap in the
Alcheringa sat down. At the west side of the northern entrance a great
jumble of quartzite boulders, much weather-worn, indicates the spot
where the grub men, who marched into this, the headquarters of the
totem, from a place called Ulathirka, sat down. Just outside the
northern end of the gap a group of gum trees indicates where the people
who marched in from Ungunja sat down, and further still up the creek, a
large boulder, standing in the bed, indicates where a celebrated old
man, the leader of one group of the Alcheringa, sat down. Up on the
western bank, a group of gum trees and acacia scrub indicates where the
men coming in from Urliipma sat.

The Udnirringita people of this, their central group, did not wander
about, and they are not recorded as having had any *Inapertwa*
ancestors, but the grubs are supposed to have been transformed directly
into human beings. Whilst, however, those who originated at the Emily
Gap, according to tradition, remained there, other groups are recorded
as having immigrated to the same spot from outside parts of the country.

The first to come were the Udnirringita from a place called Urliipma,
which lies twenty miles away to the east of the present telegraph line,
where it passes on to the Burt Plain at the northern side of the
Macdonnell Ranges. They were led by an old Bulthara man, who was what is
called *Erilknabata*, that is, a very wise man of the Alcheringa, his
wisdom being commensurate with the length of his name, which was
Irpapirkirpirirrawilika. They travelled at first under the ground until
they reached Atnamala, a place a little to the east of Painta Springs,
where they fed on Udnirringita, painted their bodies with the totemic
design, and fixed many *Lalkira*, or nose bones, in their hair. Thence
they travelled above ground, and came on south to Okirilla, where they
cooked and ate many Udnirringita, and also made *Intichiuma*, and left
the *Churinga Uchaqua* stones, which now remain <span id="page_429">p.
429</span> there, in the *Ilthura* which they used. Thence they
travelled to Unthurqua, or the Emily Gap, where they sat down on the
northern entrance, the old man Intwailiuka warning them to come no
further.

The next party to immigrate consisted of men from a place out to the
west in the neighbourhood of Mount Heuglin. Unlike the Urliipma people
they had some women with them and were led by a Panunga man named
Ilpiriiwuka, who, when he found that Intwailiuka would not allow him to
come within the sacred precincts of the Emily Gap, became angry and,
leaving his party, returned to Ulathirka, where his descendant is now
living amongst the Udnirringita of that locality. This party travelled
first of all to Atnamala, where, like the first group, they painted
their bodies with the *Ilkinia* of the totem and made *Intichiuma*.
Thence they travelled south-east to Yia-pitchera, about six miles west
of Alice Springs, where again they painted themselves and fed upon the
grub, a large waterhole springing up to mark the spot where the grubs
were cooked. Thence, after travelling only half a mile to Nang-wulturra,
they again painted themselves, ate grubs, and another waterhole was
formed. Travelling south they came to what is now called Charles Creek,
where they performed sacred ceremonies and left a Panunga woman. Then,
following down the creek, they came to Ilpillachilla, where they stopped
for a few hours and decorated themselves with the *Ilkinia* designs.
Then they went on to Kiula, a clay-pan about three miles to the south of
Alice Springs, where they again painted the *Ilkinia* on their bodies
and left one man, a Bulthara named Ulaliki-irika, whose last descendant
died a short time ago. Then they travelled on to the east along the
plain which is bounded on the south by the range through which the Emily
Gap runs, and at a spot about three miles further on, which is now
indicated by a great heap of stones, they stopped to listen for the
voice of Intwailiuka, and presently they heard him singing about the
coming of a Panunga man. Leaving behind them a Panunga man named
Ilpiriiwuka, whose descendant is now living in the person of a little
boy, they travelled on to an *Ilthura* about two miles away from the
gap, where they met a number of the local <span id="page_430">p.
430</span> Udnirringita people whom they joined, and then all of them
went into the ground and came out again at the entrance to the gap on
the western side. They were warned by Intwailiuka not to come any
further on, so they sat down and their leader at once returned to
Ulathurka. Where they sat down, a large number of black stones arose to
mark the spot. At a later time Intwailiuka led the party to the *Ilthura
Oknira*, where they assisted him to perform *Intichiuma*.

After this party, there came another from Wulpa, a spot amongst the sand
hills west of Mount Burrell on the Hugh River. This was led by an old
Panunga man named Akwithaintuya. The men of this party travelled
underground to Yinthura passing, but at some miles distant, Imanda,
where at that time the Achilpa and Unchichera were making Engwura. Here
they made *quabara undattha* and ate Udnirringita. They then travelled
on, above ground, to Nukwia, east of Ooraminna, where they left a
Panunga man; thence they came to a large clay-pan on the Emily Plain,
made Engwura and then passed on to Intiripita, where they performed
ceremonies and left two men, one a Panunga named Urangara, and the other
a Bulthara named Irchuangwa. Then they passed on to Ilpirikulla, where a
Panunga woman was left, and finally they reached the southern entrance
to the Emily Gap where they were stopped by Intwailiuka and sat down, a
group of stones now marking the spot. After their arrival they performed
*Ariltha* upon some members of their party, the operator being a great
medicine man named Urangara.

Another party came from Unthurkunpa, a range about fifty miles away to
the east of Alice Springs, where there still exists a witchetty totem
centre. They were led by a Bulthara named Intwailiuka, whose living
descendant is the present Alatunja of the Alice Springs, or, to speak
more correctly, of the Emily Gap group of Udnirringita. The members of
this party at first travelled underground to Entukatira, a creek some
miles to the east of Undoolya, where they ate witchetty grubs and
painted themselves with *Ilkinia*. Thence they went on to Iliarinia,
where they again painted and left a Bulthara man named Unchalka. Then
they travelled on to the south and, after one or two halts, <span
id="page_431">p. 431</span> reached the entrance to the Jessie Gap,
where they saw a number of witchetty men, amongst whom was a Bulthara
named Kakathurika, who warned them not to approach any nearer to the gap
and whose descendant is now the Alatunja of that group of the
totem. <span id="fr_150"></span>[1](#fn_150.md)

Then they journeyed on to Laliknika on the Emily Creek about four miles
north of the gap, where they painted *Ilkinia* on their bodies and left
one woman, a Panunga, whose descendant is one of the daughters of the
present Alatunja of Emily Gap. Thence they travelled on to the Todd
River, where some men and women were left, and then, following the banks
down to a spot, about half a mile away from the gap, where a Panunga man
named Pitcha-arinia was left, they rested for a short time and then went
on till they came to the eastern side of the Emily Gap, where they sat
down all together and a group of trees arose to mark the place.

The last party of immigrants came from Ungwia in the Hart Ranges. The
members of this party were of both sexes, and they travelled underground
until they reached Ilpirulcha, a spot on the Emily Creek a few miles to
the north of the gap, where they painted themselves with *Ilkinia* and
ate witchetty grubs. Then they went on to Achilpa-interninja, the spot
at which one of the travelling groups of the Achilpa lost a small
Churinga. After painting themselves here and eating some more of the
totemic grub, they came to Laliknika, and then on to one of the
*Ilthura*, where they halted because they heard the voice of Intwailiuka
singing. Here they left one Bulthara man, and going on stopped every now
and then to listen for the singing. Camping on the Emily Creek half a
mile to the north of the spot called Chalipita, they left here a
Bulthara woman named Chantunga, and then going on they performed some
sacred ceremonies. Leaving behind one

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

Bulthara man, whose descendant is now living, they came to I-yathika,
and found there a Bulthara man of their own totem. Here they could
plainly hear Intwailiuka singing of the coming of the men from Ungwia,
so they at once went on to the mouth of the gap, a group of trees
arising to mark the spot where they stood. Intwailiuka objected to their
passing through the gap, so they entered the ground and came up again on
the south side at Ertichirticha, where they found the Wulpa people had
previously sat down. The only living descendant of this group is a man
named Ertichirticharinia, who now lives at Alice Springs. They wished to
continue their journey to Wulpa, but Intwailiuka told them to remain, so
they sat down and stayed at the gap, and a group of gum trees marks the
spot where they sat down.

At the present time there are just forty individuals who are regarded as
the descendants of the original resident group of Emily Gap and of the
immigrant parties. Of these forty, twenty-six are the descendants of the
former and fourteen are the descendants of the latter, and out of the
total number only five belong to the Purula and Kumara moiety of the
tribe.

THE WANDERINGS OF THREE WOMEN

A woman of the Panunga class and Quirra (bandicoot) totem, left a place
called Ilki-ira, lying to the north of Anna's Reservoir, and, carrying
with her a *Nurtunja* and Churinga, travelled south to Intita-laturika,
where she found another Panunga woman of the Unjiamba totem who also had
a *Nurtunja*. She took this woman and her *Nurtunja* with her, and,
still travelling south, came to a place called Alkniara, to the east of,
and not far from Mount Heuglin. Here they camped and made *quabara
undattha*, and the Quirra woman performed the operation of *Atna
ariltha-kuma* on her companion, a great gully arising at the spot, and,
in the middle of this, a large stone to mark the exact place where,
after the performance, the women went down into the ground, underneath
which they travelled southwards to Ariltha. Here they made *quabara
undattha* and then went on to Arurumbya, where they found erected the
*Nurtunja* of a Bulthara <span id="page_433">p. 433</span> man named
Akwithaka, of the bandicoot totem. The bandicoot woman here painted her
Unjiamba companion with *Quirra undattha* <span
id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_151.md) and so caused her to change her totem to
Quirra, after which, the tradition says, she fed exclusively on
bandicoot. The owner of the *Nurtunja* was absent searching for
bandicoot, and they did not see him, but, being afraid lest he should
follow their tracks, they entered the ground and went on to Urtiacha in
the Waterhouse Range, where they again made *quabara undattha*, and then
came on to a spot five miles to the east of Owen Springs, where by means
of *quabara undattha* the woman who was originally Unjiamba and Panunga,
changed herself into a Kumara and remained there altogether. Her name
was Illapurinja, which means, the changed one.

The remaining woman now went on alone to Urapitchera, near to what is
now called Boggy Waterhole on the Finke, where she found a number of
Achilpa people making Engwura; she caused blood to flow from her sexual
organs in great volume, directing it towards the people, who at once
fled to a spot close by which is now marked by a number of stones which
sprung up where they took refuge. The blood covered the Engwura ground
and formed a fine clay-pan which remains to the present day.

Finding at Urapitchera a Kumara woman of the bandicoot totem, she took
her on as companion and started off underground towards the north-east.
After making *quabara* at various places they were chased by an old
Kumara man of the lizard totem, named Yukwirta, but he could not capture
them, and so they went on until they camped at Inkila-quatcha, where
they found the *Ulpmerka* of the plum-tree totem who subsequently
travelled northwards under the guidance of Kukaitcha and were at that
time engaged in making Churinga by means of opossum teeth, which they
used to draw the designs with. With the *Ulpmerka* the two women went to
Quiurnpa, which was close by, and there Kukaitcha decorated the Kumara
woman with sacred down, and thus caused her to change her class from
Kumara to Panunga, and thus she became *Quitia*, that is, younger sister
of the other woman.

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

It has been already described in the account of the Engwura how these
two women accompanied the *Ulpmerka* as they travelled northwards from
Quiurnpa under the guidance of the great Kukaitcha. It was this party of
*Ulpmerka* who were camped at Aurapuncha, when one of the wandering
parties of Achilpa came and joined them, and finally changed into
Ulpmerka men of the plum-tree totem.

WANDERINGS OF THREE WILD DOG MEN

In the Alcheringa there dwelt at Chilpma, about one hundred miles east
south-east of Alice Springs, three men of the Ukgnulia or wild dog
totem; one was an old Bulthara man named Kaltiwilyika, and two were
young men, both Panunga, one named Kalterinya and the other
Ulthulperinya. The old man had a string bag, called *Iruka* or *Apunga*,
in which he kept two Churinga. The two young men stole this bag and ran
away followed by the old man who carried a great stabbing spear called
*Wallira*. The two younger ones travelled away towards the north-west,
and came to Uchirka, where they found an old woman of the wild dog
totem, with a newly-born child, both of whom they killed and ate,
leaving some meat for the old man. Here they left a Churinga from which
sprang subsequently a man called Uchirkarinia, whose descendant is now
living.

Leaving Uchirka they travelled quickly, being afraid of the old man, and
during the day passed Therierita, where they saw a large mob of Achilpa.
They went on and camped at Itnuringa, where they found some *Oruncha*
men with whom they were afraid to interfere and camped at
Ulkupiratakima, a rock-hole on the Emily Plain, about eighteen miles to
the south-east of Alice Springs. Here they found an old woman of the
wild dog totem, whom they killed and proceeded to eat, and while thus
engaged, the old man came in sight. They just had time to conceal the
bag with the Churinga in it, when he came and sat down a little distance
from them without speaking. They gave him meat, but he only ate a very
little of it, being sulky. That night they were afraid to sleep lest the
old man should kill them, and before daylight they ran <span
id="page_435">p. 435</span> away and came on to Pilyiqua, where there
are some small rock-holes. Here they camped and found some small wild
dog men, some of whom they killed and ate. The old man again overtook
them and again they gave him meat, of which he would only eat a little,
being still very sulky and on the look-out for an opportunity of killing
them. Once more they ran away before daylight and, passing a hill called
Irpalpa, about seven miles south of Alice Springs, they travelled on to
Okniambantwa or Mount Gillen, where they camped on top of the range and
found an old woman of the wild dog totem whom they killed and ate. The
old man came up later on, but the two young men had hidden themselves.
He saw, however, a lot of wild dog men who had originated here (this
lies in a wild dog locality at the present day), and thinking the two
might be in their midst he attacked them with his great spear and killed
several, after which they all combined together and killed him.

The local men were very angry, and so the two young men being afraid to
join them, went up into the sky taking the bag with them. They went away
towards the north-west and did not alight until they reached Ulthirpa,
which is nearly seventy miles from Alice Springs. Here they camped and
found a Bulthara man of the wild dog totem named Ulthirpirinia, whose
descendant is now living, and who lived only on wild dog flesh (the
animal not the man), of which he consumed large quantities. He had a
*Nurtunja* and *quabara undattha*, which he showed to the two young men,
who then went on foot to Erwanchalirika, where they found a Bulthara
wild dog man whom they killed and ate. He had no *Nurtunja* or Churinga.
After eating him their faces became suffused with blood, producing a
most uncomfortable feeling, so that they relieved each other by sucking
one another's cheeks.

Travelling on they passed the spots now called Johnston's Well and
Harding's Soakage, both on the Woodforde Creek, and at the latter found
a big *Nurtunja* erected which belonged to an old Panunga wild dog named
Kalterinia, who was of remarkable appearance, having a broad white
streak down the centre of his face. They joined him and he showed them
his *quabara undattha*. At Imbatna, seven miles further north, <span
id="page_436">p. 436</span> they found another wild dog man with a
*Nurtunja* and ceremonies, and then they turned slightly towards the
west and came to Eri-quatcha, where they opened up the bag and looked at
the Churinga which fluttered about in the most extraordinary manner.
They closed it up again, and travelling on crossed Hanson Creek at
Urumbia, and reach Kurdaitcha away to the west of Central Mount Stuart,
where, long afterwards, one of the Achilpa parties camped. Here they
deposited the bag containing the Churinga, from which sprung a Kumara
man whose name was Kurdaitcharinia. A large stone arose at the spot
where the Churinga was deposited. Only one wild dog man can arise, at a
time, at the spot which lies in the middle of an Achilpa locality. After
they had deposited the Churinga one of the men mounted on to the back of
the other and went into the ground, and it is only the far away western
people who know where they came out again.

WANDERINGS OF TWO UNJIAMBA OR HAKEA WOMEN

 

Two women of the Unjiamba totem, named respectively Abmoara and Kuperta,
sprang up at Ungwuranunga, about thirty-five miles north of Alice
Springs, where they had a *Nurtunja* and Churinga, and dwelt alongside
their *Ertnatulunga*. Leaving this place they entered the ground, and
came out again at Arapera, where they saw a Purula wild cat woman named
Arilthamariltha, who originated here and had a big *Nurtunja*, and whose
descendant is now alive. The two women did not join her but camped close
by, and ate Unjiamba, on which they always fed. Thence, travelling above
ground, they went to Okillalatunga, where they erected their *Nurtunja*
and walked about looking for Unjiamba, but did not see another Unjiamba
woman, a Purula of that name, who was camped in the locality with a
large *Nurtunja*, round which one of the Achilpa parties danced when
they passed by. Taking their *Nurtunja* to pieces, they went on to
Atnyra-ungwurna-munia, where they camped and ate Unjiamba. Thence they
went to Unthipita, where they erected their *Nurtunja* again, played
about, and looked for <span id="page_437">p. 437</span> Unjiamba. Then
they once more took their *Nurtunja* to pieces and travelled on to the
Ooraminna rock-hole, where they went into the earth, and two large
stones arose to mark the spot beneath which were their Churinga. The
descendant of Abmoara is now living, and one of the two stones is her
*Nanja*. The descendant of Kuperta died recently, and it will be some
time before she will again undergo reincarnation.

In the following accounts, which refer to the wanderings of Erlia, or
emu, Yarumpa, or honey-ant, and Echunpa, or lizard men, we omit the
greater part of the details, as these are closely similar to those
already given in the case of other totemic groups.

WANDERINGS OF THE EMU MEN

 

These people originated at a place called Erliunpa, about ten miles to
the east of Giles Creek, which is situated eighty or a hundred miles
east of Alice Springs. A party of men, accompanied by three women, left
this place, travelling nearly due west. They carried *Nurtunjas* on
their heads, and their bodies were at first covered with feathers, which
they gradually shed along their line of route until at last they had all
disappeared. Their first camping place was at Oniara, where they went
into the ground. They came out at Ulpira and travelled to Karpirakura, a
little west of Soda Creek, where they found a group of emu people of
both sexes. Here they left a number of men and travelled on in a general
westerly direction, following the trend of the main Macdonnell Ranges
and forming totem centres at various spots as they went along, the exact
locality of which is known to the natives. About fifty miles to the west
of Alice Springs they shed their few remaining feathers, and a short
distance beyond what is now called Glen Helen, they entered the earth
and did not come out until they reached Apaura in the Belt Range, at the
western end of the Macdonnells, where they found and stayed with a local
group of emu men and women, forming there an important emu totem centre.

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

WANDERINGS OF THE HONEY-ANT PEOPLE

 

The Yarumpa or honey-ant people, who were of all classes, originated at
a place called Ilyaba, in the Mount Hay country. From this spot, which
is the great centre of the totem, they dispersed in various directions.
A great *Oknirabata*, named Abmyaungwirria, started out from Ilyaba to
see what the country out northwards was like, and, returning after many
days, told his people that he had found another mob of honey-ants far
away in the north-east, and that he intended leading a party to them.
After performing a lot of ceremonies which the women were allowed to
see, he started off with the party, and after finding two or three
honey-ant men living in the scrub in various places (it may be noted
that the honey-ant is found in mulga scrub), they came to Inkalitcha,
where the water-hole by which they camped was dry. They suffered much
from thirst, and so opened veins in their arms and drank blood, some of
the old men consuming immense quantities. Then they went into the
ground, and alternately travelling above and under ground, came to a
spot on the Burt Plain, where it is related that they made *Ilpirla*
This is a drink made by steeping the bodies of the honey-ants in water,
and then kneading them until the honey is pressed out and mixed with the
water. The *Ilpirla* was mixed in the hafts of their shields. After
drinking some of it the *Oknirabata* left the party, and went on ahead
to find the honey-ant people whom he had seen before. He found them at
Koarpirla making an Engwura, and, returning at once to his party, he led
them to that place. The local people were very angry, and refused to
have anything to do with them, and moreover they opened veins in their
arms, making such a flood that all the party were drowned except the
*Oknirabata* who returned to Ilyaba, where finally he died. A black hill
covered with black stones arose where the wanderers perished, and their
Churinga are now in the store-house of the local group. A spring of
fresh water is said to mark the central spot of the Engwura ground,
which lies far out in sand-hill country, and has the natives say, never
been visited by white men.

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

Another party of honey-ant people started out west under the guidance of
two *Oknirabata*. At a place called Tanulpma a large *Nurtunja* was
erected, and here one of the leaders remained behind with the
*Nurtunja*, a large gum tree arising to mark the spot where this stood.
At Umpira the party met a honey-ant woman, who, like all those seen
along the course of their travels, had a *Nurtunja* and *quabara
undattha*. When she died a large stone arose to mark the spot, and this
is the *Nanja* of her living descendant. At Umpira *Ariltha* was
performed upon some of the party. Then they travelled on to Lukaria,
where they found a large number of honey-ant men and women who had many
*Nurtunjas*. On seeing the strangers the women were very angry, and
assumed a threatening attitude, stamping and beating the air with their
palms extended outwards, shouting “*Yalika pira arinilla litchila
Churinga oknirra ninunja*” (Stop; don't advance; we have many Churinga).
The party, frightened, camped a little distance away, where they erected
a *Nurtunja* and performed *Ariltha*. The local honey-ants did not come
near to them. They travelled on westwards, camping near Mount Heuglin
and on the Dashwood Creek, and forming various totem centres. At a place
called Amulapirta they stayed for a few hours performing *Ariltha*, and
all the men had intercourse with a Panunga honey-ant woman.

On the north side of the Belt Range they camped by the side of a creek,
and here they erected their *Nurtunja*, and were too tired to take it up
again. While travelling on they heard a loud *arri-inkuma*—a special
form of shouting—and soon found themselves face to face with a large
number of honey-ants at a place called Unapuna. The local people
resented their coming, and at once drew forth floods of blood from their
arms, with the result that all the strangers were drowned, their
Churinga remaining behind and giving rise to an important Yarumpa or
honey-ant totem centre.

WANDERINGS OF THE LIZARD MEN

 

In the Alcheringa a man of the Illunja (jew lizard) totem, who sprung up
at Simpson's Gap at a spot high up on the <span id="page_440">p.
440</span> eastern wall, now marked by a column called by white men the
Sentinel, journeyed away underground to a place called Ulira, east of
Arltunja, where there were a number of Echunpa or big lizard people, who
originated there, but, unlike the lizards of the Simpson's Gap locality,
they always fed on lizards. The Illunja man had brought with him a lot
of Owadowa, a grass seed which formed the food of the Simpson's Gap
lizard people. Some of this he consumed on the road, and the rest he
offered to the Ulira lizard people, who declined it, so he placed it on
the ground, a large stone now marking the spot.

Having induced the Echunpa people to accompany him, they all started
back for Simpson's Gap, carrying a number of Churinga but no *Nurtunja*.
On the way they ate Echunpa, the Illunja man joining them in doing so.
Travelling westward, they camped at various places, and at one spot near
to the Love Creek the younger men, whose duty it was to provide and cook
the lizards for the older ones, only brought in a little to the old men,
who were angry and called then *Unkirertwa*, that is, greedy men, and to
punish them caused them to become *anchinya*, that is, grey-haired.

At Irulchirtna they made *quabara undattha*, carrying Churinga on their
heads, as shown during one of the Engwura ceremonies which represented
one of those performed during this march. Here it was that some men of
the Thippa-thippa (a bird totem) came and danced round them as they
performed, and were afterwards changed into birds, which still hover
over the Echunpa lizards and show the natives where they are to be
found. Leaving Irulchirtna, they still carried their Churinga on their
heads, and the Thippa-thippa ran round looking at them. At a place on
the Todd River in the Emily Plain they stayed some time performing
*Tapurta*, that is, a long series of lizard ceremonies, and then moving
on a little further, the party was divided into two by the Illunja man.
One lot went away south to somewhere in the region of Erldunda, and the
other kept on a westerly course till Illaba, not far from the Heavitree
Gap near Alice Springs, was reached. Here it is said that a Purula man
who had a stumpy tail left the party, intending to go away, but changed
his mind and returned. Then they went to what is now a <span
id="page_441">p. 441</span> large clay pan, called Conlon's lagoon,
where *Tapurta* were again performed. Here a thin, emaciated man was
left, and where he died arose a stone, the rubbing of which may cause
emaciation in other people. This stone is charged with *Arungquiltha*,
or evil influence.

At Conlon's lagoon the Illunja man left the rest and went on ahead to
Simpson's Gap, where he wanted to muster the Alexandra parakeet, small
rat (Untaina), and Ilura (a lizard, a species of Nephrurus) people. The
Alexandra parakeet people have, since that time, been changed into the
bird which is supposed to inhabit caves underground, out of which it
comes every now and then in search of grass seed.

The lizard party came on and camped at Atnakutinga near Attack Gap, and
then proceeded to the south of Temple Bar Gap, and from there followed
up the Ross Creek where the Illunja man met them. A little further on
they found a lizard man whose descendant now lives at Alice Springs. At
length they reached Simpson's Gap and then they danced in front of the
people who were assembled, and after that a long series of sacred
ceremonies was performed. Then the Illunja man and one of the Echunpa
returned underground to Ulirra where they stayed altogether.

The lizard people left some of their party at the Gap; three of them
being very thin and emaciated died, and the stones which arose to mark
the spot are charged with *Arungquiltha*. The rest of the party
travelled north, still eating lizards, until they reached Painta Springs
on the northern side of the Macdonnell Range and the southern edge of
the Burt Plains. Travelling northward they passed Hanns' Range, and at a
place called Ilangara they were too tired to go further and so joined
the Iwutta (nail-tailed wallaby) people who lived there. Their Churinga
were deposited in two spots close to the storehouse of the Iwutta.

THE UNTHIPPA WOMEN

 

In dealing with the wanderings of the fourth group of the Achilpa people
reference was made to some dancing women called *Unthippa* who were met
at a place called Yapilpa. <span id="page_442">p. 442</span> The women
were *Oruncha*, that is what is usually translated “devil” women, which
implies that they were of an evil nature, always ready to annoy human
beings, and endowed with special superhuman powers of various kinds. As
explained, however, in the case of the *Oruncha* men the word “devil”
must not be taken in the sense of their being at all the equivalents of
malicious creatures whose one object was to work ill to men and women;
they are more mischievous than malicious, and in this instance the term
“uncanny” more nearly expresses the idea associated with them.

These women were supposed to have sprung into existence far out in the
*Aldorla ilunga*, that is the west country, and as they journeyed they
danced all the way along carrying shields and spear-throwers until they
passed right through the country of the Arunta people. When they started
they were half women and half men, but before they had proceeded very
far on their journey their organs became modified and they were as other
women.

When they arrived at a place in the vicinity of Glen Helen they found a
number of Okranina or carpet snake people who were assembled at an
*Apulla* where they were about to perform the rite of circumcision upon
some *Wurtjas*, that is boys who had undergone the preparatory painting
and throwing up which form the first of the initiatory rites. Such women
as were *Unawa* to the boys took the latter on their shoulders and
carried them along with them, leaving them at various spots *en route*,
after performing *lartna* on them. Women were also left occasionally.

Somewhere out west of the River Jay the women changed their language to
Arunta and began feeding on mulga seed, on which they afterwards
subsisted. Upon arrival at a place called Wankima, about a hundred miles
further to the east, their sexual organs dropped cut from sheer
exhaustion, caused by their uninterrupted dancing, and it was these
which gave rise to well-known deposits of red ochre. The women then
entered the ground and nothing more is known of them except that it is
supposed that a great womanland exists far away to the east where they
finally sat down.

The long ridge of quartzite ranges which forms a marked <span
id="page_443">p. 443</span> feature in the surface configuration of the
country, in the region of the Macdonnell Ranges, and extends east and
west for more than 200 miles, forming the southern boundary of the long
narrow Horn or Mereenie valley, arose to mark the line of travel which
they followed.

The *Unthippa* dance, which is performed during the ceremonies concerned
at the present time with *lartna*, refers to these women. Upon the night
when the boy is taken to the ceremonial ground the women approach,
carrying shields and spear-throwers, and dance as the *Unthippa* women
did in the Alcheringa, while the men sing, time after time, the refrain
“the range all along,” referring to the march of the *Unthippa* which
the women are dancing in imitation of. At a later time also in the
ceremony, after the boy has been painted and advanced to the grade of
*Wurtja*, and just before the performance of the actual ceremony, one of
the women (not, however, as in the case of the *Unthippa* an *Unawa*
woman, but one who is *Mura* to the boy), placing her head between his
legs suddenly lifts him up on her shoulders and runs off with him, as in
the Alcheringa the *Unthippa* women did, but, unlike what happened in
the past, the boy is again seized by the men and brought back. Whatever
these remarkable *Unthippa* women may have been, the myth concerning
them, which has evidently arisen to account for certain curious features
in the initiation ceremonies, may be regarded as evidence that there was
a time when women played a more important part in regard to such
ceremonies than they do at the present time.

TRADITION OF ERKINCHA

 

In the Alcheringa one of the wandering parties of Achilpa or wild cat
men were under the guidance of an old *Oknirabata* named
Atnimma-la-truripa, who was renowned for the size of his penis (the
native word is *pura*, being the same as that for tail, kangaroo tail,
for example, is *okira pura*). He was always gorgeously decorated with
down, especially the *pura*. This party camped near to the waterhole at
Ooraminna, where they made an Engwura. While there they <span
id="page_444">p. 444</span> discovered a group of wild cat men who were
suffering from the disease called *Erkincha*, or *Yerakincha*, and smelt
most offensively. The southern Achilpa men had intended to settle here,
but the presence of these men frightened them and they hurried away
northwards.

Shortly after the wild cat men had gone a party of men who belonged to
the Arwarlinga (a species of Hakea) totem, who dwelt close by in the
sand hills, came in and went to the top of the Ooraminna rockhole and
made what is called *abmoara*that is a favourite drink of the natives
made by steeping Hakea flowers in water. The water was held in their
wooden vessels, and then, opening veins in their arms, they allowed the
blood to flow into the vessels and mix with the *abmoara*, until the
vessels overflowed to such an extent that the Ooraminna Creek became
flooded and all of the *Erkincha* men were drowned. A stone arose at the
spot where the diseased men perished, and since the days of the
Alcheringa this stone has been known as *Aperta atnumbira* (*aperta*,
stone; *atnumbira* signifies a diseased growth issuing from the anus).
Ever since this time the *Erkincha* has been prevalent amongst the
natives, and it is believed that old men visiting the stone can, by
means of rubbing it and muttering a request to the contained
*Arungquiltha*, or evil influence, to go out, cause the disease to be
communicated to any individual or even group of men whom they desire to
injure. <span id="fr_152"></span>[1](#fn_152.md)

THE SNAKE OF IMYUNGA

 

About fifty miles north-north-west of Alice Springs there is a gorge
opening out from the northern ridge of the Macdonnell Range on to the
Burt Plain. In the gorge is a waterfall with a small permanent pool at
its base which is said to be inhabited by the spirit of a great dead
snake and by some living snakes, the descendants of the former. The spot
is

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

called Imyunga, and is in the centre of an Ingwitchika or grass seed
locality. Here, in the Alcheringa, there lived a woman of the totem who
was very expert in gathering the grass seed on which she fed, but she
suffered great annoyance and was very angry because the people of the
same totem who dwelt with her were always stealing her grass seed, so
she journeyed far away to the south-west beyond Erldunda and brought
back with her an enormous snake. She took the latter to her camp at
Imyunga and there it ate up all the Ingwitchika thieves, after which it
lived in the waterhole. It was long after the Alcheringa before it died,
in fact it was seen by the grandfathers of some old men still living,
and it was finally killed by a great flood which came down over the
waterfall and washed it out of its hole. In the range there are great
caverns which are occupied by the spirit of the snake. Some of its
descendants are seen occasionally in the waterhole, to the eastern side
of which no man dare go except at the risk of being sucked under the
ranges—a fate which has, more than once, overtaken men who ventured too
near, though it is a long time now since such a thing happened. When
approaching the waterfall men always stop and sing out several times to
give the snake warning of their approach, for it would make him angry if
he were taken by surprise.

Close by the waterfall is the storehouse of the local group in which all
the Churinga are of stone. The *Churinga nanja* of the woman referred to
is ornamented on one side only with a number of series of concentric
circles which are supposed to represent her breasts, her name being
Urlatcha (breasts).

THE FIRE TOTEM

 

In the Alcheringa a spark of fire (*urinchitha*) ascended into the sky
at Urapuncha, the place of fire, which lies far away in the north and
was blown by the north wind to a spot now indicated by a large mountain
also called Urapuncha, or Mount Hay. Here it fell to earth and a great
fire sprang up which by and by subsided, and from the ashes came out
some *Inapertwa* creatures—the ancestors of the people of the fire <span
id="page_446">p. 446</span> totem. These *Inapertwa* were after a time
discovered by two wild duck (Wungara) men who flew over from the west
and both of whom were Bulthara, one being called Erkung-ir-quilika and
the other Mura-wilyika. They came from Ilalil-kirika close to the
junction of the Hugh and Jay Rivers, and made the *Inapertwa* into men
and women, after which they flew back to their camp in the west. The
remains of the great fire still smoulders on the top of the mountain
where the sacred storehouse of the totem is located, and at night time,
especially if the night be dark and rainy, the fire can be seen from a
long distance. Close to the storehouse is a great block of stone which
in the Alcheringa was the piece of wood used by the great leader of the
fire people, who was called Yarung-unterin-yinga, for the purpose of
being rubbed by the *amera* or spear-thrower when he made fire. The
*amera* is represented in the storehouse by a Churinga.

THE ORIGIN OF FIRE

 

In the Alcheringa a man of the Arunga or euro totem, named Algurawartna,
started from a place named Ililkinja out in the east in pursuit of a
gigantic euro which carried fire in its body. The man carried with him
two big Churinga with which he tried to make fire, but could not. He
followed the euro as it travelled westwards, trying all the time to kill
it. The man and the euro always camped a little distance away from one
another. One night Algurawartna awoke and saw a fire burning by the
euro; he at once went up to it and took some, with which he cooked some
euro flesh which he carried with him and upon which he fed. The euro ran
away, turning back along its old tracks to the east. Still trying to
make fire, but without success, the man followed until they once more
came to Ililkinja, where at length Algurawartna succeeded in killing the
euro with his Churinga. He examined the body carefully to see how the
animal made fire, or where it came from, and pulling out the penis,
which was of great length, he cut it open and found that it contained
very red fire, which he took out and used to cook his euro with. For a
long time he lived on the body of the big euro, <span id="page_447">p.
447</span> and when the fire which he had taken from its body went out
he tried fire-making (*urpmala*) again and was successful, always
singing the *urpmala* chant:—

“Urpmalara kaiti  
Alkna munga  
Ilpau wita wita.”

 

THE ORUNCHERTWA AND THE OKNIRABATA

 

In the Alcheringa a number of men belonging to the Unchipera (little
bat) and the Erlkintera (large white bat) totems set out from Imanda.
They were *Orunchertwa*, that is “devil” men, and upon arrival at a
place called Etuta they went up into the sky, but not very high up. From
this position they killed men who walked about on the earth beneath.

An old *Oknirabata* lay down at Etuta and two boys played about aiming
at trees with spears. These two boys heard the *Orunchertwa* sing out
and were killed by them. Then the old *Oknirabata* was angry and went to
his sacred storehouse which was close at hand, and took out a large
stone Churinga; sitting down he held this in both hands, and pointing it
towards the *Orunchertwa* he brought them down to earth, and then with
the Churinga cut them in pieces.

ASSOCIATION OF BIRDS WITH PARTICULAR TOTEMS

 

Around each of the *Ilthura*, or sacred holes of the witchetty grub
totem, at which a part of the *Intichiuma* ceremony is performed, there
are certain stones standing on end which represent special birds called
Chantunga. These birds are looked upon as the *ilqualthari*, or the
mates of the witchetty people, because in the Alcheringa certain
witchetty *maegwa*, that is the fully-grown grub, changed into the
birds. The latter abound at the time when the grub is plentiful and are
very rarely seen at other times, and they are then supposed to sing
joyously and to take an especial delight, as they hop about amongst the
Udnirringa bushes all day long, in watching the *maegwa* laying its
eggs. The witchetty men <span id="page_448">p. 448</span> will not eat
the bird, as they say that to do so would make them “*atnitta takurna
irima*” (which literally means stomach, bad, to see) if they were to do
so, and they speak affectionately of it.

In the Okira or kangaroo totem the men have as *ilquathari*, grass
parrots called Atnalchulpira, who in the Alcheringa were the *Uwinna*,
that is the fathers' sisters, of the Okira men, to whom they brought
water as the birds do at the present day, according to the native
belief, to the kangaroos in the dry country, where they are always found
hovering about these animals. Associated also with the kangaroo people
are the birds called Kartwungawunga, who are the descendants of certain
kangaroo men of the Alcheringa who were always killing and eating
kangaroos and euro, and changed into the little birds who are often seen
playing about on the backs of these animals.

The Arunga or euro people have as mates the rock pigeon or Inturita, who
in the Alcheringa were the *Uwinna* of the euro men, whom they furnished
with water just as the natives say that the bird now does for the
animals in the dry ranges. The euro men have a second mate in the form
of the Unchurunqua, a small beautifully coloured bird (*Emblema picta*),
the painted finch, which in the Alcheringa was a euro man. In the
Alcheringa these euro men are said to have been great eaters of euro,
and their bodies were always drenched with blood which dripped from the
bodies of the euros which they killed and carried with them, and that is
why the painted finch is splashed with red.

The Yarumpa or honey-ant people have as mates a little bird called
Alatipa, which, like the Yarumpa itself (*Camponotus inflatus*), only
frequents mulga scrub country. They also have as mates another bird
called Alpirtaka, which is a small “magpie,” which also frequents mulga
scrub. Both birds were once honey-ant people.

The emu people have as mate the little striated wren (*Amytis striata*),
which they call Lirra-lirra; and the Echunpa or big lizard people have a
smaller lizard (*Varanus punctatus*), which they call Ilchaquara.

The Quatcha or water people have the waterfowl as their <span
id="page_449">p. 449</span> mate; and the Urliwatchera, a large lizard
(*Varanus gouldii*) people, have a small scincoid lizard called Irpanta.

All these mates of the people of various totems are held in affectionate
regard by those to whom they are especially related, but except in the
case of the mates of the witchetty grubs there does not seem to be any
restriction with regard to their not being eaten. Certain totems, such
as the wild cat, the Hakea flower and the crow, are apparently without
any mates of this kind.

In addition to these birds which are regarded as mates or the members of
various totems, there are others which are regarded as representing men
of the Alcheringa of particular totems which became extinct. Thus the
little scarlet-fronted Ephithanura (*E. tricolor*) which the natives
call Ninchi-lappa-lappa were men who in the Alcheringa continually
painted themselves with red ochre, until finally they changed into the
bird. Again, in connection with the wanderings of a group of lizard men,
we meet with a tradition which says that as they wandered across the
country in the region of Simpson's Gap in the Macdonnell Ranges they
came across a group of people of the Atninpirichira or Princess
Alexandra Parakeet totem. For some reason they all changed into the
birds, and now they live far underground, only coming up at intervals
near their old camping ground to look for grass seed on which they
feed—an allusion probably to the fact that this particular bird has a
strange habit of completely disappearing out of the district for years
at a time and then suddenly appearing in large numbers.

Associated with the lizard people is a small bird called Thippa-thippa.
In the Alcheringa these were men of that totem who came and danced round
the lizard people as they performed ceremonies, and for some reason were
transformed into the birds, which have ever since continued to hover
round the lizards, and by doing so often show the natives where the
animal is to be found. In one of the ceremonies of the Engwura they were
represented by two men who danced around a lizard man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[423:\*](ntca13.htm#fr_149.md) A folding map
referring to this chapter is attached to the inside back cover of this
book.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[431:1](ntca13.htm#fr_150.md) This warning on the
part of Intwailiuka at the Emily Gap, and of Kakathurika at the Jessie
Gap appears to indicate the exclusive right over a particular area of
country which was claimed by, and accorded to, the inhabitants of that
area. Even men of the same totem are not allowed to enter without
permission from the head man. The same feeling very clearly exists at
the present day, as is shown by the fact that a strange black, coming up
to a camp, never thinks of going straight up to it, but sits down at
some little distance and then waits until he is invited to come forward
by the old men.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[433:1](ntca13.htm#fr_151.md) *Quirra undattha* is
bird's down which has been used for decoration in connection with a
sacred ceremony of the Quirra or bandicoot totem and has thus become
identified with the latter.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[444:1](ntca13.htm#fr_152.md) The disease is one
which is common amongst young people, only attacking each individual
once. It affects only the glands of the part of the body in the
neighbourhood of the sore. At first sight it has much the appearance of
being syphilitic in nature, but Dr. Eylmann, who has studied it, is of
opinion that it is distinct from syphilis. It usually appears in the
anal region, under the arms or legs, or close to the mouth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Customs Concerned with Knocking out of Teeth;
Nose-Boring; Growth of Breasts; Blood, Blood-Letting, Blood-Giving,
Blood-Drinking; Hair; Childbirth; Food Restrictions;
Cannibalism](ntca14.md)
