[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ntca13)  [Next](ntca15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Native Tribes of North Central Australia*, by Baldwin Spencer and
F. J. Gillen \[1899\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

## Chapter XII Customs Concerned with Knocking out of Teeth; Nose-Boring; Growth of Breasts; Blood, Blood-Letting, Blood-Giving, Blood-Drinking; Hair; Childbirth; Food Restrictions; Cannibalism

**Operation of tooth knocking out in the case of males after the
performance of the *Quatcha Intichiuma*—Explanation of the ceremony
given by the natives—Operation in the case of females—Throwing the tooth
towards the mother's camp in the Alcheringa—Comparison of the ceremony
with that of other parts of Australia—Nose-boring ceremony—Men painting
the breasts of a girl with fat and red ochre after charming it—To be
regarded as a ceremony of initiation—Customs concerned with
menstruation—Drinking blood when starting on an avenging
party—Blood-drinking at meetings of reconciliation—Blood-letting at
sacred ceremonies—Painting the *Kauaua* with blood—The blood after the
ceremony of *Ariltha* upon a woman in the Kaitish and northern
tribes—Deposits of red ochre associated with women's blood—Giving blood
to men and women to strengthen them—Charming fat and red ochre and
rubbing it over sick people—Part of the reproductive organs of an
opossum or kangaroo used to strengthen women—Distribution of human
hair—Customs at childbirth, making the umbilical cord into a
necklet—Food restrictions—Totemic—The wild cat must not be eaten—Food
killed by certain individuals may not be eaten—The projecting of a man's
smell into food—Men who have to be supplied with food by any individual
man belong to his wife's side of the tribe—Restrictions during
pregnancy—Food restrictions for boys and girls with penalties
attached—Cannibalism in the traditions—Killing and eating a younger
child in the Luritcha tribe.**

KNOCKING OUT OF TEETH

 

THIS is a rite to which individuals of both sexes must sooner or later
submit, if they happen to belong to one or other of the various groups
which inhabit what is called the *Kartwia Quatcha*, or rain country,
which lies in the north-east of the area of the country occupied by the
Arunta tribe. It is evident that the rite is one the significance of
which, so far as this tribe is concerned, has undergone very
considerable change in course of time. As a general rule it is performed
before marriage, but not always, and when not done at an <span
id="page_451">p. 451</span> early age, the natives give as a reason that
the boy or girl was too frightened, an excuse which would not gain a
minute's delay if the ceremony were one concerned with initiation, and
that such should be made shows that the ceremony is not one to which any
very great importance is now attached.

The operation always takes place after the Water *Intichiuma* ceremony
has been performed, and in the case of a fully-grown man, it is
performed on the *Intichiuma* ground. It is impossible to find out why
the ceremony has become so especially associated with the rain or water
totem, though at the same time it must be remembered that it is
performed, not infrequently, on men and women of other totems; in fact
any one, whatever his or her totem be, may undergo the rite at pleasure,
but in the case of just the one totem it is obligatory, or practically
so, though at the same time the non-observance of the custom would not
prevent any man from being admitted to the secrets of the tribe, but it
would subject him to what is most dreaded by the native, and that is the
constant ridicule of the other men and women, with whom he is in daily
contact. The explanation, evidently devised by the natives to account
for the special association of the custom with the rain totem, is that
the object of the rite is to produce in the face a resemblance to what
they call *Alailinga*, which is the name applied to certain clouds, dark
with a light margin, which are of peculiar appearance and are said to
portend the coming of rain. There evidently was, as will be seen later
on, a time when the ceremony had a much deeper meaning than it has at
the present day.

If the operation be performed on a man he lies down on his back, resting
his head on the lap of a sitting man who is his tribal *Oknia* (elder
brother), or else a man who is *Unkulla* to him (mother's brother's
son). The latter pinions his arms and then another *Okilia* or *Unkulla*
fills his mouth with furstring for the purpose, partly, they say, of
absorbing the blood and partly of deadening the pain, and partly also to
prevent the tooth from being swallowed. The same man then takes a piece
of wood, usually the sharp hard end of a spear, in which there is a hole
made, and, pressing it firmly against the tooth, strikes it sharply with
a stone. When the tooth is out, he <span id="page_452">p. 452</span>
holds it up for an instant so that it can be seen by all, and while
uttering a peculiar, rolling, guttural sound throws it away as far as
possible in the direction of the *Mira Mia Alcheringa*, which means the
camp of the man's mother in the Alcheringa. The man who has been
operated upon then gets up and picks up some boomerangs which he throws
at a shield which has been fixed upright in the ground some little
distance away, throwing them gently so as not to hurt the shield. There
is no singing or demonstration of any kind, other than that described,
but the mother of the man must provide an offering of *mirna*, that is
seed food of some kind, or “yams,” and send it to the tribal *Okilia* or
*Unkulla* who performed the operation, and he, in his turn, must provide
an offering of food for the use of the man on whom he operated, which is
a curious reversal of the usual rule, according to which it is
necessary, in all other cases with which we are acquainted, for the man
who has been operated upon to provide the operator with food. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153.md)

In the case of boys the operation is performed away from the
*Intichiuma* ground near to which they may not go, and at this ceremony
women may be present, for with regard to the *Intichiuma* ground the
same restriction applies to them as to boys. The performance is carried
out in the same way as described, and the same rules apply with regard
to the offering of food.

When a woman or girl is to be operated on, a little space is cleared
near to the main camp where men and women all assemble, except only
those who are *Mura* to the girl. A tribal *Okilia* sits down and the
girl lies with her head in his lap, and the operation is conducted as in
the case of the men and boys, being almost always performed by a tribal
*Okilia*. The tooth when taken out is lifted up with the same guttural
sound and thrown in the direction of the mother's Alcheringa camp. The
girl now springs to her feet, and seizing a small *pitchi* which has
been placed close at hand for the purpose,

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

fills it with sand, and dancing over the cleared space agitates the
*pitchi* as if she were winnowing seed. When it is emptied she resumes
her seat amongst the women. Previous to the operation the *Okilia*
places in her hair a topknot of feathers of a cockatoo, which is
returned to him later on. The girl, not her mother, must now provide an
offering of seed food for the use of the operating *Okilia*, and he in
his turn must send her an offering of meat.

Amongst the Kaitish tribe the operation on men is performed by tribal
*Okilia*, and on women and girls by tribal *Ungaraitcha* (elder
sisters), and in both cases, just as in the Arunta and Ilpirra tribes,
the tooth is, when extracted, thrown in the direction of the mother's
Alcheringa camp.

The existence as well as the details accompanying the performance of
this custom in these central tribes is of considerable interest. As is
well known, it forms amongst many of the eastern and south-eastern
tribes of Australia the most important initiation ceremony, after
passing through which the young men are admitted to the status of
manhood. Amongst the central tribes it has no such significance, and it
is not even of universal occurrence amongst them. At the same time, the
ceremony which accompanies the operation may in all probability be
regarded as indicative of a time when it was a more important rite than
it is at the present day. Circumcision and sub-incision are amongst
these tribes the initiation rites, and they are as characteristic in
this respect of the central tribes as the knocking out of teeth is of
certain tribes of the east and south-east of the continent.

If, however, we examine more in detail the accounts of the ceremony as
conducted in the Arunta and certain of the latter tribes, we find
unmistakable points of agreement which are difficult to account for on
any supposition except that the two have had a common origin in times
past.

Blandowski <span id="fr_154"></span>[1](#fn_154.md) in writing of certain
Victorian natives, says, that on arriving at manhood, a youth was
conducted by three leaders of the tribe into the recesses of the woods,
where he remained two days and one night. Being furnished with a
suitable piece of wood, he knocked out two of the front teeth

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

of his upper jaw, and on returning to the camp gave them to his mother.
Then he again returned to the woods for the same length of time. During
his absence, his mother selected a young gum tree and inserted in the
bark of the fork of two of the topmost branches the teeth which had been
knocked out. This was ever afterwards in some sense held sacred. It was
only known to certain persons of the tribe, and the youth himself was
never allowed to know where his teeth had been placed. If the youth
died, then the base of the tree was stripped of its bark, and it was
killed by fire, so that it might remain as a monument of the dead man.
It may be remarked, that it would be more likely to remain as a monument
if it were not killed, and that probably this was not the real reason
for destroying it.

Collins, <span id="fr_155"></span>[1](#fn_155.md) in an excellent account
of the rite as practised amongst the natives of a New South Wales tribe,
describes how a throwing stick was made, and with this the tooth was
knocked out by means of hitting it with a stone. The last performance
before the actual operation consisted in a man standing out with a
shield in one hand and a club in the other, “striking the shield with
the club, at every third stroke the whole party poised and presented
their spears at him, pointing them inwards and touching the centre of
the shield. This concluded the ceremonies previous to the operation; and
it appeared significant of an exercise which was to form the principal
business of their lives, the use of the spear.” Further on he says, “The
natives when speaking of the loss of the tooth always use the word
yor-lahng era-ba-diahng,” which “appears to be compounded of the name
given to the spot where the principal scene takes place, and of the most
material qualification that is derived from the whole ceremony, that is,
the throwing of the spear.”

Though Collins does not state anything very definite with regard to whom
the teeth were given, we can gather indirectly, but at the same time
quite clearly, that they came into the possession of certain women. He
says, “Ben-nil-long's sister and Da-ring-ha, Cole-be's wife, hearing the
author express a great desire to become possessed of some of these

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

teeth, procured them for him;” and again, “one of the boys who had
undergone the operation had formerly lived with the principal surgeon of
the settlement till that gentleman's departure for England. A female
relative of this boy brought the teeth to the author with a request that
he would send them to Mr. White; thus with gratitude remembering after
the lapse of some years the attention which that gentleman had shown to
her relative.”

In these accounts we see, certainly modified in detail but yet agreeing
in essential points, the two significant features of spear-throwing and
of the presenting of the teeth to some female relative of the person
operated upon. The idea which evidently lies at the root of the ceremony
in both the Arunta and Kaitish tribes on the one hand, and the Victorian
and New South Wales tribes on the other hand, is that the individual
operated upon has ceased to be a mere boy or girl as the case may be,
and has passed from the control of the mother into the ranks of the men
or women, and the tooth is probably given to the mother or female
relative as an indication of this. In those tribes in which the ceremony
is one of initiation it is not of course practised, at the present day,
upon women, but when it ceases to be an important ceremony of
initiation, then the same idea is, as it were, carried over to the women
along with the ceremony itself.

In the Central Australian tribes for example, the rite has ceased to
hold the importance which it still retains, or rather did until the
advent of the white man and their consequent extinction, amongst the
tribes of the eastern coastal district. In the former it has given place
to a new and presumably more recently developed form of initiation
ceremony—that of circumcision followed by sub-incision. Whilst this
change has been brought about, the original rite has persisted in the
form of what we have before spoken of as a rudimentary custom, and,
losing its original significance, as applied to men only, has been
extended, so that now it is common to both sexes. In its earlier form,
the tooth when extracted is given to the mother, or at least (judging
from Collins's account) to some female relative. In its rudimentary
state, as in the Arunta tribe, we find that the tooth is thrown in the
direction <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> of the camp of the
Alcheringa mother, which may perhaps be explained as indicating that in
the Alcheringa, or rather the early times to which this name is given,
the mother was entitled to the tooth. The natives can, as might have
been expected, give no reason for the custom, and the performance of
this is certainly not now associated with the idea of showing to any
living woman that the boy has passed out of her control this idea being,
as we have already seen, expressed in one of the ceremonies connected
with initiation, as now practised.

Of equal interest with the disposal of the tooth is the curious custom
in the Arunta of the erection of a shield at which the man who has been
operated upon throws boomerangs, but without hurting it. This is clearly
the equivalent of the gentle striking of the shield by the spears in the
New South Wales tribe, as described by Collins. In the one case the men
assembled touch the shield with their spears, in the other the man who
has been operated upon throws boomerangs at it, but in both we have the
fundamental idea represented that the individual passing through the
ceremony has arrived at the age of manhood when he may use the weapons
by which the men both defend themselves and secure their prey.

In the Arunta and Kaitish tribe we find, when the rite is extended to
include women as well as men, that the same two fundamental ideas are
expressed. The tooth is thrown in the direction of the mother's
Alcheringa camp, a feature carried over from the man's to the woman's
ceremony, and secondly, we have the curious ceremony of the emptying of
the *pitchi* which the girl carries on her head, and which may be
regarded as indicative of the fact that she has reached the age when she
can enter upon the duties of a woman, not the least important of which
is symbolised by the *pitchi* filled with food, gathered in the bush,
which she carries daily poised on the top of her head.

It can scarcely be doubted that there is a common origin for these
customs in the central and coastal tribes—the details of agreement just
referred to are, it seems to us, inexplicable except on this hypothesis.
This would seem to imply, inasmuch as in one group of tribes we find
tooth extraction <span id="page_457">p. 457</span> the important
ceremony, with no trace of the form of ceremonies (circumcision, &c.)
practised in the other group, whilst in the latter, side by side with
the present initiation rite, we find tooth extraction in the form of a
rudimentary custom, that the more ancient ceremony is that of tooth
extraction.

We have spoken hitherto as if it might be almost taken for granted that
the latter rite was in all cases originally restricted to men, and that
when, as in the central tribes, we find it practised by both sexes, it
is to be regarded as a custom which, losing its sacred significance,
was, as it were, passed on to the women, who then shared in it equally
with the men. We do not in reality, by any means, desire to imply that
this was of necessity the case. Into the question of what was the origin
of the custom it seems hopeless to inquire. Whether it always had a
sacred significance as it has at the present day, or whether it is a
custom to which in course of time the present sacred nature as an
initiation ceremony became, as it were, tacked on to its previous
attributes, is a problem which will probably never be settled. What we
wish to draw attention to now is the fact that in the traditions of the
Arunta tribe we have, so far as they are worth anything as evidence in
this direction, the clearest possible indication of a past time when the
things now regarded as so sacred that if seen by a woman she would be
put to death, were not thus tabu to women. In tradition after tradition
we have accounts set out in great detail of how particular women of the
Alcheringa carried the sacred *Nurtunja* just as the men did, and of how
they had Churinga just as the men had, and further, of how they
performed sacred ceremonies exactly as the men did. It can scarcely be
held that these traditions are merely fanciful creations of the men; if
so it is a curious feature that they have been built up amongst a people
to whose ideas of the fitness of things as they are now and probably
have been for some time past, any such acquaintance of the women with
the sacred objects is utterly foreign. It seems more probable that the
traditions do really indicate the former existence of a time when, in
this respect, men and women were upon terms of greater equality than
they are now. This being so it will be seen that it is at <span
id="page_458">p. 458</span> all events unsafe to take for granted that
even as a rite of initiation the knocking out of teeth has always been
confined to men. There are, it appears to us, two theories, in favour of
either of which many arguments might be adduced. According to the first
of these the knocking out of teeth may be regarded from the very first
as a sacred rite of initiation confined to the men; in those tribes in
which it has remained as the rite of initiation it has always been so
confined to the men, while in others it has been superseded by more
elaborate rites and has been passed on to the women when once its sacred
character was lost. A second theory would regard the custom of knocking
out of teeth as, at first, unconnected with any rite of initiation, and
as practised by both men and women. Starting from this basis the
customs, as we find them now developed, may be supposed to have followed
one or other of two lines. Along the first, for some unknown reason, the
rite came to be associated with initiation to, in the early days, both
manhood and womanhood. After a time (and as pointed out it seems certain
that changes in this direction have taken place) the rite came to be
confined to men, and dropped out so far as women were concerned until,
as in the eastern and south-eastern parts, it came to be a sacred
ceremony confined to the men. Along the second line the rite came also
to be associated with initiation both to manhood and womanhood, but its
place, for some also unknown reason, came to be taken by a quite
different ceremony in the case both of men and of women; for it must be
remembered that in the tribes of the Centre the women have initiation
rites just as the men have, only that the same sacredness is not
attached to them as to those of the men. With the introduction of the
new rites the old one of knocking out of a tooth lost its original
significance and persisted as a rudimentary custom, the relationship of
it to the same custom, still practised as an initiation rite in other
tribes, being unmistakably shown by a remarkable similarity in the
details of the ceremony as performed in the different tribes.

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

CEREMONY OF NOSE BORING

 

In the Arunta and Ilpirra tribes when a boy's nose has been bored, that
is as soon as the operation has been completed, he strips a piece of
bark off a gum tree, if possible, and throws it as far as he can in the
direction of the Alcheringa camp of his mother, that is where the spirit
individual of which his mother is the reincarnation lived in the
Alcheringa. This little ceremony is called *ilyabara iwuma* or the
bark-throwing, and the boy is told to do it by men who stand to him in
the relation of *Arunga, Oknia*, and *Okilia*, who also tell him that
the reason for doing it is that it will lessen the pain and promote the
healing of the wound. When the nose of a girl is bored, which is usually
by her husband very soon after she has passed into his possession, she
fills a small wooden vessel with sand, and facing in the direction of
the Alcheringa camp of her mother, executes a series of short jumps,
keeping her feet close together and her legs stiff, while she makes the
*pitchi* move as if she were winnowing seed until she gradually empties
it, after which she simply resumes her ordinary occupation. Neglect to
perform this ceremony would, so say the natives in explanation of it, be
regarded as a grave offence against her mother.

PROMOTING THE GROWTH OF THE BREASTS

 

To promote the growth of the breasts of a girl, the men assemble at the
*Ungunja* or men's camp, where they all join in singing long chants, the
words of which express an exhortation to the breasts to grow, and others
which have the effect of charming some fat and red ochre which men who
are *Gammona*, that is, brothers of her mother, have brought to the
spot, as well as head and arm bands of fur-string. These men belong to
the other moiety of the tribe to that to which the girl belongs; if she,
for example, be a Panunga, then they will be Kumara. At daylight one of
them goes out and calls her to a spot close to the *Ungunja*, to which
she comes accompanied <span id="page_460">p. 460</span> by her mother.
Here her body is rubbed all over with fat by the *Gammona* men, who then
paint a series of straight lines of red ochre down her back and also
down the centre of her chest and stomach. A wide circle is painted round
each nipple and straight lines below each of these circles. Long strings
of opossum fur-string are passed across each shoulder and under each
arm-pit; numbers of neck-rings are put round her neck, several
head-rings are placed on her forehead, and a number of tail tips are
fixed so that they droop down over the forehead and ears. All these
things have been charmed by the *Gammona* singing over them.

When this has been done the girl is taken out into the bush by her
mother, who makes a camp there at some distance from the main one, and
here the girl must stay until the *ilkinia* or lines on her body wear
off, when, but not until when, she may return to the main camp. The girl
wears the charmed necklets and head-rings until one by one they drop off
and become worn out. As we have pointed out previously, this is to be
regarded as a form of initiation ceremony concerned with women, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156.md) and may be looked upon as the equivalent
of the first ceremony of throwing up and painting the boy.

VARIOUS CUSTOMS CONCERNED WITH BLOOD, BLOOD-LETTING, AND BLOOD-GIVING,
&c.

 

In the Arunta and Ilpirra tribes a girl at the first time of
menstruation is taken by her mother to a spot close to, but apart from,
the *Erlukwirra* or women's camp, near to which no man ever goes. A fire
is made and a camp formed by the mother, the girl being told to dig a
hole about a foot or eighteen inches deep, over which she sits attended
by her own and some other tribal *Mia*, who provide her with food, one
or other of them being always with her, and sleeping by her side

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

at night time. No children of either sex are allowed to go near to her
or to speak to her. During the first two days she is supposed to sit
over the hole without stirring away; after that she may be taken out by
one or other of the old women hunting for food. When the flow ceases she
is told to fill in the hole. She now becomes what is called *Wunpa*,
returns to the women's camp, and shortly afterwards undergoes the rite
of *Atna-ariltha*, and is handed over to the man to whom she has been
allotted. She remains *Wunpa* until such time as her breasts assume the
pendent form so characteristic of the native women who have borne one or
more children, after which she is spoken of as *Arakutja*, the name for
a fully-grown woman.

Blood may be given by young men to old men of any degree of relationship
and at any time with a view to strengthening the latter. When it is
given to a man of the same moiety of the tribe as the donor it is drawn
from a vein in the middle of the arm, and when to a man of the other
moiety, it must be taken from a vein at the inner side of the arm.
Occasionally it is drawn from the back of the hand, and still more
rarely by the painful process of deeply puncturing the finger tips under
the nail.

When starting on an avenging expedition or *Atninga* every man of the
party drinks some blood, and also has some spurted over his body, so as
to make him what is called *uchuilima*, that is, lithe and active. The
elder men indicate from whom the blood is to be drawn, and the men so
selected must not decline, though the amount drawn from a single
individual is often very great; indeed, we have known of a case in which
blood was taken from a young and strong man until he dropped down from
sheer exhaustion.

In addition to the idea of strengthening the recipient, there is the
further important belief that this partaking together of blood prevents
the possibility of treachery. If, for example, an Alice Springs party
wanted to go on an avenging expedition to the Burt country, and they had
with them in camp a man of that locality, he would be forced to drink
blood with them, and, having partaken of it, would be bound not to aid
his friends by giving them warning of their danger. If he <span
id="page_462">p. 462</span> refused to drink the blood, then, as
actually happened in one case known to the authors, his mouth would be
forced open and blood poured into it, which would have just the same
binding influence as if the drinking had been a voluntary one.

Blood-drinking is also associated with special meetings of
reconciliation which sometimes take place between two groups who have
been on bad terms with one another without actually coming to a fight.
In this instance the group which is supposed to have suffered the injury
sends a messenger to the old men of the offending group, who says, “Our
people want you to come and have a friendly fight.” This peculiar form
of meeting is called *Umbirna ilirima*, which means “seeing and settling
(things).” If the offending group be willing, which they are almost sure
to be, then the meeting is held, and at the commencement each party
drinks the blood of its own members, and a more or less sham fight takes
place with boomerangs, no one being any the worse.

When a young man for the first time takes blood from another man, the
latter becomes for a time tabu to him until he chooses to release the
young man from the *intherta*, or ban of silence, by singing over his
mouth.

Apart from these special occasions, blood is not infrequently used to
assuage thirst and hunger; indeed, when under ordinary circumstances a
blackfellow is badly in want of water, what he does is to open a vein in
his arm and drink the blood.

Blood-letting is a prominent feature of certain sacred ceremonies, such
as the *Intichiuma* rite, as practised by the kangaroo men at Undiara,
the great centre of their totem, where the young men open veins in their
arms and allow the blood to stream out on to, and over, the edge of the
sacred ceremonial stone which represents the spot where a celebrated
kangaroo of the Alcheringa went down into the earth, its spirit part
remaining in the stone which arose to mark the place. In the same way at
the *Intichiuma* of the Unjiamba or Hakea flower totem held at Ilyaba,
blood from the arm is sprinkled over the stone which represents a mass
of Unjiamba.

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

The sacred pole called the *Kauaua*, which is erected at the close of
the Engwura ceremony, is painted all over with blood, and, in all sacred
ceremonies, in fact, in many of the ordinary corrobborees down derived
from either birds or plants is attached to the human body by blood drawn
either from the arm or the subincised urethra.

Women are never allowed to witness the drawing of blood for decorative
purposes; indeed, the feeling with regard to women seeing men's blood is
such that when a quarrel takes place and blood is shed in the presence
of women, it is usual for the man whose blood is first shed to perform a
ceremony connected with his own or his father or mother's totem. This is
in some manner supposed to be by way of reconciliation, and to prevent
the continuance of ill-feeling. The special term given to these
ceremonies is *Alua uparilima*, which means “the blood fading away.”
After a fight which took place recently, one of these ceremonies was
performed by an Apungerta man of the witchetty grub totem. He personated
a Chankuna (small berry) woman, to which totem his mother belonged, and
was decorated with an elaborate head-dress representing the woman's
digging-sticks, to which were affixed pendent bunches of feathers
representing Chankuna bushes with the berries on them, which the woman
was eating.

There are also various customs relating to the blood of women which may
be referred to here.

In the Kaitish and other northern tribes, when the rite of *Atna ariltha
kuma* is performed on a young woman by an *Ungaraitcha* or elder sister,
the blood is collected in a special *pitchi* which is made for the
purpose by an elder brother of the woman, and is taken to the camp,
where the *Mia, Uwinna*, and other women both smear their bodies with it
and drink some. It has been already described, in the account of the
initiation ceremonies, that the blood which flows at the operation of
*lartna* on a boy is taken to the women's camp and rubbed over the
breasts and foreheads of women who are the elder sisters of the boy and
of his mother.

The deposits of red ochre which are found in various parts are
associated with women's blood. Near to Stuart's Hole, on <span
id="page_464">p. 464</span> the Finke River, there is a red ochre pit
which has evidently been used for a long time; and tradition says that
in the Alcheringa two kangaroo women came from Ilpilla, and at this spot
caused blood to flow from the vulva in large quantities, and so formed
the deposit of red ochre. Travelling away westward they did the same
thing in other places. In much the same way it is related of the dancing
*Unthippa* women that, at a place called Wankima, in the eastern part of
the Arunta district, they were so exhausted with dancing that their
organs fell out, and gave rise to the large deposits of red ochre found
there.

Blood is occasionally given to both men and women to strengthen them
when they are ill. When given to a man—and it is only given in very
serious cases—it is drawn from the labia minora, and one of the women,
taking first of all one of the several kinds of witchetty grubs which
are eaten, dips this in the blood and gives it to the man to eat, after
which his body is rubbed over with the blood and afterwards with grease
and red ochre. When a woman is very ill and weak, one of her male
*Umba*, to whom she is *Mia alkulla*, that is, he is the son of one of
her younger sisters, may volunteer to strengthen her with his blood, in
which case all the women and children are sent away from her. The man
draws a quantity of blood from the subincised urethra, and she drinks
part of it while he rubs the remainder over her body, adding afterwards
a coating of red ochre and grease. If the woman recovers, she must not
speak to the man, or to the men who accompany him, until such time as
she has sent to him an offering of food. In all cases when a man or
woman feels ill, the first thing that is done is to rub red ochre over
the body, which may possibly be regarded in the light of a substitute
for blood, just as sometimes a ceremonial object may be rubbed over with
red ochre instead of blood.

We may mention here also certain customs, which are concerned with the
curing or strengthening of weak men and women.

In some cases of serious illness women will charm by “singing” it a
mixture of fat and red ochre, which they rub into the body of the sick
man, all classes taking part in the <span id="page_465">p. 465</span>
operation. If the man recovers he must not speak to any of the women,
except his own *Unawa*, who took part in the ceremony, until after such
time as he has made them an offering of meat. When this is done, the
women assemble at some little distance from the *Erlukwirra* or women's
camp, while the man, accompanied by his own and tribal *Okilia* (elder
brothers) and *Oknia* (fathers), carries the meat, which is most likely
kangaroo or euro flesh, and silently places it in front of the women,
who then rub him over with red ochre, thus removing the ban of silence.
The men and women then return to their respective camps, and the meat is
cooked and eaten at the women's camp.

In the northern and western Arunta and in the Ilpirra tribe, for the
purpose of strengthening a delicate woman, a part of the internal
reproductive organs (called *ertoacha*) is taken from a male opossum,
wallaby, euro, or kangaroo. The woman lies down on her back, and her
husband placing the *ertoacha* upon the *mons veneris*, “sings” over it
for some time after which the woman swallows it whole.

In some cases the same part of the animal is taken by the man and half
cooked, after which he coats it with grease, charms it by singing over
it, and then presents it to his wife; she has to swallow it whole
without having any idea of the nature of the object, which, in this
case, is given for the purpose of promoting sexual desire. For the same
purpose fluid material from the *ertoacha* may be squeezed into the
vulva.

CUSTOMS CONCERNED WITH HAIR

A man's hair always goes to some one who is either *Ikuntera* or
*Umbirna* to him. Supposing a man has three sons, then each of them is
made son-in-law to some special man whom he calls *Ikuntera-tualcha*.
The latter has the first claim to the younger man's hair. Any which
there may be to spare goes to the son of an *Ikuntera*, that is to a man
who is *Umbirna* of the donor. In this way a man receives hair from (1)
his actual mother-in-law (his principal supply), (2) from a *Gammona* or
son-in-law, (3) from an *Umbirna* or <span id="page_466">p. 466</span>
brother-in law, while (4) under certain circumstances, already
described, he receives a special supply from a particular *Umbirna* to
whom he stands in the relationship of *Ungipinna*. In addition to these,
which may be called his normal sources of supply, he will sometimes
receive hair-string as a return for some favour rendered. For example, a
man who belongs to a different totem from his father inherits the
Churinga of the latter, but they still remain in the store-house of the
father's local totemic group. A suitable present of such a valuable
article as hair-string will often persuade the head man of the father's
group to allow the son to remove, for a time, the Churinga of the former
to the store-house in which his, *i.e*. the son's, Churinga is kept.

A man when cutting or having his hair cut, which he must do
periodically, as it is his duty to present it to certain individuals,
always squats facing the direction of the Alcheringa camp of his mother.
If he fails to do this some great calamity will befall him.

At the close of the initiation ceremony of *Ariltha*, in the case of the
Northern Arunta, the elder sisters of the boy cut off a few locks of his
hair, which they keep for themselves.

The distribution of a dead man's hair has been already alluded to, as
well as the fact that in these tribes the remarkable customs according
to which a man's hair must be given to certain individuals have of
necessity prevented the existence of the feeling, so strongly developed
amongst many other Australian tribes, that on no account must a stranger
be allowed to secure even the smallest fragment of hair.

CUSTOM AT CHILD BIRTH

 

When a child is born, the fact is notified to the father by his actual
or a tribal *Mia*.

Before the child is born, the woman goes to the *Erlukwirra* or women's
camp. If there be any difficulty in childbirth the husband, who is at
his own camp, without saying anything strips off all his personal
adornments, and empties his bag or wallet of knick-knacks on to the
ground. Then a man who is *Mura* to him, without in any way referring to
the matter, <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> takes the hair-girdle, and
proceeding to the *Erlukwirra*, near to which as a general rule no man
may go, ties it tightly round the woman's body just under the breasts,
and then returns to the husband's camp. Not a word is spoken, but if
after a time the birth of the child is not announced, the husband, still
quite unadorned, walks once or twice slowly, at a distance of about
fifty yards, up and down past the *Erlukwirra* with a view to inducing
the unborn child to follow him, which it is said rarely to fail to do.

After birth the umbilical cord is cut with a stone knife, or sometimes
with the pointed end of a digging-stick at a distance of some inches
from the body of the child. There is no ligature, but the cut end is
frequently dressed with hot ashes. The afterbirth is burnt. After a few
days the attached part of the cord is cut off by the mother, who by
swathing it in fur-string makes it into a necklace called *Akurlaitcha*,
which is placed round the child's neck. The necklace is supposed to
facilitate the growth of the child, to keep it quiet and contented, to
avert illness generally, and it also has the faculty of deadening to the
child the noise of the barking of the camp dogs.

The painting of a black line over the eyebrow in imitation of the mark
on the *Erathippa* stone has already been alluded to.

FOOD RESTRICTIONS

 

In the Urabunna tribe, as in the great majority of Australian tribes
with regard to which we have information relating to their totemic
systems, each individual is strictly forbidden to eat the animal or
plant, the name of which he bears, as that of his totem. That is, for
example, an emu man or woman must not in any way injure an emu, nor must
he partake of its flesh even when he has not killed it himself.

The exact restrictions vary, however, to a certain extent in different
tribes, in some apparently, such as the Urabunna, it applies at all
times, in others, as described by Sir George Grey in the case of certain
West Australian natives, the rule is observed at some but not at all
times. Thus he says, <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157.md) “a

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

certain mysterious connection exists between a family and its *kobong*,
so that a member of the family will never kill an animal of the species
to which his *kobong* belongs; should he find it asleep, indeed he kills
it reluctantly, and never without affording it a chance of escape. This
arises from the family belief that some one individual of the species is
their nearest friend, to kill whom would be a great crime, and carefully
to be avoided. Similarly, a native who has a vegetable for his *kobong*,
may not gather it under certain circumstances, and at particular times
of the year.”

In the Arunta and other Central Australian tribes, restrictions as to
not eating the animal or plant because it bears the name of the
individual's totem may be said to agree in actual practice with those
just described with, however, this difference, that the Arunta native
does not imagine that the animal or plant, or some particular one of the
species, is his nearest friend. A man will eat only very sparingly of
his totem, though there are certain special occasions on which, as a
sacred ceremony, he partakes of his totemic animal or plant.

To this reference has been made elsewhere, <span
id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158.md) meanwhile it may be said here that, in
broad outline, the Central Australian agree with the majority of
Australian tribes in the general restriction according to which the
totem is tabooed. That this has not, however, always been the case
appears to be indicated by certain traditions in which we see very
distinct references to the eating of the totem by the members, in fact
the latter are represented as having a kind of prior claim to it for
this purpose.

The only case in which there is any general restriction applying to the
eating of an animal is in regard to the Achilpa, or “wild cat,” but in
this instance there is something of a very special nature, as the
restriction not only applies to members of the Achilpa totem but extends
to every member of the tribe except the oldest men and women.

Apart from restrictions concerned with the totems, there are others
which relate on the one hand to food which has been killed by special
individuals, and on the other to food which may not be eaten by
particular individuals at certain times of their lives.

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

Under the first series of restrictions we find that a man may not eat
the flesh of any animal which has been caught and killed, or even
handled, by his *Ikuntera* (father-in-law), *Umba* (children of his
sisters), female *Mura* and *Ipmunna*, nor by the man who is the father
of his mother-in-law. On the contrary he must share his food with his
*Ikuntera* or actual and tribal fathers-in-law, and it is his duty on
killing game to ascertain if any of them are in want of food. As a
matter of practice a man will never go out hunting with either his
*Ikuntera* or *Umba* men, as they will appropriate everything which he
kills while he is with them, so that he takes care to keep out of their
way as much as possible. In the distribution of food he gives a portion
first to his *Ikuntera*, then after feeding himself and his own *Unawa*
and children, he gives any which he does not require to his *Umba*, and
after that to his *Mura* and *Ipmunna* women. It may be added that this
giving away of food according to well-established rules is not a custom
more honoured in the breach than the observance, but is actually carried
out. The Australian native cannot be accused of a lack of generosity;
what he has he distributes freely to those to whom tribal custom tells
him that he ought to, and, it may be added, that he obeys to the letter
the injunction of taking no heed for the morrow.

Not only must a man supply the individuals named with food, but he must
also take care that, when he is eating, none of them is sufficiently
near to distinguish what he is eating, lest they should spoil it by what
is called *Equilla timma*, which means “projecting their smell into it.”
Should a man eat meat which has been killed or seen by any of these
persons, the food would disagree with him, and he would sicken and
suffer severely, a belief which has the result of securing the
observance of the custom.

If we take the case of a particular man, say a Panunga, and refer to the
table already given, it can be seen at a glance what are the classes to
which the individuals concerned with this restriction belong. They are
Kumara men and women. Bulthara women, Uknaria women, together with the
Uknaria man who is the father of the man's actual mother-in-law. <span
id="page_470">p. 470</span> The association in this respect is clearly
that between a man and, what we may call, his wife's side of the tribe,
and it is somewhat instructive to note that in the Arunta and other
Central Australian tribes, in which descent is counted in the male line,
a man continues, as it were, to pay a kind of tribute to his wife's
group during his lifetime, which may perhaps be regarded as an early
form of what obtains in so many other tribes under the different custom
of paying, as it were, a lump sum down at the time of marriage.

This is, further, the one important feature, so far as the Arunta and
other tribes akin to it are concerned, which appears to indicate in any
way a former condition in which a man owed allegiance to the group of
his wife; in no Australian tribe, so far as we know, is it the custom
for a man to take up his abode with the family of his wife and to work
for them, but in this custom we see, clearly expressed, the idea that a
man owes something to the group from which his wife comes.

The second class of restriction is of an entirely different nature, and
is associated with the idea, firstly, of reserving the best things for
the older people, secondly, of reserving certain things for the men as
opposed to the women, while, thirdly, there are restrictions which deal
with the food of individuals at particular times.

We may take the third series first. When a youth is circumcised, and
until he has undergone and recovered entirely from the rite of *ariltha*
or sub-incision, he is forbidden to eat of the flesh of a number of
animals; if he were to transgress this rule then his recovery would be
retarded and his wounds would become much inflamed. The forbidden
animals are—snakes, opossums, echidna, all kinds of lizards, mound birds
or their eggs, bandicoots, wild turkey and their eggs, eagle-hawks and
their eggs. The idea underlying this is evidently that of disciplining
the novice, in just the same way as, during the Engwura, the younger men
are not allowed to eat much food of any kind, but have to bring in the
greater part of any game which they may secure and present it to the
older men who remain in camp.

There are certain restrictions as to food connected with the <span
id="page_471">p. 471</span> early stages of pregnancy. A woman may, if
she likes to do so, eat meat, but the unborn child is supposed to resent
this by causing sickness, and therefore the woman at first only eats
vegetable food. Further still, during the first three or four months,
the husband does not kill any large game necessitating the use of spear
or boomerang, but only catches rats, opossums and other small game. It
is supposed that the spirit of the unborn child follows him about and
gives warning of his approach to large game. Should the man attempt to
throw a spear or boomerang at any animal, then the spirit child will
cause the weapon to take a crooked course, and the man will know that he
has lost his skill in the chase and that the child is angry with him.
If, however, despite this warning, the father persists in trying to kill
large game, then the sickness and sufferings of the mother would be very
largely increased. There is, however, nothing to prevent the man from
eating game which has been killed by other men. The natives can offer no
explanation of this custom, and it may be pointed out that the
restriction with regard to killing game does not appear to have the
slightest reference to anything which has to do with the totems.

The list of foods which an *Ulpmerka*, that is a boy who has not been
circumcised, may not eat is of considerable length. We append it with
the list of penalties following on transgression of the rules. The idea
throughout is evidently that which obtains so largely in savage tribes
of reserving the best things for the use of the elders, and, more
especially, of the elder men. The forbidden foods are as follows:—

Kangaroo tail (*Okirra purra*); penalty, premature age and decay.

Wild turkey and its eggs (*Ertua*); penalty, premature age.

Female bandicoot (*Quirra*); penalty, probably bleed to death at
circumcision.

Large lizards (*Ilchaquarra* or *Parenthie*); penalty, become
*Arro-iwama*, that is, one with an abnormal and diseased craving for
sexual intercourse, an individual held in much contempt.

Emu fat (*Erlia inga*); penalty, abnormal development of the penis.

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

All kinds of parrots and cockatoos; penalty, development of a hollow on
the top of the head and of a hole in the chin.

Large quail (*Tulkara*) and its eggs; penalty, non-growth of beard and
whiskers and general stoppage of growth.

Eagle-hawk (*Irritcha*), except the legs; penalty, premature age and
leanness; the leg is supposed to impart strength and generally to
improve the growth of the limb. Boys are often struck on the calf of the
leg with the leg bone of an eagle-hawk, as thereby strength passes from
the bone into the boy's leg.

Wild-cat (*Achilpa*); penalty, painful and foul-smelling eruption on
head and neck. This restriction applies until very old age is reached.

Podargus (*Aurainga*) and its eggs; penalty, an ugly enlargement of the
mouth.

The following restrictions and penalties concern girls and young women
until after they have had a child, or until their breasts begin to be
pendent, in the characteristic way of the native women. They may not
eat:—

Female bandicoot (*Quirra*); penalty, continual flow of the menses.

Large lizards; penalty, become *Arro-iwama*, that is, one with an
abnormal craving for sexual intercourse; such a woman would be always
tempting men irrespective of tribal laws with regard to class, and would
thus, sooner or later, meet with severe punishment, probably with death.

Large quail and its eggs; penalty, non-development of the breasts.

Wild-cat (*Achilpa*); penalty, the same as in the case of the men.

Kangaroo tail (*Okirra pura*); penalty, premature age, baldness,
non-development of the breasts.

Emu fat; penalty, malformation of the vulva.

Cockatoos and parrots of all kinds; penalty, development of a hollow on
the top of the head, and of a hole in the chin.

Echidna (*Inarlinga*); penalty, general malformation of the genital
organs.

Brown hawk (*Hieracidea orientalis*, native name *Irkalanja*); penalty,
absence of milk from the breasts, which will also <span id="page_473">p.
473</span> swell until they burst. Young women are only allowed to eat
the young nestlings. The customs connected with this particular bird are
curious. Not only is it *ekirinja* or forbidden to the young women, but,
if one of them be suckling a child and she sees one of these birds, she
at once makes haste to turn so that her breast cannot be seen by the
bird, because, if the bird should catch sight of it, or worse still, if
its shadow were to fall on it, then the milk would fail and the breast
would swell and burst. The women also believe that if they eat the old
birds their sons will be afflicted with varicose veins (*ulurkna*) on
the forehead, causing much disfigurement.

While the *Arrakurta* is out in the bush the actual *Mia*, that is, his
mother, may not eat opossum, large carpet snake, large lizard, and fat
of any sort, or else she would retard her son's recovery.

A curious restriction applying to women during the time of pregnancy,
and also during the menstrual period, is that they may not, during the
continuance of either of these, gather *Irriakura*, the bulb which
forms, together with Munyeru (*Portulaca* sp.), a staple vegetable food;
the breaking of this rule would result in the failure of the supply of
*Irriakura*. With this exception, there are no restrictions with regard
to vegetable food, except in the case of individuals whose totem is one
of them.

CANNIBALISM

There is very clear evidence that during a former stage cannibalism was
a well-recognised custom. We have already described certain ceremonies
performed at the Engwura which can only be regarded as pointing back to
the existence of a different state of affairs from that which now
obtains. For example, in the *Quabarra Ingwurninga inkinja*, <span
id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159.md) two men had their bodies decorated with
circles of white down which were supposed to represent the skulls of
slain and eaten men. The performers themselves represented the *Ulthana*
or spirits of the dead men wandering about in search of those who had
killed and eaten them. In another ceremony two Achilpa men were engaged
in cooking the body of a third; in another,

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

concerned with the white bat totem, one of the performers carried on his
head an object representing a limp, dead body; and in the traditions
dealing with the wanderings of the wild dogs, the men are continually
referred to as killing and eating other wild dog men and women.

These ceremonies may be regarded as probably indicative of what took
place in past times amongst the ancestors of the present Arunta tribe,
and of what still takes place amongst the Luritcha tribe where enemies
are eaten. Care is always taken at the present day, amongst the latter,
to destroy the bones, as the natives believe that unless this is done
the victims will arise from the coming together of the bones, and will
follow and harm those who have killed and eaten them. It is regarded as
especially essential to destroy the skull—an existing belief which may
be compared with the tradition referring to the early lizard man, whose
head was not destroyed, and who therefore came to life again when his
brother spoke to the head.

In the Luritcha tribe also young children are sometimes killed and
eaten, and it is not an infrequent custom, when a child is in weak
health, to kill a younger and healthy one and then to feed the weakling
on its flesh, the idea being that this will give to the weak child the
strength of the stronger one.

As usual, in regard to customs such as this, it is by no means easy to
find out exactly what takes place, as the natives of one part of the
country will assure you that they do not indulge in the habit, but that
they know that those of other parts do. When the accused are questioned,
they in turn lay the same charge against their accusers and so on, often
from group to group.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[452:1](ntca14.htm#fr_153.md) Any food is given
except the totemic animal or plant of the recipient. This may possibly
be a rudimentary form of the more elaborate ceremony of food-giving to
novices described by Mr. Howitt in connection with the Jeraeil of the
Kurnai tribe. *Journ. Anth. Inst*., May 1885, p. 317.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[453:1](ntca14.htm#fr_154.md) *Trans. Phil. Soc.
Victoria*, vol. i., p. 72.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[454:1](ntca14.htm#fr_155.md) *An Account of the
English Colony of N.S.W*., 1804, pp. 367–373.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[460:1](ntca14.htm#fr_156.md) In the tribes dealt
with by Roth there does not appear to be the equivalent of this
ceremony, what he describes as the first initiation ceremony of women
being that of introcision, the equivalent of the *Ariltha kuma* ceremony
amongst the central tribes, *op. cil.*, p. 174.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[467:1](ntca14.htm#fr_157.md) *Expedition in North
West and Western Australia*, 1841, vol. ii., p. 228.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[468:1](ntca14.htm#fr_158.md) Chapter VI.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[473:1](ntca14.htm#fr_159.md) *Ingwurninga* means
bones; *inkinja*, arisen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Customs of Kurdaitcha and Illapurinja and the
Avenging Party or Atninga](ntca15.md)
