[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl03)  [Next](isl05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

#### CHAPTER ONE

# The Qur’ān: The Word of God

The departure point of the Islamic religion, the central article of
faith from which all else flows, may be stated as follows: God (the only
God there is: *al-Ilāh*, *Allah* in Arabic; *El*, *Elohim*, *Jahweh* in
Hebrew; *Khudā* or *Yazdān* in Persian, *Tanri* in Turkish, ὁ Θεός in
Greek, *Deus* in Latin, *God* in plain English) has spoken to man in the
Qur’ān.

This divine communication is seen as the final stage in a long series of
divine communications conducted through the prophets. It began with
Adam, the first man, who was also the first prophet, because he was the
first to whom God revealed Himself.

After Adam, God continued to address men through prophets, to warn them
that their happiness lay in worshiping Him and submitting themselves to
Him, and to tell them of the terrible consequences of disobedience. In
each case, however, the message was changed and deformed by perverse
men. Finally, in His mercy, God sent down His final revelation through
the seal of His prophets, Muhammad, in a definitive form which would not
be lost.

The Qur’ān, then, is the Word of God, for Muslims. While controversies
have raged among them as to the sense in which this is true--whether it
is the created or uncreated Word, whether it is true of every Arabic
letter or only of the message as a whole, that it is *true* has never
been questioned by them.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

The Qur’ān was revealed in Arabic. It is a matter of faith in Islam that
since it is of Divine origin it is inimitable, and since to translate is
always to betray, Muslims have always deprecated and at times prohibited
any attempt to render it in another language. Anyone who has read it in
the original is forced to admit that this caution seems justified; no
translation, however faithful to the meaning, has ever been fully
successful. Arabic when expertly used is a remarkably terse, rich and
forceful language, and the Arabic of the Qur’ān is by turns striking,
soaring, vivid, terrible, tender and breathtaking. As Professor Gibb has
put it, "No man in fifteen hundred years has ever played on that
deeptoned instrument with such power, such boldness, and such range of
emotional effect." <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) It is meaningless
to apply adjectives such as "beautiful" or "persuasive" to the Qur’ān;
its flashing images and inexorable measures go directly to the brain and
intoxicate it.

It is not surprising, then, that a skilled reciter of the Qur’ān can
reduce an Arabic-speaking audience to helpless tears, that for thirteen
centuries it has been ceaselessly meditated upon, or that for great
portions of the human race, the "High-speech" of seventh-century Arabia
has become the true accents of the Eternal.

The selections which follow here have been taken from Professor
Arberry's translation, the only one in English which has succeeded in
suggesting the extraordinary qualities of the original. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[16:1](isl04.htm#fr_0) <span id="page_243">p.
243</span> H. A. R. Gibb, *Mohammedanism* (2nd Ed.; New York, 1953), p.
37.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[16:2](isl04.htm#fr_1) A. J. Arberry, *The Koran
Interpreted* (New York, 1955).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. God Speaks to Man](isl05)
