[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl13)  [Next](isl15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4. *Muhammad as Model and Guide*

The Prophet is not only the founder and legislator of the community: he
is the model for Muslims. It is accepted as axiomatic that every act he
made after the beginning of the Revelation was preserved by God from
error; had it

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

not been so, then the Revelation itself would be cast into doubt, a
thing God could never have permitted. There-fore, Muhammad's slightest
act was rightly guided, and of moral value. For traditional Muslims,
everything the Prophet did is a part of his *sunna*: his treatment of
children, the way he broke his fast, how he cleaned his teeth and wore
his beard, are all worthy of study and emulation.

 

Bukhārī . . . from Abū Hurayra: "The Messenger of God said: 'While a man
was walking on the road, his thirst grew strong and he found a well and
descended into it and drank and was leaving, when he saw a dog hanging
out its tongue and licking the ground from thirst, and the man said,
'This dog's thirst is like the thirst I had,' and he went into the well
again, filled his shoe with water, and held it between his teeth (while
he climbed out), and gave the dog to drink. And God approved of his act,
and pardoned his sins.' They said, 'What, Messenger of God, shall we be
rewarded for what we do for animals?' He replied, 'Yes. There is a
reward on every living creature.'" <span id="fr_36"></span>[30](#fn_36)

 

Bukhārī . . . from ‘A’isha: "A man asked permission to speak to the
Prophet, and when the Prophet saw him he said, 'Unhappy the brother of
his clan! Unhappy the son of his clan! (What a bad fellow!)' Then when
the man sat down the Prophet looked cheerfully on him and spoke kindly
to him. When the man went away, ‘A’isha said, 'Messenger of God, when
you saw him you said this and that, then to his face you were cheerful
and kindly!' And the Messenger of God said, 'Why, ‘A’isha, when have you
ever seen me act grossly with people? Verily, the worst place on the
resurrection day in the sight of God will be that of the man whom people
avoided fearing his mischief.'" <span id="fr_37"></span>[31](#fn_37)

 

Bukhārī . . . from ‘Abdallah ibn ‘Umar: "The Messenger of God said,
'When any man says to his brother 'Thou infidel!' one of the two
deserves the name.'" <span id="fr_38"></span>[32](#fn_38)

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

Bukhārī . . . from Ibn ‘Abbās: "A woman came to the Prophet and said,
'My mother vowed to go on the pilgrimage, and died before fulfilling it.
Should I make the pilgrimage in her place?' He said, 'Yes, do it. If
your mother had had a debt, would you have paid it?' She said, 'Yes.'
'Then pay what she owes, for God is more worthy than anyone that we
should keep our promises to Him.'" <span id="fr_39"></span>[33](#fn_39)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Anas ibn Mālik: "Three persons came to the houses of
the Prophet's wives to ask about his religious practice, and when they
told them, it was as if they belittled it. And they said, 'In what do we
differ from the Prophet? Yet God has pardoned all his past and future
faults.' One of them said, 'As for me, I shall pray all night long.'
Another said, 'I shall fast every day continuously.' The third said, 'I
shall draw apart from women and never marry.' Then the Messenger of God
went to them and said: 'Are you those who said thus and so? But I dread
God more than you and revere him more, yet I fast and break the fast; I
pray and I sleep too, and I marry women. Whosoever turns from my
practice \[*sunna*\] is none of mine.'" <span
id="fr_40"></span>[34](#fn_40)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī: "We took some women captives,
and in coition practised withdrawal \[*kunnā* *na‘zilu*\] so as not to
have offspring from them. We asked the Messenger of God about this and
he said, 'Is that what you did?' Then he said three times: 'There is not
a soul who is to be born for the day of resurrection, but that it will
be born.'" <span id="fr_41"></span>[35](#fn_41) \[This *ḥadīth* is used
today to overcome objections to birth control.\]

 

Bukhārī . . . from ‘Abdallah ibn Ja‘far ibn Abī Tab: "I saw the
Messenger of God eating fresh dates with cucumbers." <span
id="fr_42"></span>[36](#fn_42)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Abū Hurayra: "The Prophet said, 'The time draws near,
and the good works grow less, and avarice appears, and the *ḥarj*
increases.' They said, 'What is the *ḥarj*?' And he said, 'It is murder,
murder!'" <span id="fr_43"></span>[37](#fn_43)

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Bukhārī . . . from Anas ibn Mālik: "I served the Prophet for ten years,
and never did he say 'Uff!' (disgustedly) either for what I had done or
left undone." <span id="fr_44"></span>[38](#fn_44)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Usāma ibn Zayd: "One of the Prophet's daughters sent
him this message while we were with him. 'My son is at the point of
death.' We said, 'There is no god but God!' and he sent her as follows:
'Peace be upon you. What God takes is His, and what He gives is His.
Everything is determined by Him, therefore take this into account and be
patient.' Then she sent adjuring him to come, so the Prophet went, and
we went with him. And the child was placed on the Prophet's lap, who was
trembling, while his eyes flowed tears. Then Sa‘d said to him, 'What is
this, Messenger of God?' He said, 'It is compassion, which God places as
He will in the hearts of His servants. God has no mercy on those who do
not have mercy.'" <span id="fr_45"></span>[39](#fn_45)

 

Muslim . . . from Abū Dharr: "Some of the Companions of the Prophet said
to him, 'Messenger of God, the rich have borne away the rewards. They
pray as we do, fast as we do, and besides they make alms with the
surplus of their wealth!' He answered, 'And how has God not given you
wherewithal to make alms? To say 'Glory to God' is an alms; to say 'God
is most great!' is an alms, and similarly, 'Praise be to God. There is
no god but God!' Whatever you bid to the good, it is an alms, when you
reject the disapproved, it is an alms. Each time you perform the
conjugal act, it is an alms.' They said, 'What? We can satisfy our
fleshly appetites and gain a reward?' He answered, 'Is not the one who
satisfies his appetites illicitly guilty of a sin? Just so, one who
satisfies them lawfully gains a reward.'" <span
id="fr_46"></span>[40](#fn_46)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Anas: "The Prophet said: 'No one has tasted the
sweetness of faith who does not love his fellow-man, not loving him for
anything but God's sake, or would not find being thrown into a fire
preferable to infidelity after God had delivered him from that, and to
whom God and His prophet are not dearer than all other things.'" <span
id="fr_47"></span>[41](#fn_47)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[87:30](isl14.htm#fr_36) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
117.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[87:31](isl14.htm#fr_37) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
121.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[87:32](isl14.htm#fr_38) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
139.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[87:33](isl14.htm#fr_39) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
431.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[87:34](isl14.htm#fr_40) *Ibid*., Vol. III, pp.
410, 411.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[87:35](isl14.htm#fr_41) *Ibid*., Vol. III, p.
448.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[87:36](isl14.htm#fr_42) *Ibid*., Vol. III, p.
506.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[87:37](isl14.htm#fr_43) <span id="page_245">p.
245</span> *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p. 368.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[87:38](isl14.htm#fr_44) *Ibid*., Vol. III, p.
122.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[87:39](isl14.htm#fr_45) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
43.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[87:40](isl14.htm#fr_46) Cited in *Forty Hadiths
of al-Nāwāwī* also Cf. G. H. Bousquet, *Classiques de l’Islamologie*
(Algiers, 1950).

<span id="fn_47"></span>[87:41](isl14.htm#fr_47) Al-Bukhārī, *op. cit.*,
Vol. IV, p. 123.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The Preservation of the Prophetic Practice (Sunna)](isl15)
