[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl12)  [Next](isl14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. *Muhammad as Founder and Legislator*

Muhammad is often referred to by the Muslim philosophers as "The
Lawgiver," since from his governing of the early community and the
example of his life the Islamic Law has been systematized. The Law is
usually seen as of Divine origin, but mediated by the Prophet. In the
important task of establishing God's community on earth, there could be
no error, and by continually referring to the prophetic period, the
Muslim community hopes to be preserved from error. In a sense, then, the
Prophet's *sunna* is revelation, and it is embodied in the *Ḥadīth*.

Historically speaking, Muhammad was the exponent of a more civilized
existence in a land dominated by the wild and violent norms of the
Beduins. Even the life of the towns of Arabia was deeply affected by
their setting in the sea of nomadism, and changing this barbaric world
was no easy task.

The cultural situation of Arabia in the seventh century

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

was not too dissimilar to that described in the Book of Judges, and one
is struck by the essential similarity of Muhammad to the prophets of the
Old Testament--there is his tenderness for his people, his personal
mildness where his own affairs were concerned and his relentless zeal
where he considered that the affairs of God were concerned.

However, the *Ḥadīth* literature is so rich that one may, while never
feeling that he has fully understood this extraordinary man, add vivid
details to the general prophetic type; his daily life is depicted for
us, and there are the flashes of kindly irony, and his joy in the simple
pleasures of life.

The typical form of a fully sound *ḥadīth* is as follows:

 

Al-Bukhārī writes: "‘Abdallah ibn al-Aswad told me: 'Al-Fadl ibn
al-‘Atā’ told us: 'Isma‘īl ibn Umayya told us on the authority of Yaḥya
ibn ‘Abdallah ibn Ṡayfī that he heard Abū Ma‘bad, the freedman of Ibn
‘Abbās, say, 'I heard Ibn ‘Abbās say: 'When the Prophet, the blessings
of God be upon him, and peace, sent Mu‘adh to the Yemen, he said to him:
'You will come upon some of the People of the Book, so the first thing
you will call on them to do is to profess the Oneness of God. When they
have learned that, inform them that God has prescribed for the five
ritual prayers a day. When they have made the ritual prayers, inform
them that God has imposed *zakāt* on their possessions, to be taken from
the rich and given to the poor. When they have accepted all this, then
take the tax from them, but leave them their most precious
possessions:'"'"'" <span id="fr_24"></span>[18](#fn_24)

 

The following *ḥadīths* are taken from the "sound" collections of
Bukhārī and Muslim, and I have suppressed all but the first and last
links of the *isnād*s.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

Bukhārī . . . from ‘Abdallah: "I said, 'Messenger of God, what is the
greatest sin?' 'It is to make an idol for God, who created you.' 'Then
what?' 'To kill your own child from motives of economy.' \[lit., fearing
lest he eat with you.\] 'And then what?' 'To commit adultery with your
neighbor's wife.'" <span id="fr_25"></span>[19](#fn_25)

 

Bukhārī . . . from ‘A’isha: "The Prophet did something and thus
permitted it for others, but some people still abstained from it. And
that came to the Prophet, and he went into the pulpit, and praised God.
Then he said, 'What ails those people who refrain from a thing I have
done? For by God, I know God better than they do, and I am more fearful
of offending him.'" <span id="fr_26"></span>[20](#fn_26)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Abū Sa‘īd al-Khudrī: "The Prophet was more shy than a
virgin in her green years. When he saw a thing he disliked, we knew it
from his face." <span id="fr_27"></span>[21](#fn_27)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Abū Salama from Mir: "A man who had become a Muslim
came to the Prophet, God's benediction and peace be on him, and
confessed to fornication. The Prophet turned away from him. This
happened until the man had confessed four times. Then the Prophet said
to him, 'Are you insane?' 'No,' he said. 'Are you married?' He replied
'Yes,' and the Prophet ordered him to be stoned at the Muṡalla \[mosque
outside Medina\]. When the stones struck him, he ran away, but he was
caught and stoned until he was dead. Then the Prophet--the blessing of
God and peace be upon him--spoke well of him and prayed over him." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[22](#fn_28)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Ibn ‘Umar: "They brought the Prophet, on whom be
God's benediction and peace, a Jew and a Jewess who had committed
fornication. He said to them: 'What do you find in your book?' They
said: 'Our rabbis blacken the face of the guilty and expose them to
public ridicule.' ‘Abdallah ibn Salām (who had been a Jew) said,
'Messenger of God, tell the Jews to bring the Torah.' They

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

brought it, but a Jew put his hand over the verse which prescribes
stoning and began to read what came before it and after it. Ibn Salām
said to him 'Raise your hand,' and there was the verse about stoning
beneath his hand. The Messenger of God gave the order, and they were
stoned." Ibn ‘Umar added: "They were stoned on the level ground and I
saw the man leaning over the woman to shield her from the stones." <span
id="fr_29"></span>[23](#fn_29)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Anas ibn Mālik, servant of the Prophet: "A group of
people from the tribe of ‘Ukl came to the Prophet and accepted Islam.
Then they became ill in Medina, and he ordered them to go to the
camel-herd of the public purse and drink the urine and the milk (as
medicine). They did, and were cured. Then they renounced their religion,
killed the herdsmen and stole the camels. He sent trackers after them,
and they were captured. And he cut off their hands and their feet and
burnt out their eyes and did not cauterize their wounds, so that they
died." <span id="fr_30"></span>[24](#fn_30)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Ibn ‘Abbās: "The Prophet cursed men who act like
women and women who act like men, and said, 'Drive them from your
houses.' He expelled such people, and ‘Umar did it as well." <span
id="fr_31"></span>[25](#fn_31)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Sa‘d ibn Abī Waqqās: "The Messenger of God refused to
let ‘Uthmān ibn Maẓ‘ūn make a vow of chastity. Had he allowed him, we
would all have been castrated." <span id="fr_32"></span>[26](#fn_32)

 

Bukhārī . . . from ‘A’isha: "A Beduin came to the Prophet and said 'Do
you kiss children? We never do.' And the Prophet said, 'What shall I do
to give back to you the mercy God has taken from your heart?'" <span
id="fr_33"></span>[27](#fn_33)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Abū Hurayra: "A Beduin came to the Messenger of God
and said, 'Messenger of God, my wife has given birth to a black
male-child.' 'Have you camels?' the Prophet asked. 'Yes,' said the
Beduin. 'Are they ever ash-colored?' 'Yes,' said the Beduin. 'And how is
that?' he asked.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Something in the
blood changed them.' 'Then perhaps something in the blood has changed
your son,' said the Prophet." <span id="fr_34"></span>[28](#fn_34)

 

Bukhārī . . . from Sahl ibn Sa‘d: "A woman came to the Messenger of God,
and said, 'Messenger of God, I have come to offer you my person.' The
Messenger of God gazed upon her and looked her up and down. Then he
lowered his head. And when the woman saw that he had made no decision
about her, she sat down. One of the Prophet's Companions rose and said,
'Messenger of God, if you have no need of her, marry her to me.' He
asked, 'Do you have anything (to give her as marriage portion)?' 'No, by
God, Messenger of God.' 'Then go to your people and see if you can find
something.' The man went and returned, and said, 'No, by God, I found
nothing, Messenger of God.' He said, 'Look; even for a ring made of
iron.' He went and came back and said, 'No, by God, Messenger of God,
not even a ring made of iron, but here is my waist-wrapper.' Sahl added,
'It was not large enough as that he could have given her the half of
it.' The Messenger of God asked, 'What would she do with your
waist-wrapper? If you wear it, she will get nothing out of it, and if
she wears it you will get nothing out of it.' The man sat down for a
long time, and then he rose to go. The Messenger of God saw him leaving
and ordered him to be called back. When he came, he said, 'How much of
the Qur’ān do you know?' He replied, 'I know *sūra* so and so, and such
a one, and such a one.' He said, 'Could you read them on the surface of
your heart?' 'Yes,' said the man. 'Go then. I give her to you for what
you have of the Qur’ān.'" <span id="fr_35"></span>[29](#fn_35)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[84:18](isl13.htm#fr_24) Al-Bukhārī, ed. Krehl &
Juynboll, *Kitāb al-Jāmi‘ al-Sahīh* (Leyden, 1868-1908), p. 445. The
*Sahīh* has also been translated into French by O. Houdas and W. Marcais
(Paris, 1903-1914).

<span id="fn_25"></span>[84:19](isl13.htm#fr_25) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
115.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[84:20](isl13.htm#fr_26) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
139.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[84:21](isl13.htm#fr_27) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
139.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[84:22](isl13.htm#fr_28) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
302.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[84:23](isl13.htm#fr_29) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, pp.
300, 309.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[84:24](isl13.htm#fr_30) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
298, several versions.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[84:25](isl13.htm#fr_31) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
308.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[84:26](isl13.htm#fr_32) *Ibid*., Vol. III, p.
413.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[84:27](isl13.htm#fr_33) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
114.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[84:28](isl13.htm#fr_34) *Ibid*., Vol. IV, p.
431.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[84:29](isl13.htm#fr_35) *Ibid*., Vol. III, p.
403.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Muhammad as Model and Guide](isl14)
