[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](isl21)  [Next](isl23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. *The Universality of The Law*

Until the nineteenth century A.D. the general tendency of the *‘ulamā’*
was to expand the practical application of the Law--already in theory
eternal and universal--so as to give religious value to every act and
aspect of life.

One means of doing this was the legal interpretations of the *muftīs*,
the jurisconsults. While the *qāḍī*, or judge, heard cases and
administered law, the *muftī* gave his expert opinion only when it was
formally requested about some point of law not fully covered by the
*fiqh* books. Thus new situations could be met within the framework of
the Law. The answer of the *muftī* constituted a *fatwa*, a legal
opinion which formed legal precedent and helped determine the practical
application of the Law.

The following *fatwas* were given by Ebū Su’ūd (Abū Su‘ūd), the famous
*muftī* of Sulayman "The Magnificent" (Ottoman Emperor (A.D. 1520-1566),
who was Shaykh-al-Islam, or Grand Muftī of the empire, from A.D. 1545 to
1574.

In themselves historically interesting, they illustrate the point that
within the traditional confines of the Law there is a considerable area
for freedom of interpretation. When

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

the ruler could rely on co-operative *‘ulamā’*--and due to his control
of posts, professorships and fellowships, this was usually possible,
after the neo-orthodox Saljūq restoration--this freedom of
interpretation could be invoked on behalf of the ruler's interests.

The "People of the Book"--Christians, Jews, Samaritans, Mandaeans,
etc.--were permitted to apply their own legal systems in Muslim states,
but certain aspects of the Muslim law applied to them as well,
especially when they offended against Muslim morality.

In giving his *fatwas*, Ebū [Su‘ūd](errata.htm#1) is guided by the
Ḥanafī School, the official school of the Ottoman Empire.

 

1\. *Question*: When in several Muslim villages there is not a single
mosque, and the inhabitants do not perform the congregational prayers,
must the authorities force them to build a mosque and punish those who
neglect to pray there?

*Answer*: Yes. In A.H. 940 \[A.D. 1533\] express edicts were issued for
the attention of the local rulers of the Well-protected \[Ottoman\]
Empire, that they compel the inhabitants of such villages to construct
mosques and establish regular prayers. They shall proceed accordingly.
Ebū Su‘ūd wrote as follows, God have mercy on him: "The Call to Prayer
is one of the distinguishing characteristics of Islam, so that if the
people of a city, town, or village refuse, the *Imām* should force them,
and if they do not do it, he should take up arms against them. And if
the people of a town neglect the Call to Prayer, the performance of
prayer, and the congregational prayers, he must fight them, for these
are earmarks and outward signs of religion." <span
id="fr_76"></span>[28](#fn_76)

2\. *Question*. One of the conditions of marriage is the *walī* (the
legally empowered representative of the bride), who is a necessary
condition for the valid performance of matrimony for minors,
mentally-ill women, and slave-women. There is disagreement in the case
of a mature free woman of sound mind, as to whether she may
independently contract marriage.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Abū Sulaymān (the
disciple of the Ḥanafī doctor Muhammad al-Shaybānī) reports Shaybānī as
holding her marriage null and void. Abū Hafs (also his student), reports
him as saying it is permissible if she has no representative, but if she
does it depends on his consent; if he permits it takes place; if he
refuses the marriage is void, regardless of whether the husband is her
equal or not. Is the decision a judge may make on this conflicting
evidence effective?

*Answer*: In the year A.D. 951 \[A.D. 1544\] the *qāḍis* were enjoined
to accept no marriage contract without the permission of the bride's
*walī*; Ebū Su‘ūd wrote this.

3\. *Question*: In the *Muḥīt* (law-book) it says: "A Ḥanafī may reckon
by Shāfi‘i law as regards eating hyena-flesh and purposely neglecting to
say 'In the name of God!' and a Shāfi‘ī may reckon by Ḥanafī law as
regards drinking *muthallath* \[wine boiled to a third of the original
volume: not punishable for Ḥanafīs\], and marriage without a *walī*."
Now if the judge says "In this matter the precedents and opinions
differ, so I shall follow the other doctrine here; it is permissible to
regard her marriage as legal," is his verdict legally valid?

*Answer*: Since it is illegal, it is certainly not valid. The authority
of the *qāḍi* stems from the permission and authority of the holder of
caliphal power. Also, the *qāḍis* have been enjoined to make use of the
soundest opinion, so that the option of basing themselves on this legal
disagreement is taken from them, especially since the general corruption
of our era is obvious (and very few can correctly interpret the Law).

The original of the Imperial Decree is preserved in the Law courts of
Istanbul, Pera, and Scutari, forbidding such practices. The corruptness
of such practices is clearer than day; if they are followed, the
families of certain people will come to ruin! <span
id="fr_77"></span>[29](#fn_77)

4\. *Question*: If the Jew Bakr says to the Christian Bishr, "Your
Prophet Jesus (God's blessing be upon him!) was (God forbid!) an
illegitimate child," what must be done with the accursed one according
to the Law?

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

*Answer*: The unbelievers who publicly abuse the prophets (God's
blessing be upon them all) shall be put to death; Ebū Su‘ūd wrote this
. <span id="fr_78"></span>[30](#fn_78)

5\. *Question*: If Zayd says "The book *Fuṡūṡ al-Ḥikam* of the *Ṡūfī*
Shaykh Ibn al-‘Arabī is outside the sublime *Sharī‘a* and was composed
to misguide people; whoever studies it is a heretic (*mulḥid*)," what
should be done with him according to the Law?

*Answer*: It is well known that this book contains expressions
impossible to reconcile correctly with the *Sharī‘a*; the false
superstition with which certain ignoramuses who are unaware of the
procedures of the sublime *Sharī‘a* have attempted to reconcile them
deserve neither confidence nor respect. There is no doubt that the
correct statements, found in his book are his own, but as for those
which it is impossible to reconcile with the *Sharī‘a*, the shaykh's
fame as well as his verifiable testimony in his other works testify that
they are erroneously ascribed to him. It is well known that a certain
Jew interpolated them so as to lead people into error. \[This is a fable
designed to avoid condemnation of a brother Muslim.\]

It is necessary for Muslims to be on guard against them, and an Imperial
Prohibition has been issued to that effect. In any case, avoidance is
necessary. <span id="fr_79"></span>[31](#fn_79)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[135:28](isl22.htm#fr_76) *Ibid*., pp. 70, 71.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[135:29](isl22.htm#fr_77) *Ibid*., p. 75.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[135:30](isl22.htm#fr_78) *Ibid*., p. 78.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[135:31](isl22.htm#fr_79) *Ibid*., pp. 77, 78.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](isl23)
