[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sdr01)  [Next](sdr03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662308/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians*, by Magus Incognito, \[1918\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span id="img_fig01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure 1. Mystic
Symbol of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood](tn/fig01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig01.jpg.md)  
Figure 1. Mystic Symbol of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood  
</span>

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### PART I

### THE ROSICRUCIANS AND THEIR SECRET DOCTRINE

The student of the history of occultism and the esoteric teachings, and
even the average reader of current books and magazines, finds many
references to "The Rosicrucians," a supposed ancient secret society
devoted to the study of occult doctrines and the manifestation of occult
powers. But when such person seeks to obtain detailed information
concerning this supposed ancient "order" he finds himself baffled and
defeated. Before acknowledging the futility of the quest, however, he
usually investigates one or more so-called "orders" having as a part of
their title the word "Rosicrucian," only to find himself invited to join
such "order" upon the payment of a fee or fees ranging from a small
amount in some cases to quite large amounts in others, each "order"
claiming to be the "only original order," and asserting that all the
others are base imitators.

The truth is that there is not in existence, and never has been in
existence, any popular occult order sanctioned by the real Rosicrucians,
which anyone may join upon payment of fees, large or small, just as he
may join any of the better known fraternal organizations of which there
are so many. The true Rosicrucians have no formal organization, and are
held together only by the ties of common interest in the occult and
esoteric studies, and by the common

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

acceptance of certain fundamental principles of belief and knowledge.
This unorganized "order" has members in all walks of life, and in all
countries, and its members never announce themselves as "Rosicrucians"
to the general public. Admission to this unorganized "order" is never
granted upon the payment of a fee, and is possible only upon the request
and recommendation of three members in good standing who have themselves
been members for a certain period of time, and who have attained a
certain degree of proficiency in the attainment of the esoteric
knowledge, and in demonstrating the principles discovered by them under
the direction of certain higher adepts in the arcane wisdom.

Members of the Rosicrucian body are prominent in the councils of nearly
all of the occult organizations and societies throughout the world—in
fact, it is these persons who are the real leaven in the general mass,
and who keep alive the Sacred Flame of Truth in them. Many Rosicrucians
are also prominent in philosophic and scientific circles, and some of
them are men quite prominent in the large affairs of the business and
professional world, and in the ranks of statesmanship. Others are
prominent in movements like the "labor movement" and similar activities.
Some are prominent in the councils of the various churches, and others
are leaders in Masonry and similar secret societies. In all of such
circles the Rosicrucians exert a powerful influence, and always in the
direction of good.

#### "The Brothers of the Rosy Cross"

The modern interest in the Rosicrucian Teachings dates back to the early
part of the seventeenth century—about 1610, to be exact. At that time
there

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

were rumors of the existence of a society known as "The Brothers of the
Rosy Cross," the officers and meeting places of which were not known to
the public. The mysterious society was severely attacked by the
ecclesiastical authorities and others, and was as vigorously defended by
those who were interested in the general subject of occultism and the
esoteric teachings. There were many spurious and counterfeit "orders"
established during the following century, and for that matter in nearly
every century since, but none have been able to show an undoubted
connection with the original order. Some of the original teachings of
the Rosicrucians have been incorporated in some of the higher degrees of
Masonry, and have served a good purpose therein.

The legend concerning the origin of the order—true in some respects, but
erroneous in others—was as follows: That a certain Christian
Rosenkreutz, a German nobleman who had donned the robes of a certain
order of monks, had visited India, Persia, and also Arabia, and had
returned bringing with him a certain Secret Doctrine obtained from the
sages and seers of those Oriental lands. He was said to have established
the original Rosicrucian Brotherhood about 1425, its existence not
becoming generally known until nearly two hundred years afterward. The
true Rosicrucians, however, recognize this legendary tale as being
merely a cleverly disguised recital of the real facts of the
establishment of the unorganized order, which must be read between the
lines, aided by the spectacles of understanding, in order that its real
import may be grasped.

The present writer does not feel justified in telling in these pages the
tale as he understands it, and as

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

it has been transmitted to him by those in authority; in fact, to make
the same public, he would be violating a most sacred promise, which
would amount to a betrayal of his initiation secrets. He, however, is
permitted to state that the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians is a
body of esoteric teachings, handed down for ages by wise men deeply
versed in the esoteric doctrines and occult lore. This Wisdom originally
came by way of the Orient, and in fact even today comprises part of the
Inner Teachings of some of the highest Oriental Brotherhoods. Its
history is but another instance of the truth of the old Secret axioms,
one of which says that we must "Look to the East, whence comes all
Light."

For many years little or nothing was permitted to be revealed to the
general public concerning the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians, but
during the past twenty-five years there has been a greater, and still
greater freedom in this respect, until today many important Rosicrucian
teachings form a part of nearly all writings and teachings upon the
subject of the Esotericism in general, and of the Higher Metaphysics in
particular. Theosophy, and the general interest in Oriental Philosophies
and Religions, have done much to bring into public notice some of the
more elementary points of the Secret Doctrine. In fact, in the highest
writings and teachings of some of the great organizations above referred
to the Rosicrucian may find many half-hidden bits of the Rosicrucian
Doctrine, cleverly disguised from the unprepared Many, yet plainly
revealed to the prepared Few.

### The Higher Alchemy

The Rosicrucians, according to the public encyclopaedias, and other
works of reference, are held to

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

have been devoted to the subject of Alchemy. And, indeed, this statement
is correct. But the modern compilers of such reference books have fallen
into the error of supposing that the Alchemy referred to was performed
wholly upon the Plane of Matter—and concerned wholly with the
Transmutation of Elements. They are ignorant of the fact that the
Alchemy which attracted the Rosicrucians, and which took up most of
their time and attention, was Mental Alchemy, and Spiritual
Alchemy—something quite different indeed, though having of course a
correspondence to the Material Alchemy, according to the Law of
Correspondence. The student of the present book will discover this fact,
and will receive many valuable hints concerning the higher forms of
Alchemy, providing he is prepared to read between the lines of the text,
and to reason by Analogy. The axiom "As above, so below," will be found
to work out well in this connection.

#### Why the Esoteric Teaching is Kept Secret

It is difficult to convey to the average European or American the true
reasons underlying the Secrecy which invariably surrounds the Esoteric
Teachings of all the great schools of occult thought. Such a person is
inclined to think that the only reason [therefore](errata.htm#0.md) is the
delight in "mystery mongering" which he thinks he finds among all occult
teachers. But to one who penetrates even but a short distance on The
Path, the true reasons are perceived. Such a one perceives the dangers
of premature disclosure of important esoteric principles to the
unprepared public mind. The following quotations from a well-known
writer will perhaps give a hint to the solution of this question. The
writer says:

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

"The Oriental method of cultivating knowledge has always differed
diametrically from that pursued in the West during the growth of modern
sciences. Whilst Europe has investigated Nature as publicly as possible,
every step being discussed with the utmost freedom, and every fresh fact
acquired circulated at once for the benefit of all, Asiatic science has
been studied secretly and its conquests jealously guarded. I need not as
yet attempt either criticism or defence of its methods. The student will
later on see that this falls naturally into its place in the whole
scheme of occult philosophy. The approaches to that philosophy have
always been open, in one sense, to all. Vaguely throughout the world in
various ways have been diffused the idea that some process of study
which men here and there did actually follow, might lead to the
acquisition of a higher kind of knowledge than that taught to mankind at
large in books or by public teachers. The East, as pointed out, has
always been more than vaguely impressed with this belief; but even in
the West the whole block of symbolical literature relating to astrology,
alchemy, and mysticism generally has fermented in European society,
carrying to some peculiarly receptive and qualified minds the conviction
that behind all this superficially meaningless nonsense great truths lay
concealed. For such persons eccentric study has sometimes revealed
hidden passages leading to the grandest imaginable realms of
enlightenment. But till now, in all such cases, in accordance with the
law of those schools, the neophyte no sooner forced his way into the
region of mystery than he was bound over to the most inviolable secrecy
as to everything connected with his entrance and further progress there.
In Asia, in the

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

same way, the chela, or pupil of occultism, no sooner became a chela
than he ceased to be a witness on behalf of the reality of occult
knowledge. I have been astonished to find, since my own connection with
the subject, how numerous such chelas are. But it is impossible to
imagine any human act more improbable than the unauthorized revelation
by any such chela, to persons of the outer world, that he is one; and so
the great esoteric school of philosophy successfully guards its
seclusion. \* \* \* It is however desirable to disabuse the reader of
one conception in regard to the objects of adeptship that he very likely
has formed. The development of those spiritual faculties, whose culture
has to do with the highest objects of the occult life, gives rise as it
progresses to a great deal of incidental knowledge, having to do with
physical laws of Nature not yet generally understood. This knowledge,
and the practical art of manipulating certain obscure forces of Nature,
which it brings in its train, invest an adept, and even an adept's
pupils, at a comparatively early stage of their education, with very
extraordinary powers, the application of which to matters of daily life
will sometimes produce results that seem altogether miraculous; and from
the ordinary point of view, the acquisition of apparently miraculous
power is such a stupendous achievement, that people are sometimes apt to
fancy that the adept's object in seeking the knowledge he attains has
been to invest himself with these coveted powers. It would be as
reasonable to say of any great patriot of military history that his
object in becoming a soldier has been to wear a gay uniform and impress
the imagination of the nurse maids."

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

#### "The Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians"

What is known as "The Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians" is an
extensive body of esoteric teaching and occult lore which has been
transmitted from Master to Student, from Hierophant to the new Initiate,
for countless generations. Seldom has any part of the Secret Doctrine
been committed to writing, or exposed to public view on the printed
page, until the present generation. Previous to that time the little
that was written, or printed, concerning this body of teachings was
disguised in the vague terms of alchemy and astrology, so that the same
would have one meaning to the average reader and another and closer
meaning to those who possessed the key to the mystery. The frequent
references in the ancient books to "sulphur," "mercury," and other
chemical elements, and to "The Philosopher's Stone," etc., were all
intended to indicate certain portions of the teachings of the Secret
Doctrine to those who already possessed the key.

The Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians is believed by those best
informed to have been built up gradually, carefully, and slowly, by the
old occult masters and adepts, from the scattered fragments of the
esoteric teachings which were treasured by the wise men of all races.
The legend runs that these fragments of the Secret Doctrine were the
scattered portions of the old esoteric teaching of ancient Atlantis—the
bits of the great mass of the Atlantean occult teachings which were
scattered in all directions by the great cataclysm which had destroyed
that great continent. The few survivors of the Atlantean civilization
carefully preserved these Fragments of Truth, and passed them on to
their chosen students and capable descendants.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

The old Masters who made it the object of their lives to gather together
once more these scattered fragments, and to thus reconstruct the Occult
Doctrine of the Atlanteans, found a portion of their material in Egypt,
in India., in Persia, in Chaldea, in Medea, in China, in Assyria, and in
Ancient Greece, and also in the mystic records of the Hebrews, such as
the Kaballah and the Zohar. The common source, however, may be regarded
as distinctly Oriental. The great philosophies of the East, in fact, may
be said to have been built upon the base of these still more ancient
teachings. Moreover, the great Grecian Secret Teachings are believed to
have been based upon knowledge obtained from this same common source.
So, at the last, the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians may be said to
be the Secret Doctrine of Atlantis, transmitted through the descendants
of the people of that great centre of occult knowledge.

The following quotation from a writer who, himself, has gathered
together many bits of the ancient wisdom, may be interesting. Speaking
of these ancient teachings he says: "The teaching has come down to the
present age through the corridors of time, from the dim ages of past
eras, races, and schools of thought. Even those highest in the ancient
occult councils, however, are unable to trace the teachings, in an
unbroken direct line, further back than the time of Pythagoras (about
500 B. C.), and a little later in Ancient Greece, although they find
many references thereto, and extracts therefrom, in some of the older
records of ancient Egypt and Chaldea, which serve to show that the
schools of Pythagoras, and other ancient Grecian occultists, were
founded on occult instruction still more remote,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

received in a direct line of succession of teachers and pupils extending
over centuries. Investigators have found traces of the teachings in the
records of Persia and Media, and it is believed that the inspiration for
the original philosophical teachings of Gautama, the founder of
Buddhism, was received from the same sources. Traces are also found in
the Hebrew Esoteric Teachings."

The writer continues: "The Grecian Teachings were undoubtedly obtained
directly from Egyptian sources, through Pythagoras, the relation between
the early Grecian teachings and philosophies, and the older school of
old Egypt, being very close and intimate. Pythagoras is known to have
received instruction from Egyptian and Persian hierophants. There is to
be found the closest resemblance between the ancient Grecian teachings,
and those of the Egyptian Esoteric Fraternities. Some of the Teachers,
however, hold that the Grecian and Egyptian schools, respectively, were
but two separate offshoots of an original and older Teaching which had
its origin in the lost continent of Atlantis. There are many traditions
connecting the Teaching with Atlantis, and it is possible that both
Greece and Egypt received it from this common source, instead of Greece
being indebted to Egypt for the line of transmission. But, be this as it
may, it is a fact that all of the traces of teaching that the various
occultists gather from the traditions, scraps of doctrine, and legends
regarding Atlantis, can be reconciled with the best esoteric and occult
knowledge had by the race today. The fragments of the Egyptian Esoteric
Teachings, many of which are still preserved in an undoubted direct line
of succession, are practically identical, in fundamental and basis
points,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

with the Grecian Occult Teachings. And, as has been said, the Persian,
Medean, and Chaldean legends .and traditions, and scraps of teachings
which have been preserved, show a common source or origin with those of
Egypt and ancient Greece."

The writer adds: "We are speaking now of the historical view of the
subject, only. The occult traditions hold that the Teaching, in some
form, is as old as the race itself, and has been known to the advanced
minds of every great civilization of the past, many of which disappeared
thousands of years ago, all traces of them having been lost to the
present sub-race. The traditions hold that the Teaching was handed down
from the Elder Brethren of the race—certain advanced souls who appeared
in the earlier days, in order to plant the seeds of Truth, so that they
would grow, blossom, and bear fruit throughout the ages to follow. We do
not ask you to accept this statement—it is not material—for the Teaching
bears evidences of its own Truth within itself, without needing the
force of such high authority. The ancient tradition is mentioned merely
that the student may know that the same is accepted as truth by many of
the highest occult authorities and teachers."

#### "The Seven Aphorisms of Creation"

In the present book, the writer has presented for the consideration of
his readers "The Seven Aphorisms of Creation" of the Rosicrucians, which
embody the fundamental principles of the Rosicrucian Secret Doctrine. He
has also reproduced the leading Secret Symbols of the Rosicrucians which
relate to the Seven Aphorisms of Creation.

The student who will master the principles herein

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

set forth will have brought himself to a plane of thought which will
naturally tend to place him en rapport with the higher teachers of the
Rosicrucians, and to render him subject to the offer of still higher
information should he desire to proceed further into this great study.
Let the student always remember the ancient axiom: "When the Pupil is
ready, the Master appears." But the Pupil is not "ready" until he has
**mastered** the elementary instruction such as is given in the pages of
this book.

It is not claimed, however, that in the pages of this book are given
**all** the Secret Teachings of the Rosicrucians, such as their Formulas
and Methods of Mental Alchemy, and Spiritual Transmutation. Such
information cannot be cast broadcast, for reasons which will be apparent
to every earnest and intelligent student. But, on the other hand, **such
information cannot be withheld from those who are ready to receive it**,
and who are moved by the proper motives in seeking to acquire the secret
knowledge. When the student learns how to give "The Right Knock," then
will he find proven the old promise: "Knock, and it shall be opened unto
you."

#### The Symbol of the Rosy Cross

The well-known Symbol of the Rosicrucians—"The Rosy Cross"—appears in
several forms, as for instance: The Cross surmounted by the Rose; the
Sword (the Cross handle) attached to the Rose; the Cross surmounted by
the Crown; a modification of the Phallic Cross, etc. The explanation of
the general Symbol is Sevenfold—the three highest being reserved for
Initiates of a certain rank, only, and therefore cannot be stated here.
Below follow several

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

of the meanings which we are permitted to translate and explain here:

\(1\) **The Cross Surmounted by the Rose**, indicates that the "Rose"
(the mystic symbol of the Divine) can be attained only by the suffering
of mortal life (symbolized by the Cross).

<span id="img_fig02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure 2. The
Symbol of the Rosy Cross. (Conventionalized)](tn/fig02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig02.jpg.md)  
Figure 2. The Symbol of the Rosy Cross. (Conventionalized)  
</span>

\(2\) **The Sword Attached to the Rose** indicates that the Sword of the
Spirit must be actively employed in the Battle of Life, in order to win
the reward of the Rose (the Rose being the reward bestowed by the Queen
upon the victorious Knight, in the olden days).

\(3\) **The Cross Surmounted by the Crown**, indicates that the
suffering of mortal existence, borne by the faithful disciple of Truth,
will inevitably be rewarded by the attainment of the Crown of Mastery.
"Every Cross has its Crown"; and "No Cross, no

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Crown"; being old
aphorisms seeking to express this truth.

\(4\) **The Modified Phallic Cross**, indicates the Sexual Duality of
the Manifested Universe—the Presence and Activity of the Universal Male
Principle and the Universal Female Principle, respectively. \[The
Modified Phallic Cross of the Rosicrucians, however, must not be taken
to indicate any relationship of the Rosicrucians with the gross forms of
Phallic Worship, however. The latter is merely the distorted shadow of
the Truth, and must not be mistaken for the Reality.\]

Concluding this introductory statement, and inviting you to enter into
the study of the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians, let us ask you to
carefully consider the following words of an ancient aphorism: "The
possession of Knowledge, unaccompanied by a manifestation and expression
in Action, is like the hoarding of precious metals by the miser—a vain
and foolish thing. Forget not The Law of Use, in this and all other
things."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part II. The Eternal Parent](sdr03.md)
