[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sdr09)  [Next](sdr11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662308/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians*, by Magus Incognito, \[1918\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

### PART IX

### THE SEVENFOLD SOUL OF MAN

In the Secret Doctrine of the Rosicrucians, we find the following
Seventh Aphorism:

#### The Seventh Aphorism

**VII. The Soul of Man is Sevenfold, yet but One in essence; Man's
Spiritual Unfoldment has as its end the Discovery of Himself beneath the
Sevenfold Veil**.

In this Seventh Aphorism of Creation, the Rosicrucian is directed to
apply his attention to the concept of the Sevenfold Soul—One in
essence—of Man; which in the figurative language of the mystic
constitutes the seven veils which conceal from (yet reveal to) Man his
real Self. This concept is represented by the Rosicrucians by means of
the symbol of the figure of a man surrounded by seven outlined
shapes—the man, himself in his essence, is represented by the blank
space disclosed by the inmost outline, and each one of the "concealing
but revealing veils" is represented by an outlined figure, each being
but one of the series of seven. The series of outlines, be it noted, is
enclosed in the circle representing the Infinite Unmanifest.

The Symbol is interpreted as follows: (1) The Infinite Unmanifest
manifests itself in the Elemental Soul; (2) the Elemental Soul takes
upon itself the outward form of Mineral Substance; (3) The Mineral

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Soul evolves from
itself the Plant Soul; (4) the Plant Soul evolves from itself the Animal
Soul; (5) the Animal Soul evolves from itself the Human Soul; (6) the
Human Soul unfolds into the Soul of the Demi-Gods; (7) the Soul of the
Demi-Gods unfolds into the Soul of the Gods; and finally, the Soul of
the Gods once more is resolved into Pure Spirit, which

<span id="img_fig12"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Figure 12. Symbol
of the Sevenfold Soul](tn/fig12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig12.jpg)  
Figure 12. Symbol of the Sevenfold Soul  
</span>

is represented by the blank space at the centre of the symbol. This
statement will be more clearly apprehended by those who have carefully
studied the preceding chapters conveying instruction concerning the
Seven Planes of Consciousness, and much of the information contained in
those chapters is to be taken into consideration in the study of the
present chapter.

It will be noted that while these Seven Veils serve to **conceal** the
Real Self—in the sense of imposing

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

limitations and shape to it, yet at the same time it **reveals** the
presence of Spirit by means of its outlines. The ancient teachers were
wont to illustrate this concealing-revealment by means of a bit of thin
gauzy drapery suspended across the space of an open door or open window
into which the breeze is blowing. The drapery covers (and thus conceals)
the moving wind, yet at the same time it shows a **form** representing
the movement and presence of the wind, and thus **reveals** the latter.
Another favorite illustration was that of an invisible hand, of itself
impossible of being perceived, but upon which was placed seven gloves,
one over the other. The gloves were filled, and the presence of the hand
revealed; but each glove, in turn, is mistaken for the hand itself. The
hand is able to feel but faintly, and to act clumsily when the gloves
are all on it, but as each glove is taken off it feels more sensitively,
and performs more delicate actions; but without at least one of the
gloves it is not apparent at all, even to the eyes of its owner.

Let us now briefly consider each of these Veils with which Spirit is
concealed, and yet revealed.

#### I. The Elemental Soul

There is only one REAL Soul, of course; and when the Rosicrucians speak
of "The Elemental Soul" they mean simply **the Soul clad in the garments
of elemental substance—covered with the veil of elemental substance**,
which while concealing its real nature yet serves to reveal it in
manifestation.

Following the terms of the symbol, it may be said that the Infinite
Unmanifest involves itself first in the garment of Elemental Substance,
or wraps itself in the veil thereof. Elemental Substance, in the sense

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

in which the term is used by the Rosicrucians in this connection, is a
very subtle, tenuous form of substance—a form of substance which may be
regarded as the "ancestor" of the most subtle form of matter known to
science today. It lies far back of the plane of the electrons, ions, or
corpuscles of which matter (as commonly known) is composed.

The Elemental Soul, clad in the garments of Elemental Matter is the
**pattern** upon which the ordinary physical body is built. It is the
"ghost" of the physical body, and persists after the disintegration of
the latter. The **intelligence** or **consciousness** manifesting in
this garment of substance is quite simple and elementary, and performs
merely the office of providing and sustaining a **pattern** or **form**
upon which the ordinary physical body is built.

This Elemental Soul, embodied in elemental substance as stated, is that
Something which to the race has been known as the "ghost," "spirit" (in
this case the term "spirit" is grossly misused and inappropriate),
ethereal body, "fluidic body," "double," "wraith," "doppelganger," etc.
It has sometimes been called "the astral body," but this is a mistake,
for what the occultists have long known as the true "astral body" is
something very different.

This Elementary Soul survives the dissolution of the physical body of
the individual to which it belonged, and under certain conditions and
circumstances it may become visible to living persons as the "ghost" of
the deceased person. When the Elementary Soul has been "sloughed off" by
the higher vehicles of the Soul (after the physical "death"), and has
also been released by the partial or complete disintegration of the
physical body, it is really but

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

a "shell" having for form and shape of the latter, and is almost
lifeless, although held together by the cohesive forces of the
fast-dying vibrations. In such cases it possesses neither intelligence
nor consciousness beyond that concerned in holding its substance
together and to all intents and purposes can be regarded as nothing more
than a **mass of cloudy vapor assuming the form of a human being**, and
destined to become speedily disintegrated on its own plane.

#### II. The Mineral Soul

By the term "The Mineral Soul," the Rosicrucians seek to indicate the
Soul embodied in the Mineral or Chemical Substance of which the Physical
Body is composed. The concept sought to be expressed is the physical
body of man considered merely in its aspect of mineral or chemical
substance and their atoms—rather than in its aspect of
[protoplasmic](errata.htm#17), **living** substance (using the term
"living" in its popular, rather than in its esoteric sense).

The term "Mineral" of course means "inorganic substances having a
definite chemical composition; neither animal nor vegetable substances."
We need scarcely to call the attention of the student to the fact that
the substance of which the physical body is composed is, itself,
composed of certain chemical or mineral substances, such as oxygen,
carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, iron, and other
chemical elements. Cremate a body and the greater part of it will
disappear as the vapor of water (composed of oxygen and hydrogen), and
other gases; the remainder being composed of other chemical or mineral
elements. The physical body is built up of mineral and chemical elements
transformed by the action of plant chemistry into protoplasm, and then

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

absorbed by man as food in the form of vegetables or animal meat. The
basis of all organic matter is chemical or mineral substance.
Protoplasm, the basis of organic substance, vegetable or animal, was
evolved from carbon—that same element which manifests as coal, diamond,
graphite, etc. The physical basis of the bodies of animals and plants is
solely mineral or chemical, and all such bodies are built up from the
chemical material originally furnished by earth, air, and water.

The intelligence and consciousness manifested in and by the Mineral Soul
is confined to that required for the purely chemical processes of the
body, and the coordination and regulation of the chemical and mineral
particles of which the body is composed. There are important chemical
processes under way in the life of the physical body—many of them quite
complicated, so complicated in fact that they cannot be reproduced or
duplicated in the laboratory of man's making and operation. These
important processes are under the control and direction of the Mineral
Soul—of Soul embodied in the chemical and mineral substance of which the
body is composed. These processes are not merely mechanical—they are the
product of intelligence and consciousness, and are impossible without
the presence of these mental forces.

When the physical body is discarded by the soul at "death," it proceeds
to disintegrate; first the organic substances of which it is composed,
i.e., the vegetable and animal organic material, become resolved into
their mineral and chemical elements, and then these, in turn, become
resolved into their more simple forms and conditions, and are used in
supplying

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

material for the bodies of other forms of living creatures.

#### III. The Plant Soul

By the term "The Plant Soul," the Rosicrucians seek to indicate the Soul
embodied in the Vegetable Cellular Substance of which a very large
proportion of the human physical body is composed. Apart from advanced
scientists and advanced occultists, few realize how great proportion of
the processes of the human and animal body is really vegetable in
nature. The growth of bodily tissue, of parts and organs, is
distinctively vegetable in character.

Recent discoveries in the biological laboratories and in the realms of
surgery have shown us that not only portions of skin and bone may be
"grafted" from one body to another, and made to grow as well in the new
body as in the old; not only that portions of organs may be
"transplanted" in a similar way and made to grow and perform their
offices; but also that portions of the human body, and organs thereof,
may be removed from the original body, and made to grow and perform
their offices independent of the bodily general organism. And these
processes are not merely chemical—they manifest all the characteristics
of purely vegetable processes.

The chief distinction between the intelligence and consciousness of
Plants and Animals is that the former manifest almost entirely along the
lines of instinctive or unconscious mentation, while the latter manifest
in a steadily increasing degree purpositive and deliberate conscious
activity. In the processes of the human body we find a large proportion
of those performed clearly along the lines of the instinctive,
unconscious vegetable kingdom. These processes

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

come under the control and direction of the Plant Soul. They are
performed on the Plane of Plant Consciousness just as truly as are the
processes of the ordinary types of plant life. Some of these processes
are very complex—but so are the processes involved in the life of the
ordinary plant.

The distinction between the plane of the Plant Soul and that of the
Animal Soul will become more apparent and clear as we proceed to
consider the phenomena of the latter.

#### IV. The Animal Soul

By the term "The Animal Soul," the Rosicrucians seek to indicate the
Soul embodied in the Animal Organic Substance, both in the lower animals
and in man. The Animal Soul is the animating spirit, or vital spirit,
manifesting in the many activities of animal life, high and low. Its
intelligence and consciousness are very high in comparison to those of
the Vegetable Soul, but is limited to the requirements and needs of the
purely animal life. In its lower manifestations it is but little if any
higher than that of the higher manifestations of the Plant Life, and in
its highest manifestations it is but little if any lower than that of
the lowest manifestations of the Human Soul. In fact, as we have
repeatedly said in this book, the various Planes of Consciousness (and
hence the powers and limits of the several Souls) blend into those on
each side of them, and with which they are linked.

The Animal Soul is the seat of the purely animal desires, and in the
work of developing and satisfying the same it has built up out of the
substance of which it is composed, and which it has absorbed from the
substances of the vegetable and mineral plane beneath

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

it, certain complex organs and groups of organs. Its intelligence and
consciousness are concerned simply with the physical well-being of their
owner, the man, just as in the animal they are concerned with the
**physical well-being** of the animal owner. Moreover, certain of the
purely vegetable processes, such as nutrition, reproduction, etc., are
in part taken over by the Animal Soul and additional power and
complexity bestowed upon them. The desires of man which we usually refer
to as "purely physical" belong to the Animal Soul. The chief desires of
the Animal Soul are concerned with the offices of nutrition and
reproduction, and manifest respectively as Self Preservation and Sex
Desire (on the physical plane, of course), and as Love of Offspring.

In its higher phases the Animal Soul develops and manifests certain
higher qualities, such as the desire for Comradeship, Companionship,
Mutual Sympathy, Affection, etc., which closely resembles similar
feelings and emotions in the lower animals—this because the two Planes
of Consciousness are linked together and are blended one with the other.
The Animal Soul, however, never has the consciousness of "I Am"—at the
most it may be conscious as "Am," but the "I" consciousness is never
present in its true form.

#### V. The Human Soul

The Human Soul is distinguished from the Animal Soul not only by its
special aptitude for intellectual reasoning, and voluntary choice and
action, but also by its consciousness of itself—of the "I am I." This
distinction has been fully explained in previous chapters of this book,
and need not be gone into in

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

further detail at this place. The following paragraph, however, quoted
from a writer, may prove of interest in the consideration of this phase
of the general subject before us. The writer says:

"Among the lower animals there is very little of what may be called Self
Consciousness. In fact, the consciousness of the lowest forms of animal
life is little more than mere sensation. Life in the early stages of
animal life is almost automatic. The mentation there is almost entirely
along subconscious lines, and the mental operations are only those which
are concerned with the physical life of the animal—the satisfaction of
its primitive wants. After a bit, this primitive consciousness developed
into what psychologists call 'simple consciousness,' which is an
awareness' of outside things, and an apprehension of them as things.'
But there is no self-consciousness manifested at this point. The animal
does not think of its hopes and fears, its aspirations, its plans, its
thoughts, and then compare them with like thoughts of others of its
kind. It cannot indulge in abstract thinking, or use symbols of thought.
It simply takes things for granted and asks no questions. It does not
seek to find answers to perplexing general questions, for it does not
know that such questions exist. With the advent of Self-Consciousness,
man begins to form a conception of the 'I'. He begins to compare himself
with others, and to reason about the result thereof. He takes mental
stock of himself, and draws conclusions from what he finds in his mind.
He begins to think for himself, to analyze, to classify, to separate, to
deduce, to form judgments. He begins to create for himself, and is no
longer a mere mental automaton."

Another writer has said concerning the evolution

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

of the consciousness of man: "For some hundreds of years, upon the
general plane of self-consciousness, an ascent, to the human eye
gradually, but from the point of view of cosmic evolution rapid, has
been made. In a race, large-brained, walking erect, gregarious, brutal,
but king of all other brutes, man in appearance but not in fact, was
from the highest simple consciousness born the basic human faculty, Self
Consciousness, and its twin, Language. From these and what went with
these, through suffering, toil, and war; through bestiality, savagery,
barbarism; through slavery, greed, effort; through conquest infinite,
through defeats overwhelming, through struggle unending; through ages of
aimless semi-brutal existence; through subsistence on berries and roots;
through the use of the casually found stone or stick; through life in
deep forests, with nuts and seeds, and on the shores of waters, with
mollusks, crustaceans, and fish for food; through that greatest,
perhaps, of human victories, the domestication and subjugation of fire;
through the invention and art of bow and arrow; through the taming of
animals and the breaking of them to labor; through the long learning
which led to the cultivation of the soil; through the abode brick and
the building of houses therefrom; through the smelting of metals and the
slow birth of the arts which rest upon these; through the slow making of
alphabets and the evolution of the written word; in short, through
thousands of centuries of human life, of human aspiration, of human
growth, sprang the world of men and women as it stands before us and
within us today with all its achievements and possessions."

A writer on the subject of the evolution of the soul has well given the
following words of warning: "The

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

awakening of the intellect in man does not necessarily make him a better
being. While it is true that the unfolding of a higher faculty gives an
upward tendency to man, it is also true that some men are so closely
wrapped in the folds of the animal sheath—so steeped in the material
side of things—that the awakened intellect only tends to give them
increased powers to gratify their low desires and inclinations. Man, if
he chooses, may excel the beasts in bestiality—he may descend to depths
of which the beast never would have thought. The beast is governed
solely by instinct, and his actions, so prompted, are perfectly natural
and proper, and the animal is not to be blamed for following the
impulses of his nature. But man, in whom intellect has unfolded, knows
that it is contrary to his highest nature to descend to the level of the
beasts—yea, lower by far. He adds to the brute desires the cunning and
intelligence which have come to him, and deliberately prostitutes his
higher principle to the task of carrying out the magnified animal
propensities. Very few animals abuse their desires—it is left for some
men to do so. The higher the degree of intellect unfolded in a man, the
greater the depths of low passions, appetites, and desires possible to
him. He may actually create new brute desires, or rather, build edifices
of his own upon the brute foundations. It is unnecessary for us to state
that all occultists know that such a course will bring certain
consequences in its train, which will result in the soul having to spend
many weary years in retracing its steps over the backward road it has
trodden. Its progress has been retarded, and it will be compelled to
retravel the road to freedom, in common with the beastlike natures of
undeveloped creatures whose proper state of the journey it is,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

having an additional burden in the shape of the horror of a
consciousness of its surroundings, whereas its beast-companions have no
such consciousness and suffer not therefrom. If you can imagine the
feeling of a cultured, civilized man being compelled to dwell among the
African Bushmen for many years, with a full recollection of his past
living in civilization, you may form a faint idea of the fate in store
for one who deliberately sinks his higher powers to the accomplishment
of low ends and desires. But even for such a soul there is escape—in
time."

The Human Soul occupies a place of great trials and struggles between
two conflicting forces. On the one hand is the force of the lower animal
nature, striving to pull it downward into the plane of the Animal Soul
and urging him to employ his newly awakened intellectual powers on the
lower plane. On the other hand is the awakening forces of the higher
spiritual nature, striving to draw him upward into a consciousness of
his relationship to the All, and urging him to open his intellect to the
inflow of the higher vibrations of spiritual consciousness and to turn
his faculties to the carrying out of the dictates of the higher portion
of himself.

#### VI. The Soul of the Demi-Gods

As has been said in the preceding chapters of this book, the Soul of the
Demi-Gods has as its distinctive and characteristic consciousness the
conscious realization of its relationship to the All—to the Universal
Life. Its mental and spiritual horizon has expanded until, in its higher
stages, it takes in All Life and feels itself identified therewith. All
that has come to man of humanity, justice, kindness, sympathy, nobility
and Human Brotherhood has come to him

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

filtered through from this higher region of himself. Man feels sympathy
for others because of his dawning sense of his relationship to, or
Oneness with all the rest. With the coming of the flashes of the Cosmic
Consciousness, all narrow feelings of distinction and caste fade away,
and he feels the urge of Unity. Not only does he enjoy the thrill of
Universal Life, but he also may suffer the World-Pain, at least until a
fuller understanding of the latter comes to him.

A writer has well said of this stage of consciousness: "As man unfolds
spiritually, he feels his relationship with all mankind, and he begins
to love his fellow-man more and more. It hurts him to see others
suffering, and when it hurts him enough he tries to do something to
remedy it. As time goes on and man develops, the terrible suffering
which many human beings undergo today will be impossible, for the reason
that the unfolding spiritual consciousness of the race will make the
pain be felt so severely by all that the race will not be able to stand
it any longer, and it will rebel and insist that matters be remedied.
From the inner recesses of the soul comes a protest against the
following of the lower animal nature, and, although we may put it aside
for a time, it will become more and more persistent, until finally we
will be forced to heed it. The struggle between the higher and lower
natures has been noticed by all careful observers of the human soul, and
many theories have been advanced to account for it. In former times it
was taught that man was being tempted by the devil on the one hand, and
helped by a guardian angel on the other hand. But, as all occultists
know, the struggle is between the two elements of man's nature, not
exactly warring, but each following its own line of effort, and the Ego
is torn

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and bruised in its efforts to adjust itself. The Ego is in a transition
stage of consciousness, and the struggle is quite painful at times, but
the growing soul in time rises above the attraction of the lower nature,
and its dawning spiritual consciousness enables to understand his real
nature and his real place in the universe."

The same writer has said: "The higher planes of the soul are also the
source of the 'inspiration' which certain poets, painters, sculptors,
writers, preachers, orators, and others have received in all times and
in all lands. This is the source from which the seer obtains his
vision—the prophet his insight and foresight. Many have concentrated
themselves upon high ideals in their work, and have received rare
knowledge from this source, attributing it to beings of another
world—but the inspiration came from within: it was the voice of the
Higher Self speaking to the Ego."

The writer aforesaid, informs us as follows concerning the experiences
of Inspiration and Illumination coming to the Ego from the regions of
this Higher Self: "These experiences, of course, vary materially
according to the degree of unfoldment of the individual, his previous
training, his temperament, etc., but there are certain characteristics
common to all. The common features are as follows: (1) A conviction of a
sense of actual being—of immortality; this apart from faith or religious
conviction, and coming seemingly from a deeper source than these—it has
been described as 'the faith that **knows**.' (2) A total slipping away
of all fear and the acquirement of a feeling of trust, certainty, and
confidence, which is beyond the comprehension of those who have never
experienced it. (3) A feeling of

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

universal Love which sweeps over one—a Love which includes all Life,
from those near to one in the flesh to those at the furthest parts of
the universe; from those whom we hold as pure and holy, to those whom we
have regarded as vile, wicked, and utterly unworthy. All feelings of
self-righteousness and condemnation seem to slip away, and one's love,
like the light of the sun, falls upon all alike, irrespective of their
degree of development or 'goodness.' (4) A feeling of the utmost bliss
and joy, the memory of which abides long after the actual experience.
(5) A feeling of exalted knowledge and wisdom, in which all doubt
disappears and a sense of understanding the deeper meaning of all things
takes its place, for the time of the experience at least. To some these
experiences have come as a deep reverent mood or feeling, which took
possession of them for a time, while others have seemed to be in a dream
and have become conscious of a spiritual uplifting accompanied by a
sensation of being surrounded by a brilliant and all-pervading light or
glow. To some, certain truths have become manifest in the form of
symbols, the full meaning of which in some cases have not become
apparent until long after the actual experience.

"These experiences, when they have come to one, have left him in a new
state of mind, and he has never been the same man afterward. Although
the keenness of the recollection has worn off, there remains a certain
memory which long afterward proves a source of comfort and strength to
him, especially when he feels faint of faith and is shaken like a reed
by the winds of [conflicting](errata.htm#18) opinions and speculations.
The memory of such an experience is a source of renewed strength—a haven
of refuge to

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

which the weary soul flies for shelter from the outside world which
understands it not. From the writings of the ancient philosophers of all
races, from the songs of the great poets of all peoples, from the
preachings of the prophets of all religions and times we can gather
traces of this illumination which has come to them—this unfoldment of
spiritual consciousness. One tells the story in one way, the other in
other terms, but all tell practically the same essential story. All who
have recognized this illumination, even in a faint degree, recognize the
like experience in the tale, song, or preaching of another, though
centuries may roll between them. It is the song of the Soul, which when
once heard is never forgotten. Though it be sounded by the crude
instruments of the semi-barbarous races, or the finished instruments of
the talented musician of today, its strains are plainly recognized. From
Old Egypt comes the song—from India of all ages—from Ancient Greece and
Rome—from the early Christian saint—from the Quaker Friend—from the
Catholic [monasteries](errata.htm#19)—from the Mohammedan Mosque—from
the Chinese Philosopher—from the legends of the American Indian
hero-prophet—it is always the same strain, and it is swelling louder and
louder, as many more are taking it up and adding their voices or the
sounds of their instruments to the grand chorus."

The student must remember that in the experiences noted above, the
individual simply has flashes, or period of dawning consciousness on
this Sixth Plane of Consciousness, and is not to be regarded as having
entered fully and completely into its manifestations, much less as
having evolved into a state in which he functions normally and
habitually on this high plane. There are beings—once men—who

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

have evolved into the higher state in which they function normally and
habitually on this plane of conscious being; but these individuals are
no more than mere men, and have earned the right to be called
"Demi-Gods." But, even as they once were men, so all men become as they
now are by the unfoldment of this higher region of Self. These flashes
of consciousness from this high plane are prophetic signs and messages
indicating the awakening of the higher faculties, and giving assurance
of further growth and unfoldment.

In concluding our consideration of this high plane, let us glance at the
following words from the pen of Sir Oliver Lodge, the great English
scientist, who has given the world startling corroboration of some
important ancient truths known to the occultists and esoteric teachers;
he says: "Let us imagine, then, as a working hypothesis, that our
subliminal self—the other and greater part of us—is in touch with
another order of existence, and that it is occasionally able to
communicate, or somehow, perhaps unconsciously, transmit to the fragment
in the body something of the information accessible to it. We should
then be like icebergs floating in an ocean, with only a fraction exposed
to the sun and air and observation; the rest, by far the greater bulk,
eleven-twelfths—submerged in a connecting medium, submerged and
occasionally in subliminal or sub-aqueous contact with others, while
still the peaks, the visible bergs, are far separate. Such an iceberg,
glorying in its crisp solidity and sparkling pinnacles, might resent
attention paid to its submerged subliminal supporting region, or to the
saline liquid out of which it arose, and to which in due course it will
some day return. 'We feel that we are greater than

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

we know.' Or, reversing the metaphor, we might liken our present state
to that of the hulls of ships submerged in a dim ocean among strange
beasts, propelled in a blind manner through space; proud, perhaps, of
accumulating many barnacles of decoration: only recognizing our
destination by bumping against the dock wall; and with no cognizance of
the deck, and the cabins, and spars, and sails, no thought of the
sextant and the compass and the captain, no perception of the lookout on
the mast, of the distant horizon, no vision of objects far ahead,
dangers to be avoided, destinations to be reached, other ships to be
spoken with by means other than by bodily contact—a region of sunshine
and cloud, of space, of perception, and of intelligence, utterly
inaccessible to those parts below the water line."

#### VII. The Soul of the Gods

It must be apparent to every careful student that it is practically
impossible to speak in ordinary terms of the expression and
manifestation of the Self which is known to the Rosicrucians as "The
Soul of the Gods." It is sufficient for the purpose to merely indicate
its existence as a phase of the Ego—existing in a latent state in most
individuals, but affording occasional flashes of its presence to a few,
and destined to become the normal plane of conscious functioning to the
whole race in the course of spiritual evolution. Moreover, on certain
planes of life and being, even today, there exist beings to whom this
phase of consciousness is habitual and normal, even as is the plane of
human consciousness normal and habitual to the majority of our race
today.

To such beings, separated from the Infinite Unmanifest—

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

the Eternal Parent—but by the most tenuous and subtle substance serving
as the veil, the whole process of the Universe must appear merely as a
great moving picture show of shadow forms, magnificent phantasmagoria
having apparent substance and form but having no actual reality when
viewed from the aspect of the Eternal. Such beings are, indeed, Gods as
compared with the rest of living creatures. Close up to the very heart
of the Eternal, these exalted beings are conscious of the very
heartthrobs of the Eternal Parent.

As almost incredible as it may seem, however, there are among us on
earth today certain advanced souls in whom this consciousness has
already begun to manifest itself; and their number is growing. Such
souls have experienced an actual conscious realization of the truth that
the One is All, and that other than the One there is nothing—the entire
array of the Cosmic Phantasmagoria being perceived as Illusion, Mirage,
Maya, Glamour, Unreality. Into such, the Soul of the Gods is beginning
to manifest itself.

No more can be said here on this particular subject.

#### Summary

The student must not fall into the error of supposing that man really
has seven separate and distinct souls, either tied together like a
bundle of twigs, or else worn as one would wear seven overcoats, one
over the other. The symbol is only figurative, and must not be construed
literally. There are not seven selves in man—but only One Self concealed
by seven veils, each of which while serving to conceal the real nature
of the Self yet serves to disclose the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

presence and power thereof to some degree. It is as if seven planes of
variously colored glass, ranging from the darkest to the
almost-transparent and colorless, were to be placed before a brilliant
light. The darker glass would almost entirely obscure the Light, though
yet revealing its presence in some of its rays; the next lighter would
reveal more, and obscure less; and so on to the last in which the
obscuration was but slight, and the revelation almost perfect. All
illustrations of this ineffable fact of the Eternal are, by the very
nature of things, imperfect, faulty, and misleading if taken too
literally.

The lesson to the student is that in every man there lie concealed the
potentiality of Godhood, and stages less than Godhood though above that
of ordinary Manhood; and that in every man also abide the lower phases
of manifested existence, even the very lowest of all. The wise man uses
the lower, but does not allow the lower to use him; he maintains a
positive, masterful mental attitude toward the lower planes of being,
while opening himself receptively to the influences of the higher planes
of his Self.

In conclusion, you are asked to once more consider the Seventh Aphorism:
"The Soul of Man is Sevenfold, yet but One in essence: Man's spiritual
Unfoldment has as its end the Discovery of Himself beneath the
Seven-fold Veil."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part X. Metempsychosis](sdr11)
