[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ioy02)  [Next](ioy04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# Introduction and Sketch of the Author

GALEN CLARK, the author of this little volume, is one of the notable
characters of California, and the one best fitted to record the customs
and traditions of the Yosemite Indians, but it was only after much
persuasion that his friends succeeded in inducing him to write the
history of these interesting people, with whom he has been in close
communication for half a century.

The Indians of the Yosemite are fast passing away. Only a handful now
remain of the powerful tribes that once gathered in the Valley and
considered it an absolute stronghold against their white enemies. Even
in their diminished numbers and their comparatively civilized condition,
they are still a source of great interest to all visitors, and it has
been suggested many times that their history, customs and legends should
be put in permanent and convenient form, before they are entirely lost.

Many tales and histories of the California Indians have been written by
soldiers and

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

pioneers, but Mr. Clark has told the story of these people from their
own standpoint, and with a sympathetic understanding of their character.
This fresh point of view gives double interest to his narrative.

Galen Clark comes of a notable family; his English ancestors came to the
State of Massachusetts in the seventeenth century, but he is a native of
the Town of Dublin, Cheshire County, New Hampshire, born on the 28th day
of March, 1814, and is consequently nearly ninety years of age, but
still alert and active in mind and body.

He attended school in his early youth during the winter months, and
worked on a farm during the summer, leading nearly the same life which
was followed by so many others who afterwards became famous in our
country's history.

Later in life he learned chair-making and painting, an occupation which
he followed for some years, when he removed to Philadelphia and
subsequently to New York City.

Whilst residing in New York, in 1853, he resolved, after mature
reflection, to visit the new Eldorado. His attention was first attracted
to this State by visiting the celebrated

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Crystal Palace in New York, where there was then
on exhibition quantities of gold dust which had been sent or brought
East by successful miners.

Mr. Clark left New York for California in October, 1853, coming via the
Isthmus of Panama, and in due time reached his destination, In 1854 he
went to Mariposa County, attracted thither by the wonderful accounts of
the gold discoveries, and the marvelous stories he had heard of the
grandeur and beauty of the Yosemite Valley and the surrounding
mountains.

Upon his first arrival in Mariposa, he engaged in mining, and was also
employed to assist in surveying Government land on the west side of the
San Joaquin Valley, and canals for mining purposes, some of which passed
through the celebrated "Mariposa Grant," the subject of prolonged and
bitter litigation, both in this country and in Europe. He probably knows
more about the actual facts concerning the Mariposa Grant than any one
now living, and it is to be hoped that some day he may overcome

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

his natural repugnance to notoriety, and give to the public the benefit
of his knowledge.

In the year 1855 Mr. Clark made his first trip into the Yosemite Valley
with a party made up in Mariposa and Bear Valley.

Returning to Mariposa, he resumed his old occupation of surveying and
mining, and, whilst so engaged, by reason of exposure, had a serious
attack of lung trouble, resulting in severe hemorrhages which threatened
to end his life.

He then removed, in April, 1857, to the South Fork of the Merced River,
and built a log cabin in one of the most beautiful of our mountain
valleys, on the spot where Wawona now stands. He soon recovered his
health entirely, and, though constantly exposed to the winter storms and
snows, has never had a recurrence of his malady.

Wawona is twenty-six miles from Yosemite, and at that time became known
as Clark's Station, being on the trail leading from Mariposa to the
Valley, and a noted stopping place for travelers. This trail, as well as
one from Coulterville, was completed to the Valley in 1857, and the trip
to

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Yosemite then involved a stage ride of
ninety-two miles, and a journey of sixty miles more on horseback. In
1874 and 1875 the three present stage roads were constructed through to
the Valley.

All travelers by the Raymond route will remember Wawona and the
surroundings; the peaceful valley, the swift-flowing Merced, and the
surrounding peaks and mountains, almost equaling in grandeur the famous
Yosemite itself.

In the early days this locality was annually visited by several bands of
Indians from the Chowchilla and Fresno rivers. The Indian name for the
place was Pal-lah'-chun. Whilst residing there Mr. Clark was in constant
contact with these visiting tribes; he obtained their confidence, and
retains it to this day.

Whilst on a hunting trip, in the summer of 1857, Mr. Clark discovered
and made known to the public the famous Big Tree Grove, now known all
over the world as the "Mariposa Grove of Big Trees," belonging to the
State of California. On this expedition he did not follow the route now
traveled, but came upon the grove at the

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

upper end, near the place where the road to Wawona Point now branches
off from the main drive. The spot where he caught his first view of the
Big Trees has been appropriately marked, and can be seen from the stage
road.

So impressed was Mr. Clark with the importance of his discovery, that he
opened up a good horse trail from Wawona to the Trees, and shortly
afterwards built a log cabin in the grove, for the comfort and
convenience of visitors in bad or stormy weather. This cabin became
known as "Galen's Hospice."

In the year 1864 the Congress of the United States passed an Act, which
was approved in June of the same year, granting to the State of
California the "Yosemite Valley" and the "Mariposa Grove of Big Trees."
This grant was made upon certain conditions, which were complied with by
the State, and a Commission was appointed by Governor Low to manage and
govern the Valley and the Big Tree Grove. Galen Clark was, of course,
selected as one of the commissioners. He was subsequently appointed
Guardian of the Valley, and under his administration

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

many needed improvements were made and others suggested. Bridges were
built, roads constructed on the floor of the Valley, and trails laid out
and finished to various points of interest overlooking the Valley
itself. In a word, the Guardian did everything possible with the limited
means at his disposal.

After serving twenty-four years, Mr. Clark voluntarily retired from the
position of Guardian, carrying with him the respect and admiration of
every member of the Commission, of all the residents of the Valley, and
of every visitor who enjoyed the pleasure of his personal acquaintance.

As showing the opinion of those with whom Mr. Clark was intimately and
officially associated for so long a time, the following resolutions
passed by the Board .of Commissioners upon his voluntary retirement from
the office of Guardian, are herein given:

WHEREAS, Galen Clark has for a long number of years been closely
identified with Yosemite Valley, and has for a considerable portion of
that time been its Guardian; and

WHEREAS, he has now, by his own choice and will, relinquished the trust
confided in him and retired into private life; and

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

WHEREAS, his faithful and eminent services as Guardian, his constant
efforts to preserve, protect and enhance the beauties of Yosemite; his
dignified, kindly and courteous demeanor to all who have come to see and
enjoy its wonders, and his upright and noble life, deserve from us a
fitting recognition and memorial; Now, Therefore, be it

Resolved, That the cordial assurance of the appreciation by this
Commission of the efforts and labors of Galen Clark, as Guardian of
Yosemite, in its behalf, be tendered and expressed to him.

That we recognize in him a faithful, efficient and worthy citizen and
officer of this Commission and of the State; that he will be followed
into his retirement by the sincerest and best wishes of this Commission,
individually and as a body, for continued long life and constant
happiness.

The subject of this sketch is one of the most modest of men; but
perfectly self-reliant, and always actively engaged in some useful work.
He has resided in the Valley for more than twenty summers, and has also
been a resident during many winters, and his descriptions of the Valley,
when wrapped in snow and ice, are intensely interesting. Though always
ready to give information, he is naturally reticent, and never forces
his stories or reminiscences upon visitors; indeed it requires some
persuasion to hear him talk about himself at all.

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

For some years, Mr. Clark was postmaster of Yosemite; and he has made
many trips on foot, both in winter and summer, in and out of the Valley.

In September, 1903, this writer made a trip through the high Sierras
from Yosemite, and, upon reaching the top of the Valley, Mr. Clark was
met coming down the trail, having in charge a party of his friends,
amongst whom was a lady with her two small children. This was at a point
2700, feet above the floor of the Valley, which is itself 4000 feet
above the level of the sea.

Needless to say, he is perfectly familiar with all the mountain trails,
and, notwithstanding his great age, he easily makes long trips on foot
and horseback which would fatigue a much younger man. Mr. Clark is
thoroughly familiar with the flora, fauna and geology of the Valley and
its surroundings. His knowledge of botany is particularly accurate, a
knowledge gleaned partly from books, but mainly from close personal
observation, the best possible teacher.

His long residence in Yosemite has made him familiar with every spot,
his love for

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

the Valley is deep and strong, and when he departs this life his remains
will rest close to the Yosemite Falls, in the little grave yard where
other pioneers are buried.

With his own hands he has dug his grave, and quarried his own tombstone
from one of the massive blocks of granite found in the immediate
neighborhood. His monument now rests in his grave, and when it is
removed to receive his remains, will be used to mark his last resting
place. His grave is surrounded by a neat fence, and trees, shrubs and
vines, which he has himself planted, grow around in great profusion. In
each corner of the lot is a young *Sequoia*.

May it be many years before he is called to occupy his last earthly
tenement.

W. W. FOOTE.

San Francisco,  
     February, 1904.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter One: Early History](ioy04)
