[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp01)  [Next](ptp03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Second Century

<span class="smallcaps">Evaristus</span> now took the helm. Of him it is
recorded that he was born in Bethlehem of Jewish parentage and that he
founded the parochial system, dividing Rome into parishes. In the third
year of his office he celebrated the hundredth year since the Birth of
Christ. One full century since the Birth at Bethlehem and sixty-six
years since Peter had preached the first sermon. To be a Christian still
meant death but nevertheless the teachings of the Nazarene had spread
to, and sometimes beyond, all corners of the huge Empire. Despite the
terrors of persecution a disciplined priesthood was administering to a
laity that was formed of many races and different tongues yet which was
bound together with a unity stronger than the command of any Caesar, the
bond of common faith. And it was about this

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

time, this first turning of a century since the birth of its Founder,
that the Church received the name by which it is now known. From the pen
of the great bishop of Antioch, St. Ignatius, came the significant and
historical words: Catholic Church.

Trajan was then the Roman Emperor. History has judged him to be an able
ruler and possessed of high character. There is no doubt that under his
rule the Empire prospered yet from the first he frowned upon the
Christians, regarding them as misguided fanatics who were troublesome to
the civic power and as such should be stamped out. This he endeavoured
to do by giving impetus to the Third General Persecution amongst whose
victims were St. Ignatius and St. Simeon of Jerusalem. The persecution
failed in its objective and Trajan, conqueror of Dacia and brilliant
soldier and administrator, was defeated. However, he allowed no feeling
of chagrin to drive him into angry excesses. He continued to persecute
but eventually showed less severity and at no time of his reign can it
be claimed that his actions were characterized by the murderous
brutality of his predecessors. Writing to his Legate, Pliny the Younger,
who had appealed to him for instructions he said "They (the Christians)
are not to be sought out, but if accused and convicted they must be
punished." In other words he was leaving the matter entirely to the
discretion of Pliny. Evaristus died during this reign in the year 105
and although the exact circumstances of his death are not known
tradition counts him as one of the martyrs.

<span class="smallcaps">St. Alexander</span>, a native Roman, came next,
presiding until 115 when he was beheaded and his body buried in the
catacombs. Little is known of him save that he is credited with the
inauguration of the institution of holy water. Of his successor, <span
class="smallcaps">Sixtus</span>, we are told even less. He was a Roman;
his rule lasted ten years and he was followed by

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">Telesphorus</span>, a Greek whose pontificate (to 136)
was disturbed by a series of grave heresies. It is not within the
province of this limited work to enter into descriptions of the
formidably numerous heresies and schisms which have troubled the Church
from its founding. A great number of volumes would be needed for such a
task but in passing it can be said that time has proven that the results
of schism have always been the same. Severed from the fount of their
beginning they inevitably lose energy within themselves and so gradually
perish.

Telesphorus was well equipped to use measures, both of authority and
argument, necessary to combat the heresies of his day. Previous to his
election his had been the meditative and strictly ordered life of a
desert anchorite. Evidence of this early life of penance and fasting is
discernible in his act of taking the old customs of Lent and molding
them into one definite rule. Another of his inaugurations is that of
Midnight Mass at Christmas. In his time also was addressed to the
Emperor the first Christian Apology. This document, written by
Quadratus, a disciple of the Apostles, aimed to explain the position of
the Christians but it had no immediate effect for their relief.
Christianity was still a crime against the State and as such was
punishable by death. Hadrian had succeeded Trajan and, if anything, was
even less severe than that ruler; nevertheless the law remained
unaltered. It is not difficult to understand the official Roman
viewpoint. By this time the pattern of the Empire had apparently
attained perfection. Never before had it, or any other country, been so
prosperous or powerful. Yet the Christians proposed to effect a complete
social change. They talked of the brotherhood of man and to the Emperors
this theory was not only ridiculous and blasphemous, but treasonable as
well.

Persecution continued and in one of the periodic raids

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Telesphorus was
captured and despatched to his martyrdom. A few years before his death
the Jews at Jerusalem made their final desperate rebellion against Roman
rule and for a last time in history the ancient ramshorn, the *Shofar*,
called the Jewish people, as a nation, to arms. But, as Titus had
ruthlessly suppressed their fathers only sixty-five years before, so did
Hadrian again, destroying completely whatever had been left from or
built since the first siege. The ancient city was now no more. Its
residents were either killed or banished from the sight even of the
ruins, upon which a Roman colony called Elia Capitolina was formed.

<span class="smallcaps">Hyginus</span>, of Greek birth, was the ninth
Pope, presiding for about four years and principally remembered for his
regulation of minor clerical orders. He was followed by Pius and of him
history tells nothing except the fact of his name and that his
pontificate lasted from 140 to 155. After him came a Syrian, one <span
class="smallcaps">Anicetus</span>, who ruled eleven years, during which
time there arose the great argument with the Eastern Church as to the
day which should be celebrated as Easter. In Rome it was the Sunday
following the fourteenth Nisan (i.e. the fourteenth day after the March
moon). In the East it was the actual day of the fourteenth Nisan.
Polycarp, able Bishop of Smyrna, tried to urge the latter usage on Rome
but Anicetus remained steadfast to the custom that had begun with Peter.
Great controversy was waged between Bishop and Pope but the Pope did not
make it a question of papal authority and the Bishop had the good sense
not to suggest or cause a schismatic break. The argument was to continue
until finally settled, in favour of the Western Church, at the Council
of Nicaea in 325. And even after then we find the Celtic monks disputing
the Easter question with the Roman missionaries in Britain. Other things
there were besides this vexatious altercation that Anicetus found to
disapprove of in ecclesiastical

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

ranks. He accused his clergy of being over-considerate of their personal
appearance, and in a series of regulations expressed his censure and
wishes. As the Church had grown, so of course had the priesthood; and
with such a quickly spreading organization, still forced to the shroud
of secrecy, it was easy for unauthorized changes to creep into the
liturgy, particularly when that liturgy was not yet recorded in written
form. <span class="smallcaps">Soter</span> who [succeeded](errata.htm#0)
Anicetus in 166 turned a vigilant eye on these errors and insisted on
the correct and orthodox observance of all sacred customs. In searching
for such abuses he came in contact with many of the poorer Christian
communities and these, it is recorded, he made it a special mission to
assist.

Marcus Aurelius the Philosopher was Emperor during this pontificate but
despite his philosophy he displayed less tolerance than had been shown
during the previous reigns. Persecution was intensified and remained so
into the time of Pope <span class="smallcaps">Eleutherius</span> who
officiated for fifteen years. Both in Rome and in the provinces
Christian blood ran freely and with terrible persistence. No resistance
was offered but in this generation there were not lacking learned
Christians who could utilize the potency of words, in the phrasing of
philosophy which the Emperor so admired, and so defend their faith with
logic as well as vigor and courage. But as far as Marcus Aurelius, and
his son, the despicable Commodus, were concerned the Apologies bore no
weight and the persecutions were continued. And with the same sequel as
earlier times. Each martyrdom served as a beacon to attract droves of
converts, the Church continued to grow, and the propaganda of the faith
unceasingly went on. And sorely harassed as Pope Eleutherius must have
been he yet found time to formulate plans for the conversion of such
far-off places as Britain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Third Century](ptp03)
