[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp03)  [Next](ptp05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Fourth Century

But the brightness of success is rarely unaccompanied by the shadows of
jealousy. Swords may have been sheathed but pens were at work, producing
a steady stream of ridicule and falsehood that in turn was kindling the
rancor of resentment amongst that considerable part of the population
who in earlier days had regarded the Christians as too insignificant a
minority to excite any feeling save indifference or occasional pity. But
indifference could not survive in the face of the mounting and obvious
strength of the Church and as the end of the third century neared most
Romans held one of two opinions; if not Christian, then anti-Christian.
Such was the condition of affairs when in 296 the Roman <span
class="smallcaps">Marcellinus</span> became Pope, eleven years after the
able Diocletian had reached the Imperial station which he was to occupy
with undeniable brilliance until his abdication in 305. At the beginning
of his reign Diocletian did not show any signs of bitterness towards the
Christians. Combining exceptional talents of martial skill and civil
administration, so rarely found united in one

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

human brain, he set out to reorganize the government of the Empire,
partitioning the vast territories into two portions, East and West, each
to be governed separately by an Emperor who in turn was to be assisted
by a sub-ruler. The East he chose for his own jurisdiction and for his
chief lieutenant, with the august title of Caesar, he selected Galerius,
an energetic product of the Legions, a barbarian who proved to be a true
personification of the pagan standards he so assiduously followed. The
hatred and contempt that this man held for the Christians, his utter
incomprehension and warrior's disgust at their precepts of kindness and
forgiveness, finally resulted in Diocletian's promulgating an edict
against them.

Bitter and savage were the cruelties that followed for such was the
discipline maintained by this ruler that any order issued by him was
executed to the minutest detail, to the fullest extent of human
endeavour. But human endeavour has its very definite limits, the skies
of his domains were clouded by the smoke of burning churches, the
streets of his cities were stained with the blood of new martyrs, the
consciences of his magistrates were made heavy with unjust sentences,
but never could the Christian spirit be obliterated. Pope Marcellinus
perished during these outrages and the story of his death is as lost as
his sacred books which were destroyed in the pagan fires.

Four years elapsed before another Bishop of Rome could be elected. This
time it was <span class="smallcaps">Marcellus</span>, who immediately
and with courageous defiance set out to provide new places of worship
for the churchless faithful. He died only one year after he had taken
office (309) and was succeeded by <span
class="smallcaps">Eusebius</span> whose death in exile occurred after a
term of equal brevity. The reign of the next pontiff, <span
class="smallcaps">Melchiades</span>, of African birth, was dramatically
made bright with triumph; for even the savage Galerius when on his
deathbed,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

like so many other implacable enemies of the Church at the same solemn
moment, was to beg for Christian prayers and forgiveness. Maximin, who
succeeded him as Emperor of the East, did not allow this unexpected mood
to soften his judgment which was vehemently anti-Christian. This tyrant
in turn stoked the fires of the persecution to a renewed intensity
which, however, was not to endure for long. The tide was soon to turn.
But let us return to Diocletian.

Within a year of the publication of his infamous edict he, prompted by a
philosophy none of which, alas, he showed in his treatment of the
Christians, had astonished his subjects by divesting himself of his
exalted rank and had retired to forget the turbulence of an Empire in
the peace of a country garden. He who had controlled the destinies of
millions of men was content to turn his energies to the nurturing of a
few cabbages. After successfully regulating great territories he was
satisfied to anticipate death, and to pass on his power and policies to
his successors. But rarely do the plans of a despot run smoothly after
he has quitted the scene. Divided rule was not for the Empire and
Diocletian's successors were quick to learn that purple is a color that
loses much of its glory when worn by more than one. Contemporary rulers
soon became rival rulers and as ambitions clashed wars and confusions
were born and from these struggles eventually came the incident which
was to mark the turning for the Christians.

In the Autumn of 312 the new Emperor of the West, Constantine, a young
leader who had inherited the virtue of a tolerant nature from a wise
father marched his army across the Alps and was about to storm the gates
of Rome. On the day before battle, alone with solemn thoughts that must
haunt even the most confident of commanders at such a time, he says that
he saw a vision. Brightly etched against

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the evening sky there shone a Cross and beneath it to dazzle his
astonished eyes was the shimmering legend *In hoc signo vinces*.

"By this sign thou shalt conquer." These were startling words and were
to inspire a startling decision: for to most Romans the Cross was still
the repugnant symbol of a dishonorable death. Nevertheless Constantine
had commanded that the fateful words were to be the motto of his troops.
The next day he won his battle and with a memory unlike most Princes his
gratitude was always to remain. A few months after this particular
victory, along with his colleague of the West, Licinius, he not only
announced freedom of worship for all but also promised restitution of
properties to a dispossessed Christian clergy.

Joyfully Pope Melchiades bent to his altar as the Edict of Milan was
issued. After three centuries a Christian was no longer to be considered
a criminal because of his faith. Roman law had changed and in the reign
of the thirty-second pope a new era had begun.

The very year of the Edict of Milan saw the first Council of the Church
to be convened with the full sanction of the secular authorities. But
the occasion was not one for celebration: for no sooner had the sword of
the persecutor been stayed than ominous and formidable dissensions
within their own ranks began to threaten Christian unity. Melchiades was
forced to convene a meeting of bishops. On arriving in Rome the clerics
were saluted as persons of rank and honor and their pride and happiness
can well be imagined, these veterans, all of whom had suffered and
administered under the shadows of oppression. Even the building that was
the scene of their meeting, and where they pronounced judgment against
the Donatist heresy, was in itself a splendid sign of the Imperial
magnanimity for it was a gift from Fausta, the wife of Constantine, to

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Melchiades who
made it the papal residence. And as such the Lateran Palace remained
until its destruction by fire ten centuries later.

Melchiades died in 314 and was followed by <span
class="smallcaps">Sylvester</span> who was troubled by the grave schism
of Arius and who was also to witness, in 321, a brief renewal of
persecution under the direction of Licinius. This erstwhile ally of
Constantine became his bitter enemy and opposed all his policies
including the tolerance guaranteed the Christians by the Edict of Milan.
The struggle between the two Emperors was ended by the violent death of
Licinius which left Constantine the undisputed and sole ruler of the
Empire. His own generation was to add to his name the title Great and
that memory of successive generations which is called posterity has
endorsed the bestowal—so commonly offered by sycophantic subjects to a
ruler and so quickly forgotten—as well deserved. Like all of human mould
he had his weaknesses, his vanities, his cruelties, but there can be no
denial of his magnitude as an administrator. Nothing less than heroic
were his efforts to reorganize the Empire. And not the smallest of his
achievements was the prodigious task involved in the transference of the
Imperial Headquarters to the strategically situated city of Byzantium,
afterwards, in his honor, called Constantinople. This shifting of the
temporal power was to prove of immense consequence to the Papacy for
notoriously the protection of a ruler is seldom without its drawbacks to
the Church. The intrigue so inevitable to courts thrives on proximity
and the long miles separating Rome and Constantinople were to prove
healthy indeed for the Papacy.

A strange fact of Constantine's life is that despite his championship
of, and his obvious faith in, Christianity he was not to receive actual
baptism until shortly before his death in 337. And so strong had become
the Arian heresy

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

by this time that it was the Arian bishop, Eusebius, who officiated at
the important function. Arianism had begun with the teachings of Arius,
a priest of Alexandria, who attacked the doctrine of the Trinity and
declared the Son to be subordinate to the Father. The eloquence of this
misguided theologian rapidly won many supporters including the powerful
Bishop of Nicomedia, Eusebius, who became his ardent patron. By 325 the
theological dispute was waxing with such fury that the puzzled Emperor,
although not yet a baptized Christian, saw fit to take action as a
protector of the faith. He called together the Council of Nicaea. Three
hundred and fourteen distinguished Fathers of the Church met amidst
elaborate ceremonies of Imperial hospitality. Pope Sylvester did not
attend because of the infirmities of his advanced age but he sent as his
Legate, Osius, the Bishop of Cordova, and Vitus and Vincent, two priests
of Rome.

"I consider dissension in the Church more dreadful and more painful than
any war," Constantine told the assembled Churchmen as he exhorted them
to unity. The Council sat from May to August and the important outcome
was the formation of what has been known since as the Nicene Creed: "We
believe in only one God, the Father, Almighty, maker of all things
visible and invisible; and in only one Lord, Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, the sole-begotten of the Father, that is to say of the Father's
substance, God of God, Light of Light, true God of true God; begotten
not made, consubstantial with the Father, by whom all things were made;
who for us men and for our salvation came down, became incarnate, became
man, suffered, was raised again on the third day, ascended back to
heaven and will come again to judge the living and the dead; and in the
Holy Spirit. As for those who say 'There was a time when He did not
exist; Before He was begotten

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He did not exist;
He was made from nothing as from another substance or essence; The Son
of God is a created being, changeable, capable of alteration,' to such
as these the Catholic Church says Anathema."

In addition to this avowal some twenty canons of Discipline were
promulgated; including a decree that said no cleric should have living
in his residence any woman who was not a relative. As yet celibacy for
the clergy was not a law of the Church although it was a traditional
custom dating from Apostolic times when St. Paul had said, "He that is
without a wife is solicitous for the things that belong to the Lord, how
he may please God. But he that is with a wife, is solicitous for the
things of the world, how he may please his wife: and he is divided. . .
." At the end of the third century the tradition thus prompted by the
great Apostle had become an actual rule in Spain. But when Osius, the
Legate, sought to make it a universal law at the Council he received
vigorous opposition, mainly from one Bishop Paphnutius whose spirited
protest marked the commencement of that difference of opinion and
practice on the same subject which still exists between the Eastern and
Western Churches. Paphnutius pleaded sympathy for those priests who had
been married before ordination, declaring that they should not be
separated from their wives. The majority of his listeners agreed and
Osius was defeated.

Eleven years after the great Council Pope Sylvester died and he was
succeeded by <span class="smallcaps">Mark</span>, an able prelate, whose
pontificate however did not extend a full year. Julius, a valiant
preserver of orthodoxy, was then elected to the sacred office. This good
man's calm judgment, his able custodianship of dogma, was to stand like
a beacon over a stormy sea for in truth the bark of St. Peter was at
this time in danger of being swamped by the treacherous seas of schism.
To aid him was the brilliant hero bishop of

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Alexandria,
Athanasius, who was well equipped both with faith and scholarship to
carry on the desperate struggle with the dissenters.

It was an age of schism. Misguided theologians, sincere in their beliefs
but noisy in their errors, were offering many new interpretations of the
faith. And there were not lacking bishops to support them: for in the
ranks of the latter there was now a troublesome new class, opportunists
who did not hesitate to use ecclesiastical office in the pursuance of
doubtful schemes. At this time, before actual consecration, the
selection of a bishop was still determined by the inhabitants of a
vacant See. In theory this might seem to be an admirable practice but in
truth it was dangerous; for now that the Church had the approval of the
majority there were the inevitable aspirants, in many cases successful,
to the episcopal office whose sole vocation was a hungry desire for
temporal power. Rascals of this calibre whose artful conniving had won
for them the confidence of a community did not hesitate to adopt
innovations in dogma whenever it suited their convenience. So when the
Emperor, because of an unhappy ignorance, showed favor to Arianism such
consciences quickly and conveniently followed that path. But though the
Arians held Constantinople, Rome remained firm and uncompromising. In
matters of discipline the pontiffs might accommodate but when it came to
dogma they were adamant, not deigning to answer argument with counter
argument but content to guard their heritage of traditional faith and
quick to pronounce against any who would seek to change that trust.

After the death of Constantine the rule of his domains had descended to
his sons, one of whom, Constans, was loyal to Pope Julius. But when, in
350, this prince perished in battle the Empire was subjected to the
dominance of his

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

brother Constantius who favoured the Arians and frowned at Rome. Julius
courageously defied this tyrant's will until his death two years later.
He was succeeded by <span class="smallcaps">Liberius</span> who
continued the admirable tradition of courage and orthodoxy until he was
arrested and brought before the Emperor who banished him to exile and
appointed the Arian bishop Felix to usurp the Roman See.

"The laws of the Church are more important than residence in Rome," was
the pontiff's answer to this sentence. He remained in exile two years
and the circumstances of his return are clouded with historical dispute
for many authorities have agreed that the harassed man, in the plight of
his exile and in the weariness of his advanced age, did eventually sign
his name to a document insufficiently explicit against Arian doctrine.
Whether he did or not may be the subject of argument but what remains
clear is that there is no evidence of any kind to prove he ever taught,
or approved the teaching of, any part of the Arian philosophy which
differed from the Catholic faith. On his return to Rome the Imperial
arrogance dictated that he should share the Papal office with the
illegally appointed Felix. This absurd and presumptuous decision was
suitably received by the Roman populace who, when it was announced in
the Circus, loudly chanted with vigorous logic, "One God, one Christ,
one Bishop."

The successor of Liberius was <span class="smallcaps">Damasus</span>
who, immediately after his election in 366, had in his turn to deal with
a schismatic usurper, the deacon Ursinus. This time, however, the
pretender received no Imperial support. On the contrary, after inciting
his misguided adherents to noisy disorders, he was ordered from Rome by
an Emperor of different views, Valentinian I, who also decreed that
henceforth his magistrates were not to exercise any authority over
ecclesiastical or religious matters. Vastly different had

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

been the attitude of Valentinian's immediate predecessor, Julian, who in
a reign of only two years had earned for himself the ignominious
appellation of Apostate. In vain this obstinate prince had tried to
revive Paganism but Christianity had proved too strongly rooted in the
public conscience to be crushed, or even stemmed. By giving a semblance
of Church organization to Pagan practices he had endeavoured to win
allegiance to the ancient cults but no matter what measures he took,
sweetened though they were by bribes and fortified with threats, he met
with scant success. His death actually found the Christians enjoying
more unity than when he had commenced his rule and as the profane fires
of the sacrificial altars he had inaugurated flickered miserably into
oblivion the Cross was once again carried before the Legions. Imperial
animosity towards Christianity proved fortunate in one way for
orthodoxy. Schismatic bishops were no longer able, by court intrigue, to
cause harm or win favor.

The pontificate of Damasus is studded with achievement. In his person
were combined the talents of theologian and administrator, and in the
warmth of his zeal and the fertility of his wisdom the power of the
papacy became nurtured to a larger and well consolidated strength. In
all fields his energy was manifested. Ardent missionaries journeyed to
distant places. Eloquent legates harangued Councils and Synods. Churches
were restored and built. And masons and architects, spurred by the papal
patronage, labored diligently to preserve the catacombs. It was with his
encouragement that St. Jerome, for a while his secretary, revised the
earlier Latin version of the Bible. Schismatics were outmaneuvered and
heresies were stemmed. It was only natural that the author of so many
vigorous policies should become a target for the plots of those whom he
had frustrated. And indeed some of his enemies succeeded

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

in bringing charges even of adultery against his name. The Emperor
listened to this calumny as did also a synod of forty-four bishops with
the result that not only was the scandal rejected but the accusers
suffered excommunication for their lies. Two years before Damasus died
and in the sixteenth year of his jurisdiction splendid triumph came to
him in the form of the famous Imperial Edict *De fide Catholica*, issued
by Theodosius, which declared the official religion of the Roman State
to be "that doctrine which St. Peter had preached and of which Damasus
was supreme head."

<span class="smallcaps">Siricius</span> came next and his reign, lasting
fourteen years, was a successful and peaceful continuation of Damasus’
policies, unmarred by any great crisis or disaster, but witnessing the
unprecedented spectacle of an erring Emperor bowing before the anger of
a prelate. The principals of this significant drama were the Emperor
Theodosius and the patrician-born Ambrose, Archbishop of Milan.
Theodosius, for the most part an amiable and astute prince, had proved
second only to Constantine in the furtherance and protection of the
Church but unfortunately his record became blotted with a bloody and
unjust crime. At the town of Thessalonica several of his officers had
been brutally murdered and in the exasperation of his grief the Emperor,
not waiting for the tedious workings of justice to punish the actual
miscreants, had impatiently caused the entire city to be put to the
sword. After fury had subsided there came the agonies of remorse to
disturb the unhappy ruler, who was possessed of some degree of
conscience, if not of discipline. He admitted his sorrow, his guilt, his
unhappiness, but such protestations were not enough to appease the wrath
of the redoubtable Ambrose who halted the Imperial passage to his
cathedral, refusing admittance to the sacred premises, unless Theodosius
made a public

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

confession of his sins. This, before the awed gaze of his court, the
contrite Emperor agreed to do and so as the end of the fourth century
neared we find the kneeling figure of a Caesar, stripped of the emblems
of his exalted rank, petitioning for clemency, humbly accepting the
stinging words of accusation, rebuke and sentence, and submitting
unconditionally to the authority of one of his own subjects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifth Century](ptp05)
