[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp16)  [Next](ptp18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Seventeenth Century

In 1600, the eighth year of his reign, Pope Clement (VII) proclaimed a
grand Jubilee in Rome. Over three million pilgrims responded to the
invitation and their devotion and presence was gladdening evidence of
the success which was attending Catholic revival. Throughout all Europe
the Jesuits, the Franciscans, the Benedictines, the Dominicans, in fact
all the Orders, old and new, were carrying the fight with example and
zeal. "Thanks be to God," reported a nuncio from Vienna "the number of

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Catholics is on
the increase." The same could be said of other places which were
strong-holds of Protestantism. Because of men who patently had but one
purpose, the salvation of souls, who were afraid of nothing on earth,
and who indeed were prepared to welcome martyrdom, great numbers of men
and women were being regained to the ancient faith in Germany and the
Netherlands. And from Switzerland a German doctor wrote to a friend:
"Truly moving, and reminiscent of the most beautiful days of the past
are the life and the works of the Capuchins, whom I have known in
Switzerland and the Tyrol. They are poor and humble and filled with true
charity. During their missions their confessionals are besieged, stolen
property is given back, and conjugal peace restored." Saintly endeavours
were not restricted to distant regions. In Rome the Pope listened
respectfully to such men as the eminent Jesuit St. Robert Bellarmine and
St. Philip Neri, founder of the Oratorians, while at the same time St.
Francis of Sales was providing the world with an immortal example of
episcopal perfection. In France the same pope exhorted the bishops to be
true leaders of their flocks. "Do honor to your ministry," he instructed
them, "help your country, drive away heresy, preach and convert those
who have gone astray. God, and the authority of the king and the Pope,
will be kind to you in this work."

An example of the persistence and patience which marked the diplomacy of
the cautious Clement was provided in the lengthy developments attending
the return of the Jesuits to France. That strange antipathy, that
special mixture of repugnance and strenuous hostility, of suspicion and
apprehension of the sinister, which the Jesuit name seems periodically
and peculiarly to invoke in the minds of parliaments and princes and
even prelates

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

had been responsible for the expulsion of the Order from France a few
years earlier. "Slaves of Spain" Henry had called the followers of St.
Ignatius of Loyola and his parliament had gone even further, terming
them: "Corrupters of youth, disturbers of the peace, and enemies of King
and State." Anxious though he had been for the lifting of the ban of
excommunication Henry would not consent to the return of the Jesuits as
being one of the conditions. A less sage negotiator might have halted in
rash deadlock at such an attitude but the patient Pope resolved to wait
and work and after five years of ceaseless effort his will triumphed.
The Society of Jesus went back to France and the great change which had
been wrought in the King's opinion is shown in his address to those of
his subjects who remained more stubborn in their prejudices.

"How can you," he asked, "accuse of ambition men who renounce the honors
and benefices which are offered to them, and who even vowed to God never
to accept them, and who ask for nothing else on earth than to be
allowed, without reward, to serve those who wish to avail themselves of
their services? . . . The university is opposed to them, but only
because they do better than others, which is shown by the crowds that
attend their lectures. If men did not learn more and better from them
than elsewhere, how is it that, because of their skill, your
universities have nothing to show against them but empty benches and
that in spite of your prohibitions, the students follow them everywhere,
even beyond the frontiers of the kingdom? You complain that they attract
to themselves all the clever children, and choose the best. For this
reason I esteem them highly . . . Do we not ourselves choose the best
soldiers to lead the battle . . . It must be admitted that their
patience is great, and for my

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

part I admire them, because it is by patience and virtue that they
obtain their ends. With regard to the authority of the Pope, their
teaching is no different from that of other Catholics, and if you would
put them on trial for that, you would have to do the same to the
Catholic Church. I do not believe they withdrew the clergy from my
authority, or teach regicide. Therefore leave me alone to deal with this
Society."

The thirteen years that Clement held the papacy were remarkably
fruitful. Nevertheless neither his piety nor his wisdom nor his caution
prevented him from indulging in outrageous and flagrantly open nepotism.
Fortunes were given and nephews and great-nephews received both secular
and ecclesiastical office of the highest rank. It was thus thought that
the family was firmly ensconced in a rich and permanent security; but
less than fifty years after the death of Pope Clement an aged cardinal
was asking, "Where today is the greatness of the Aldobrandini? Where are
those fine nephews that I so often saw in the ante-cameras of the Pope?
They are dead, as is Clement VIII and Cardinal Aldobrandini. The male
line is quite extinct; how vain are the hopes of men, and how frail the
happiness of this world."

The next conclave was divided into two parties and the rulers of Spain
and France, employing all devices and resources in the cloistered
struggle, awaited the outcome of the balloting with eagerness and
anxiety. The French deemed it a victory when a kinsman of their Queen,
the Cardinal Alessandra Ottaviona de Medici, was chosen; but the
sweetness of the triumph turned abruptly to the uncertainties of
suspense again when the new pontiff sickened and died after a reign of
twenty-seven days. He was seventy-one years old and on his tomb was
inscribed the name of <span class="smallcaps">Leo</span> XI. The same
parties which had struggled

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

to control the previous conclave now maneuvered again and finally
compromised in the selection of the Cardinal Camillo Borghese who became
<span class="smallcaps">Paul</span> V. He was a Roman and the conduct of
his reign could be anticipated from the name he chose; for like Paul IV
he was a stern and haughty nepotist whose harsh pronouncements were
seldom softened by mercy. He was but fifty-five years old and most of
his career had been spent in the study and application of canon law.
Thus, save in the matter of enriching his family, his policies and
viewpoint were those of an academically correct lawyer rather than the
adaptable ways of the professional diplomatist. Perhaps it was fortunate
that such a man should now supervise the Curia for the decrees of the
Council of Trent were still new and stern discipline was needed to make
sure of unhindered observance and to keep clear the channels of
interpretation.

The unyielding and uncompromising nature of the Pope brought him into
conflict with the Venetians who for a century past had been a source of
various troubles to the papacy. When insolence from that quarter was
carried into his reign Paul V made little endeavour to parley but
unhesitatingly put the Republic under interdict. The actual incident
which brought the drastic sentence concerned the seizure and
imprisonment of two Venetian ecclesiastics without attention to the
existing law of clerical immunity. Great indignation was manifested in
Venice at the papal action and the Doge, supported by local theologians,
ordered the clergy to disregard the Interdict. His command was obeyed
except by the Jesuits, the Theatines, and the Capuchins, all of whom
were forced to vacate their pulpits and their properties in the city of
canals. It then appeared as though the next stage of the conflict would,
much to the delight of Protestant observers,

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

result in bloodshed. But as both armies prepared the French King
intervened and by the efforts of his representative a species of
reconciliation was effected although with little good will on either
side.

In this reign began an incident which was to be magnified and distorted
in the telling by anti-papal writers of later generations. Living then
was the celebrated Galileo Galilei of Pisa who mingled his great talents
in the realms of physics, astronomy, and philosophy. His firm belief in
the heliocentric planetary theory which had first been formulated but
not completely proved by the priest Copernicus led him into conflict
with those of his colleagues who supported the Ptolemaic or geocentric
system and as was the noisy habit of the day invective and insult were
invoked to support argument. The noisy argument as to whether the sun
revolved around the earth or vice versa was heard beyond the academies
because both sides rashly invoked scriptural allusion to support their
beliefs; and as the possession of high talent is usually escorted by the
malice and envy of those less favored, it was only to be expected that
complaints against the scientists’ unorthodoxy should reach the alert
ears of the Inquisition. It was known that certain astronomers mixed
their science with more mysterious practices and so the doctor was
summoned to Rome where a court of theologians, ever super-sensitive in
their fears that scientific innovations might be but subtle disguises
for novelties in doctrine, pronounced the opinion, after consultation
with men of science, that the Copernican theory was erroneous and
contrary to scriptural teaching. Galileo, displaying a discretion rare
in a man of genius, promised not to spread his beliefs any further and
so was released. But as time passed the complacency of his erstwhile
critics presented a temptation too great to resist and once again he was

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

called to Rome where he was tried, not for his theories, but for
breaking his former promise. Considering that the shadow of heresy had
rested on him the terms of his punishment were lenient and in all he
only spent twenty-two days in the buildings of the Holy Office. Another
pope now ruled and it was he, Urban VIII, who afterwards gave the
distinguished scientist a pension while he lived and his blessing when
he died. Charges have been made that this was a case where the Church
clearly tried with all authority to obstruct the enlightenment of
scientific progress. The facts are that while certain theologians did
disagree with Galileo, the Pope, as the Voice of the Church, never
pronounced against the views of the scientist nor was such opposition
incorporated into the doctrinal belief of the Church. And as for the
mistake of the ecclesiastics it should be remembered their attitude was
fortified by established belief and the profound opinion of almost every
contemporary scholar, Catholic or Protestant. "Even such a great man as
Bacon," says Macaulay, "rejected with scorn the theory of Galileo."

Paul V was Pope for sixteen years and when he died the conflict known as
the Thirty Years War had commenced. Although it was supposedly a
religious quarrel the Pope did his best to remain neutral for he
realized that political differences were the real reasons: they were to
extend the hostilities for three decades. A revolt in Bohemia started
the campaign, which is divided by the historians into four periods,
Palatine, Danish, Swedish, and French. The battles were many and so were
the shifts of fortune and by the time conclusion had been reached
Catholics had fought shoulder to shoulder with Protestants against
similarly assorted opponents. Opposing national interests fed the fires
of the conflict and in the last years the aim of France, under the
leadership of Cardinal Richelieu,

<span class="small">Innocent X. Reigned 1644 to 1655.</span>

<span id="img_28000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Pope Innocent
X](tn/28000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/28000.jpg)  
Pope Innocent X  
</span>

<span class="small">His corpse lay unattended three days. See pages
[284](#page_284)-5.</span>

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

was to overcome the Catholic House of Austria, and the Treaty which
marked the cessation of the long hostilities was indeed a bitter and
humiliating blow to the latter power.

Quickly chosen after the death of Paul was a clever canonist and
diplomatist, the Cardinal Alessandro Ludovisi, <span
class="smallcaps">Gregory</span> XV. He was a silent and sickly man with
the wan appearance of an ancient scholar whose health had been broken in
over study; and he was able to support his new and great burdens only
for two years, but short though the time was his accomplishments were
many and permanent. New rules were made to govern the procedure of
future conclaves, and the methods of choice were limited to three
processes; that of *scrutiny* which is the employment of secret ballot
and the method most commonly used; that of *compromise*, which delegates
by general consent the elective power to a small committee of cardinals;
and *acclamation* which is a contingency to provide for those rare
occasions when by an unanimous agreement the hopes and approval of the
Sacred College unite in the person of an unopposed candidate.

To meet the problems involved in the complex administration of the great
missionary activities which were now in full and noble motion in the
Americas and the Indies and Africa as well as the remote places of the
Orient, the Congregation of the Propaganda was established. And new
names were added to the calendar of Saints, including those of Ignatius
Loyola, Francis Xavier, Philip Neri and the mystic Teresa of Avila. The
difficult business of guarding the Papal dignity through the
vicissitudes and treacheries of the current war was accomplished with
tact and dexterity. That combination of Princes who determined the
Imperial succession numbered seven, and Gregory by his astute diplomacy
increased the Catholic influence

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

so that five of the votes became pledged to Catholic policy. While
friendship was maintained with Spain, the city of Paris was elevated
from the status of an episcopal see to metropolitan dignity; and to gain
further support from France, which was already protecting the
missionaries in Turkish territory, an eloquent young prelate with
powerful friends was sent the Red Hat. His name was Armand Jean du
Plessis, Duc de Richelieu.

Assisting the ailing pontiff in most of his enterprises was a nephew who
had been elevated to the purple and the accession of the next Pope,
<span class="smallcaps">Urban</span> VIII, certainly brought no halt to
what now seemed an established custom. On the contrary several relatives
were made Eminences, others were given lucrative positions, and it has
been estimated that during a pontificate which extended twenty-one years
this Pope's family was enriched by one hundred and five million scudi.
As the Cardinal Maffeo Barberini he had served the Church well, and
particularly in his capacity as Nuncio to the French court he had won
distinction, although from this association was formed a policy which
brought him criticism and trouble. The delicate position which his
predecessor had adroitly managed to keep during the ever changing
fortunes of the Thirty Years War was abandoned by Urban VIII; and to the
disgust and rage of the Catholic Princes he openly supported Richelieu
who with his Protestant allies was determined to crush Catholic Austria.
Manifestations of chagrin and bitterness only induced the Pope to open
wide his treasury for the defence of Rome and elaborate fortifications
were built and the ancient walls repaired. For the glory of his name and
the vanity of his kin artisans and artists were also kept busy on such
famous structures as the Barberini Palace and the villa of Castel
Gandolfo which is the present summer residence of the Pope.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Quirinal
gardens were designed for his approval and so great and constant was the
building activity that when lead was stripped from the roof of the
Pantheon to provide material for new projects a typical Roman sarcasm
was born. "What the barbarians spared, the Barberini have taken."

Infected by the same greedy ambitions which had already intoxicated his
nephews the Pope sent his troops to occupy the Duchy of Castro, property
of the Farnese family, but the unjust encroachment alarmed and angered
the other great clans and principalities to such an extent that with
their ready assistance the Farnese duke enlisted a capable band of
experienced warriors, well equipped with the tools of war. The Papal
States were invaded with cries of revenge and promises of destruction to
the Barberini and a catastrophic campaign was only averted by the timely
intervention of the French king, who forced the Pope to deliver the
usurped domain back to its duke. Because, in Italy, his covetous conduct
was frankly that of the head of an aggressively ambitious family rather
than the example expected of the leader of Christendom, and because,
across the Alps, his unwise and shifty abandonment of neutrality had
dissipated the aloofness which should have earned him the respect of the
nations, Urban VIII can be blamed for the fact that at the close of his
considerable reign the attention shown a papal pronouncement was rapidly
achieving the same small degree of importance as might be accorded the
voice of a temporal sovereign whose territories and armies were neither
large nor important. A decree of Urban thus received was his solemn
condemnation of the book *Augustinus* written by Cornelius Jansenius,
Bishop of Ypres, which purported to interpret the teachings of St.
Augustine and which among opinions of Calvinistic tinge declared

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

the will of man was not free and that Christ had not died for all. The
bishop died soon after the publication of his work but there rapidly,
despite the Papal ban, sprang into existence the tenacious sect of
Jansenism which was to bring much trouble during the coming century.

If the prestige which Urban had lost was to be regained in the next
reign, it was necessary that his successor should be a man of energy and
strong will, yet the sad truth is that these were the very
characteristics missing in the nature of <span
class="smallcaps">Innocent</span> X. The cardinals had pondered weeks
before agreeing on their pleasant-tempered and nobly born colleague,
Giovanni Battista Pamfili, who as a prelate had lived correctly and
officiated with discretion but who was now past his three score and ten
and who was distinctly not one of those ancients whose vigor excites the
wonder of lesser and younger men. In fact he was shamelessly content
that his family should guide his will; and defeating a cardinal nephew
for this privilege was his brother's widow Olimpia Maidalchini, an
extraordinary and resolute woman well able to dominate the actions of a
tired old man. Even in an age when nepotism was the accepted custom the
arrogance of this presumptuous shrew excited scandal and dismay; for she
ruled the papal household from the kitchens to the reception chambers
and her anger was feared alike by cooks and cardinals. A bare and looted
treasury had aroused the ire of this formidable character and steps were
taken to make the Barberini disgorge their ill-gotten wealth. But the
nephews of the previous Pope wisely fled to France where, with the hope
of securing their favor at a future conclave, protection was given them
and influence brought to bear so that they were able eventually, with
fortunes unimpaired, to return to Italy.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

The ornamentation of Rome was continued in this reign with generous
patronage and was appreciated by the citizens; but a gauge of the
dwindling papal prestige outside the Papal States is best illustrated by
the hearty indifference which was accorded the Pope's objection to the
Treaty of Westphalia. Historic rights and properties of the Church were
arbitrarily given to Protestant rulers in this agreement between the
nations and it was in vain that Innocent declared "all articles of the
Treaty prejudicial to the Catholic religion, to divine worship, to the
Apostolic See or to subordinate Churches . . . are to be null and void,
invalid, iniquitous, rejected, without force or effect in law." The
Treaty was supposed to mark the end of the Thirty Years’ War although in
fact Spain and France continued hostilities for another decade; but
Austria accepted humiliating terms and the actual break up of the
so-called Empire was assured. Innocent X was eighty-two years old when
he died and so wretched and confused was his household that his corpse
lay unattended for three days. It had been thought that the Donna
Olimpia, hitherto the governing spirit of the Lateran, would arrange the
funeral but the remarkably practical dowager, well aware her time was
over, did naught but announce that such action was impossible for "a
poor widow."

No hasty conference was the next conclave and particularly grave were
the responsibilities confronting that assemblage. It was the middle of
the seventeenth century, the end of that period which historians have
allotted to the Reformation, and all Europe was writhing in a disunity
and exhaustion from which France had emerged, thanks to the genius of
Richelieu, holding the balance of power. France had remained a Catholic
nation but it was the plan of the great Cardinal, followed by his
successor,

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mazarin, to bring
all things ecclesiastical under the absolute control of the State, and
to pay what in effect would be but lip service to the Pope. Catholic
revival in France had been earnest and successful and as proof there
were at this very time living and spreading their good works such men as
the saintly Vincent de Paul and the famous theologian and historian
Bossuet; but many a good churchman, sincere in intention but intoxicated
by patriotism, had diverted his allegiance and given his support to the
proposed alliance of Church and State which was to be known as
*Gallicanism*. Across the English Channel Puritan passions were in full
fury, King Charles had lost his head, altars had been overturned
throughout the country and Catholic blood was shed freely. But these
outrages seemed almost inconsequent when compared to the crowded
massacres which were the awful work of Cromwell's men in Ireland.
Protestant princes held sway in Holland and the north countries but the
story of Hungary, because of the efforts of one of her own sons, the
Archbishop Pazman, was a triumph of the counter-reformation.

The people of Spain had held their faith too but her prelates and her
sovereign were uneasy and fearful that the papacy would become a
permanent instrument of French policy; and the King, Philip IV, who had
not resigned himself to the painful lessons of the Thirty Years War,
still cherished hopes that once again Spain would become the foremost
nation of Europe. A like mirage dazzled the minds of the Turks and at
Constantinople modern implements of battle were made ready, ancient
scimitars sharpened, and a fleet of fast feluccas outfitted in
preparation for the wild joys of a Holy War. In that minaretted city
where the great church of the Christians had become the premier mosque
of the Moslems, the

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Patriarch of the
Eastern Church still dwelt under the sufferance and capricious
protection of the Caliphs, clinging to an ill heeded authority,
contemptuously spurning the advances of Protestant theologians but
always, true to the ancient and miserable tradition, stubbornly refusing
union with Rome. The Russias were rumbling with the approach of a new
era and there was a chance that the Church might gain opportunities,
hitherto denied, to propagate throughout the wider regions. The popes
had long tried to draw the Muscovite Christians into the fold but the
Orthodox metropolitans with a persistence, equal in duration and
tenacity, had consistently met such advances with spirited opposition.
Pope Gregory XIII had earned the esteem and had received the envoys of
Ivan the Terrible with the result that the Jesuits had been allowed to
cross the long boundaries and they were now achieving success among the
people, but they were also incurring the wrath and hatred of the native
clergy. Formidable this hatred proved to be, for the time of Peter the
Great was approaching and after many vicissitudes the followers of
Ignatius were, at the beginning of the next century, to receive the
order of expulsion.

For three months after the death of Innocent X the cardinals deliberated
and argued and at one time decided that the good and well qualified
Cardinal Sacchetti should be their choice. But the ring of the Fishermen
was denied him because the representative of the Spanish King presented
the solemn objection of Spain. Thus was exercised the "Right of
Exclusion," in virtue of which the head of a nation claimed to veto the
election of a candidate on the grounds that such an elevation would be
incompatible with the interests of his country. This privilege is now
explicitly rejected by the Church but up until recently it was claimed
at various times by the Governments of

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> France, Austria,
Spain and Germany. After the Spanish objection to Cardinal Sacchetti had
been recognized the votes were cast again and this time the majority
went to Fabio Chigi, a cardinal who had spoken for the Church at the
negotiations leading to the Treaty of Westphalia and who had
consequently incurred the dislike of the French. This antipathy was now
manifested when that nation objected to the possibility of his being
Pope. Sacchetti was the candidate preferred in Paris but as a hopeless
deadlock seemed likely the worthy prelate magnanimously persuaded the
French to withdraw their opposition to the other candidate. Chigi was
then proclaimed pontiff and the Borgia reputation did not prevent him
from taking the name of <span class="smallcaps">Alexander</span> VII.

He was fifty-six years old and was a grandnephew of Paul V. He had been
an important legate and in an age which produced such illustrious names
in the realms of science and scholarship as Bacon, Galileo, Descartes,
Napier, Leibnitz, Isaac Newton, Bellarmine and many others of like
genius and learning he was reckoned to be a scholar of repute. Much
could be and much was expected of him but he proved to be an indifferent
administrator. Indolence was his weakness and many hours were spent each
day enjoying the warmth of the sun, coining epigrams and quoting Latin
verse amidst the pleasant chatter of friends who were of similar taste.
When this languorous routine palled there were long vacations in the
country where life was even less irksome. The burdens of Government and
even important decisions involving policy were left to the wisdom of
either the Secretariate of State or the Congregations; and in a sense
this was but a reflection of a change in government that was then taking
place in every land. Monarchs, formerly so absolute in their authority,
were yielding ground to the growing and

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

accumulated power of the higher aristocracy and as the great families of
the Papal States, their ranks augmented from time to time by the kin of
reigning popes, were as alert and as effective as their noble equals
elsewhere in claiming and occupying offices of the State, many important
positions in the Congregations were now held by bearers of familiar
names. Alexander VII was pope twelve years and most of the time he was
on bad terms with France. There were numerous disagreements which
finally resulted in the troops of the young King Louis XIV occupying
Avignon. The circumstance which brought this belligerent action had
begun in a dark corner of a Roman street when a drunken servant of the
French Embassy received a fatal thrust from the sword of an equally
drunken soldier of the Papal Guards. For this crime the minister of the
foremost nation of Europe demanded reparations, including a long and
full apology from the Pope.

The lackadaisical Alexander had allowed many of his most vexatious cares
to fall upon the shoulders of the papal Secretary of State, Cardinal
Giulio Rospigliosi, and it was this distinguished and hard-working
prelate who became his successor as <span
class="smallcaps">Clement</span> IX. It was a popular choice and there
was rejoicing among good men for though the new pope was famous for his
sweet temper and devotion to high ideals he was also an administrator
whose experience would not allow him to be the easy dupe of villains.
The enthusiasm of his admirers was never betrayed; and if his rule,
parental rather than regal, was renowned for kindness it was never
despised for weakness. In Rome Clement IX was accessible to all and
twice a week he could be found in St. Peter's with attendants dismissed,
assuming the duties of a humble confessor. No nephews came to wear the
purple or fatten

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

their purses and when buildings were erected the new walls, in defiance
of the established custom, remained bare of his name or heraldry. Taxes
were reduced, the evils of the grain monopolies abolished, and so
earnest were his charities that the citizens cheered at the mention of
his name. Nor did his popularity cease at the walls of Rome. Across the
boundaries of nations it flourished and over the thresholds of courts.
Though his policies with the powers were conciliatory they were also
characterized by the firmness of will and unswerving adherence to
principles of a true priest. Trouble with the Jansenist movement was
averted in his reign because of his gentle and understanding treatment
of those who were so inclined, and when Spain and France decided to end
hostilities the same peace-loving mind was credited with having played a
considerable part in the preliminary negotiations. It was his wish that
these powerful nations should form an alliance that would awe and
prevent Turkish aggression but before his plans could be realized the
audacious Mohammedans landed at Crete and conquered Candia. The
calamitous news was a bitter blow to the anxious and fatigued pontiff
and when informed he was felled by a shock and grief from which he never
fully recovered. Soon the pontificate of but two years and a few months
was at an end and there were tears and gloom.

The Sacred College, assembling with haste but already subjected to the
heavy intrigues of France and Spain, met with confusion and dismay in a
conclave that was long and miserable. The weeks dragged by and the fifth
month was almost concluded before the honor was given to the Cardinal
Emilio Altieri who fervently wished to assume the name of his friend and
predecessor and so became Pope <span class="smallcaps">Clement</span> X.
That he had held the esteem of Clement IX was sufficient endorsement of
his character; but he

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

was eighty years old and his election cannot be regarded as being other
than a device of compromise on the part of the cardinals. It was an
escape from deadlock and the opposing parties of the conclave each
thought to increase their strength during a pontificate that could not
be long, although in fact their venerable choice lived for six more
years. He brought no great change to the policies of Clement IX but
neither did he bring the vigor of the inspired leadership of that good
man. Most of the papal authority was put into the hands of a young
adopted nephew, the Cardinal Paoluzzi-Altieri who tried, but in vain, to
create a league of the Christian nations which for all time would end
the Turkish threat. Savage battles were already being fought by the
Hungarians under the command of gallant John Sobieski; but it was the
French strategy, always inimical to Austria, to keep trouble on the
eastern borders of that country so instead of opposing the Turks the
envoys of the most Christian King actually made pact with Mohammed IV.

Little heed was given to any word of the Pope in France for Gallicanism
was on the increase in the kingdom of Louis XIV. Revenues of vacant
bishoprics were arbitrarily claimed in the royal name and under the seal
of the same authority elevations were, without reference to Rome, made
to the episcopacy. But if little respect was shown by France to Clement
X, the Czar Alexis of Russia, a bitter enemy of the Turks, despatched an
embassy to Rome. His envoy bore the name of Menzies and was the son of a
Catholic Scotsman who had fled from Cromwell's soldiers; but
unfortunately he was a poor diplomat and making no effort to disguise
his dislike of Rome and the Romans he accomplished little save to draw
upon himself an enormous unpopularity.

Death came to Clement in his eighty-sixth year and

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

there was determined resistance on the part of those cardinals who were
under French influence to prevent the election of the Cardinal Benedetto
Odescalchi. Opposition from the same quarter had denied him the honors
six years earlier but this time his supporters were stronger and more
than ever convinced he should reign. Their persistence succeeded and at
the end of two months their unassuming but capable candidate was hailed
as Pope <span class="smallcaps">Innocent</span> XI. The hostile
presumptions of Louis XIV were met without fear or weakness by the new
pontiff and he remained unintimidated when the monarch commanded the
French clergy to meet in a formal assemblage for the purpose of defining
the rights of the Church in France. Most of these churchmen had the
Erastian bias of their king and the shadow of schism loomed terribly
near when their deliberation resulted in the *Four Gallican Articles*
which declared that Kings and princes in temporal things were not to be
subjected to ecclesiastical power, the decrees of the Council of
Constance were to be upheld, the use of papal power was to be moderated
by the Canons, and the decision of the Pope could not be final without
the consent of the Church.

The response of Innocent to the violation of his authority was a swift
condemnation of the assemblage and its declarations, and this measure
was followed by an announcement that henceforth canonical investiture
would be denied ecclesiastics possessed of such views. Thirty-six French
bishoprics thus became vacant and although royal nominees were able to
usurp revenues of certain sees they remained devoid of spiritual
jurisdiction and were denied by the Curia. The rage of Louis mounted and
in retaliation there was further trespass by his troops at Avignon. Rome
showed no fear and the quarrel took an even more violent course when the
French envoy refused to surrender certain

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

diplomatic privileges, involving extra-territoriality, which had been
withdrawn by the papal government because of abuse. Louis sent soldiers
to bolster the ambassadorial attitude and when his haughty
representative was excommunicated the nuncio in France was arrested.
Relations between this Pope and King were never to be happy, yet the
grievous altercation brought no aid to Protestantism in France: in fact
the continued harsh treatment given to the Huguenots awakened the
compassion of the pontiff to such a degree that he appealed on their
behalf to James II of England, hoping that words of the English king
would have weight with his brother monarch and thus lessen their
miserable lot. "As the French government became severer towards the
Protestants," one writer recorded, "so the Pope became milder, while
remaining immovable, however, on matters of faith." His strict and
unbending orthodoxy on the subject of dogmatic interpretation brought
his displeasure upon that flexible school of theology known as
*Casuistry*, a science which supposedly was enjoying favor amongst those
French Jesuits who were fighting the dour and severe teachings of the
Jansenists. The Casuist sought to explain moral principle through
practical example and as it was a method which could easily lead to
error and misunderstanding the stern Pope condemned a series of
propositions which had been taken from the writings of moral theologians
considered to be possessed of too lax leanings. This action against
their enemies naturally pleased the Jansenists and their dangerous
applause drew a suspicion of Jansenism upon the reputation of Innocent
XI which was to linger long after his death.

But certainly nobody could deny that his was a model reign. He lived
simply and humbly and though he reduced taxes a sizable balance grew in
the papal treasury.

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus he was able
to send financial assistance to the Austrians and Poles who were still
carrying on their bitter struggle against the hordes of the Crescent. He
sought to impose his own decorous way of life upon the Romans, the
citizens were deprived of their gambling dens, and their wives were
forbidden to wear immodest clothing. Like many of his predecessors he
deplored usury and comprehensive legislation was made in an effort to
control and limit the disastrous practice. Wisdom and moderation
characterized his relationship with England and it was without his
support and against his counsel that the Catholic King James II employed
the violent and imprudent measures which cost him his throne and so
dealt a crushing blow to Catholic hopes in that kingdom.

The difference between Innocent XI and Louis XIV always remained
unbridged and when the former died the royal representatives once again
labored strenuously to secure the election of a candidate who would be
more sympathetic to their sovereign. They were not entirely successful
but neither were their intrigues a complete failure. After a struggle of
two months the opposing factions within the conclave agreed to a
compromise in the person of the eighty-year-old Pietro Ottoboni who was
a Venetian. He took the name of <span class="smallcaps">Alexander</span>
VIII. He had had wide administrative experience but he was now an old
man and with indulgence and relief he allowed his aristocratic but
greedy family to participate in many of his decisions. He only reigned
sixteen months and no great changes were made in the broader policies
which he had inherited except for the establishment of a more amicable
relationship with France. Louis reciprocated the good will and as a
grand gesture removed his troops from Avignon; but further steps toward
a complete reconciliation were halted by the sudden although not
unexpected death of

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Alexander. The
rivalries of national intrigues kept the cardinals imprisoned for five
months before they could tell the world that there was a pope again. The
Archbishop of Naples, the Cardinal Antonio Pignatelli del Rastrello, was
proclaimed Pope <span class="smallcaps">Innocent</span> XII and quickly
illustrated the high standard of his reign by providing a permanent and
heavy check to nepotism in the form of the Bull *Romanum decet
Pontificem*. With canonical authority carefully exercised the decree
left scant opportunity for abuses on the part of future papal kinsmen. A
pope, if the circumstances so demanded, might raise one relation to the
Sacred College but no more than one, and similar limitations regulated
the appointment of other offices, ecclesiastical or civil or military,
which were under papal patronage. Adherence to the enactment by the
cardinals, as well as future popes, was assured by the institution of an
obligatory declaration under oath. "If the head of the Church," declared
Innocent XII, "has poor relations, let him give them the same charity as
he gives other needy people."

The conciliatory mood which Louis XIV had shown towards the previous
pontiff did not lessen with the new reign. Perhaps the increasing
strength and unity of the anti-French nations, Austria, Spain, Sweden
and later England and Holland, made him more appreciative of papal
friendship; but whatever the cause his former extravagant claims were
gradually abandoned and in time the Declaration of the Four Articles was
supplanted by a more reasonable edict which without any radical
departure from canon law redefined the rights of the ecclesiastical and
temporal powers in France. The enemies of Louis regarded these
happenings with suspicion and alarm and soon the current holder of the
Imperial title, Leopold I, was making angry accusation against the pope.
As a

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

pretext for quarrel his ambassador in Rome claimed those diplomatic
privileges of immunity and asylum which had been denied the French envoy
during the reign of Innocent XI. The Pope rejected the claims, the
quarrel grew, and when Charles I of Spain looked for an heir the papal
advice was that his territories should be pledged to a French prince,
Philip of Anjou. The decision brought glory and power to the House of
Bourbon but it also brought the cruel War of the Spanish Succession and
before Philip could enjoy his throne the martial genius of John
Churchill, first Duke of Marlborough, had inflicted defeat after defeat
upon the French armies during the campaigns of Blenheim, Ramillies,
Oudenarde, and Malplaquet. But these battles were fought after the time
of Innocent XII and his last days were bright with the hopes that the
approaching century would be an era of peace. There was a lull in the
European struggles, the Crescent seemed subdued, and with dreams based
upon such fragile foundation the Holy Year of the Jubilee of the year
1700 was celebrated with happiness and success. Great crowds of pilgrims
pressed forward to receive the tremulous blessing of a worthy old man
who was awaiting his end without fear or regret, content that he had
done his best in all things. He had ruled with justice and wisdom and
charity and when he died the memory of this pope—whom the poet Browning
was to salute as being "simple, sagacious, mild yet resolute"—was
honored even by those who had incurred his censure.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eighteenth Century](ptp18)
