[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianty](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ptp17)  [Next](ptp19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00295S01A/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pageant of the Popes*, by John Farrow, \[1942\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Eighteenth Century

The eighteenth century had arrived and eight popes were to make their
entrances and their exits during its crowded span, this hundred years
which saw such formidable opponents of the papacy as the philosophers
Voltaire and Jean Jacques Rousseau, the statesmen Duc de Choiseul and
the Marquis Pombal, the sovereigns Louis XV of France

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="small">Innocent XII. Reigned 1691 to 1700.</span>

<span id="img_29700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Pope Innocent
XII](tn/29700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/29700.jpg)  
Pope Innocent XII  
</span>

<span class="small">Browning's Pope: "Simple, sagacious, mild, yet
resolute." (*The Ring and the Book*) See pages
[295](ptp17.htm#page_295)-6.</span>

and Joseph II of Austria. It was the hundred years which was to be rent
by the bitter miseries of the French Revolution, which was to witness
the fantastic successes of Napoleon Bonaparte, and which, as it ebbed,
was to provide the depressing drama of a pope imprisoned and his
properties garrisoned by alien troops. It was a century when the rights
of the Holy See were entirely ignored by the nations and the protests of
the popes were received with contempt, their praise with indifference.

The successor of Innocent XII was the handsome clever Giovanni Francesco
Albani who became <span class="smallcaps">Clement</span> XI on November
23, 1700, and who held the tiara for twenty-one years, the longest reign
since the twelfth century. He was young for a pope, being in his early
fifties; but he looked even younger, perhaps because he wore no beard,
an oddity which astonished and often shocked visitors to Rome. He owned
an enviable reputation for charity and piety and his work as Secretary
of Briefs had been marked by diligence and brilliance. When he came to
the throne there was no lessening of ideals or slackening of energy. Yet
his reign cannot be considered successful. It seemed as though no
barricade could be erected, no scheme devised in one man's time to stem
the rushing stream of event and movement, the mad current of history.
Tranquillity and order Pope Clement XI managed to preserve in the Papal
States and this was no mean feat in itself, but the general turmoil of
Europe and in particular the war of the Spanish Succession made
activities outside his boundaries precarious and fruitless. Neutrality
was impractical, nor would it be permitted or even believed by either
side; and seeing no reason to change the policy of his predecessor he
chose to maintain amicable relations with France, a path which
automatically brought to him the ill-will of the Emperor and the
Imperial allies.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

A very dangerous ill-will this was, for the armies of Marlborough and
the Prince Eugene were heaping a series of bloody disasters upon the
French who could do little to help the Pope, even when Italy was
invaded. A terrible price was paid for French sympathies and heavy blows
at the political prestige of the papacy were struck from all sides with
bewildering rapidity. Hopes for unity among the Catholic nations, always
the dream of a pope, were woefully shattered when the Emperor made
alliance with that stronghold of Protestantism, the Kingdom of Prussia.
The Papal protests were ignored and they were ignored again when the
Imperial banners were unfurled over Milan and Naples. A constant flow of
humiliation and trouble enveloped the Curia with sorrow. In Sicily a
triumphant usurper persecuted the clergy. The papal nuncio was driven
from Madrid. And the French Ambassador left Rome contemptuously,
declaring that it was no longer the seat of the Church. Yet the City
itself seemed untouched by disorder or panic and in fact grew richer by
the addition of new academies and works of art. The missions were not
neglected, the intricate business of the Congregations continued on, and
the Pope found time to deal with the Jansenists who once again were
disturbing France. So great was the controversy this time that the
French king razed the walls of Port Royal, an abbey which housed many of
the movement's most fanatical adherents who satisfied their vows and
their consciences by paying but an outward obedience to past edicts. In
his first bull, *Vineam Domini*, the Pope declared that this form of
"respectful silence" was not enough; his second, *Unigenitus*, was a
severe condemnation of their theology. These measures were sufficient to
halt the movement and although traces lingered on for some time within
the Church most

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

of the extremists went into schism and found refuge in Holland.

The reign of the next pope, <span class="smallcaps">Innocent</span>
XIII, did not last three years and little glory was brought to the
papacy by the Cardinal Michele Angelo Conti, a scion of one of the great
Roman families. One of his first actions was to make the wily and
unprincipled French statesman, the Abbé Dubois, a member of the Sacred
College; and this deed plainly indicated the trend of his sympathies and
provided foundation for the accusations which declared him to be
governed by French influence. The dwindling respect for the papal office
became the more sharply accentuated in his time when, because of the
machinations of the Emperor, Don Carlos of Spain was made heir to the
childless Prince Francesco Farnese, ruler of the Grand Duchy of Parma
and Piacenza. The Duchy was a fief of the Holy See but the Pope's
protests were overridden and the Imperial will was triumphant. The
raising of the notoriously vocationless Dubois to the purple brought
criticism and troubles in abundance to Innocent XIII but his successor,
<span class="smallcaps">Benedict</span> XIII, was to give the honor to a
far worse creature, a villain whose crimes clouded the Holy See with
grief and shame.

The conclave which elected this pope had been divided into three
parties, the Imperial, the French, and those cardinals who fought for
the Italian interest. The last were successful and in the final scrutiny
the majority of the ballots were for the Cardinal Pietro Francesco
Orsini. He was an Orsini but he had no wish to be pope and earnestly
tried to avoid the distinction. He was seventy-five years old and for
five decades had worn the purple with honor and humility. All his life
he had lived like a monk and as Pope he made no change in a worthy
routine. Perhaps it was a mistake; for the long hours

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

spent lingering over his rosary or meditating in the peaceful shadows of
his chapel left him with small time for the grander duties. He heard
confessions in St. Peter's, he visited and comforted the sick, and as
the appearance of the Roman clergy affronted his monastic standards he
took measures to enforce somberness in clerical attire. But the really
important problems and decisions were left to the judgment of his friend
and adviser, Nicholas Coscia, who was given the Red Hat along with the
complete confidence and trust of his benefactor. Coscia had also been a
monk but neither Carmelite vows nor discipline prevented him from being
a hypocritical rogue of the first rank. Once secure in high position he
proceeded to loot the papal treasury and revenues with speed and
efficiency. His avarice and treachery were perceptible to all except his
patron, and when after six years the regime was ended by the death of
Benedict it was to the Coscia palace that the mobs rushed with cries of
vengeance and threats of burning.

The right of veto was invoked freely by the Imperial representative at
the following conclave and it was not until four months had passed that
the Cardinal Lorenzo Corsini was presented to the world as Pope <span
class="smallcaps">Clement</span> XII. He was a Florentine, a friend of
the Medici, and born of a family which had given many sons, including
the illustrious St. Andrew Corsini, to the service of the Church. A
suspicion of compromise could well fall upon those who had chosen him,
for he was nearly eighty years old and soon was to be completely
bedridden and blind too. Yet the surprising fact is that his policies
and decisions were not devoid of a certain vigor and initiative. Coscia
had been given asylum in Naples by the Emperor's Viceroy, but Clement
was unyielding in his insistence that the unworthy cardinal should be
returned to Rome

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

and justice. Eventually this was done and the villain was imprisoned and
made to disgorge what could be found of his ill-gotten wealth. Because
of his dishonesty and bad management the papal treasury had become
woefully bare and the new pope was forced to replenish it from his
private fortune, an act that he was able to do without great hardship or
regret for his family was enormously rich and he had been long
celebrated for the grand scale of his charities. Amongst the recipients
of his special patronage were the Marionite Catholics, for he had always
been an eager student of the Eastern rites; indeed all Catholics holding
the faith in remote places attracted his concern and prayers. Not always
could he send advice or assistance for this was a time when the ships of
Protestant England, with prize-hungry crews eagerly sniffing the
horizons, were prowling the oceans and severing communication with the
colonies of the countries she happened to be warring against. Many
missions across the seas were thus deprived of guidance and help, but
there was little the pope could do: for the steady deprivation of
temporal power continued on in his reign and he had as little success in
his dealings with the kings as had his immediate predecessors.

The Papal territories were invaded periodically during the interminable
operations of the nations at war and the noise of guns and the clash of
steel against steel were heard again in Naples and Sicily as Charles of
Bourbon disputed the Imperial claims and took possession by force of
arms. The Pope's advice was ignored and it was ignored again when he
offered to adjust the disagreement between Genoa and Corsica. Rejection
of the papal guidance brought no prosperity or great success to the
Catholic governments or princes and in fact their power was decreasing
while the importance of the Protestant nations

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

was mounting steadily. But no lesson was learned and the old quarrels
and presumptions continued. In Spain the voice of a woman was suddenly
lifted to challenge the papal authority. It was that of the Queen
Elizabeth, whose Farnese blood and an unfortunate propensity for
meddling in clerical affairs gave her the eloquence to convince her
husband, Philip V, that he should make the episcopal appointments and
control the benefices of Spain. She also demanded that canonical
investiture to the Archbishopric of Toledo should be given her third son
who was not yet nine years old.

It was this Clement who in his bull *In Eminenti* was the first pope to
frown upon Freemasonry, a papal condemnation not always understood by
non-Catholics in Great Britain and North America: for the Masonry they
know, mild and charitable in activity but nevertheless a secret society,
does not, like the brand often practiced in Europe, exist to carry on
questionable political activities or to attack both civil and
ecclesiastical authority. Up to this reign the devotion of the Way of
the Cross, a meditation upon the tragic procession to Calvary, was only
to be witnessed in the churches of the Franciscans who had adopted the
practice some time in the fourteenth century; but Clement's
encouragement and wish spread the custom and today all Catholic churches
are equipped with fourteen Stations of the Cross, either in the form of
wooden crosses, pictures, groups of statuary or other constructions of
art, depicting the sorrowful last journey of Christ on earth.

Clement XII died at the age of eighty-eight but the Sacred College was
slow in assembling and nearly three months passed before a conclave was
mustered. Three more wearisome months dragged by and despair mounted as
each fresh count of the ballots failed to produce a majority.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After one of these
disappointments the Archbishop of Bologna, the Cardinal Prospero
Lambertini was heard to say: "If you want a saint choose Gatti, if a
statesman Aldobrandini, if a plain honest man then take me." The words
had been spoken in jest but they were taken seriously and it is well
they were: for their author as <span class="smallcaps">Benedict</span>
XIV made an illustrious pope. His own words, "a plain honest man," were
hardly an adequate description of his values. He was honest but he was
also the most famous ecclesiastical scholar of his time and his talents
had not been confined to the library or harnessed to academic obscurity.
A long apprenticeship in the Roman courts and congregations had
sharpened his wits and then had come the pastoral responsibilities of
the mitre, first at Ancona and then at Bologna, where fittingly enough,
for it was his native city, his reputation as an administrator gathered
fame and commendation. He was a tremendously popular man both before and
after his election and if his pontificate brought no temporal
restoration at least a greater respect was earned for his office and the
conclusion of his reign found the Holy See enjoying extraordinarily
amicable relations with most of the governments, both Catholic and
Protestant. His charm and ability conquered bigotry and opposition and
in England the usually acrid pen of Horace Walpole reported that here
was "a man whom neither wit nor power could spoil." Even Voltaire whose
superb prose usually mocked the priesthood was impressed; and he paid
tribute and showed his admiration by dedicating his tragedy *Mahomet* to
the pontiff whom he described as being "the pride of Rome and father of
the world, who taught mankind by his writings and honored it by his
virtues." Voltaire's martial friend, Frederick the Great, succumbed to
the prevailing mood and saluted the pontiff in his correspondence; and

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

the Sultan of Turkey likewise expressed admiration in high terms. Such
compliments made some of the cardinals draw long faces and they were
gloomy too when Benedict made concessions to the Catholic nations with
what indeed seemed a very prodigal hand. The King of Portugal was
granted certain privileges of episcopal nomination and allowed to call
himself the most Faithful King. The King of Sardinia became the Vicar of
the Holy See and he too was given the right of nomination, and similar
concessions delighted the ruler of Spain.

The policies of Benedict were certainly most conciliatory yet they were
not weak. He well understood the weaknesses and dangers of his temporal
position and so realized the futility of stern decrees or unreasonable
demands. Shortly after his election he remarked: "The pope gives orders,
the cardinals do not obey, and the people do as they like." There was no
force to back his decisions nor did he seem to need force: it was by
moderation and good will that his ends were achieved. By such graceful
means the loyalty of Eastern Catholics to the Holy See was strengthened,
and rebuke went to overzealous Roman ecclesiastics who had proselytized
too vigorously on behalf of their own rite. "We desire most intensely,"
he declared, "that all should be Catholics but not that all should be
Latins." He ordered that no changes should be made in the ancient
Eastern practices, including the right of their clergy to marry before
ordination.

Tolerance truly marked his every activity. The extreme Jansenists, the
campaigning Protestants, the cynical atheists, were not the targets of
his rage but were benefited by his understanding and gentleness, and
those officials who were in charge of the Index of Prohibited Books were
instructed to be less severe. When there was need he spoke with strength
and authority, and the decree of the

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

preceding pope which condemned Freemasonry was endorsed with a vigorous
clarity. Without hesitation two books written by his admirer Voltaire
were forbidden to the faithful. Like many of his predecessors Benedict
XIV was aware of the dangers of a financial system which utilized usury
and a grave and paternal warning was delivered against the evil. But the
advice again fell on unheeding ears. Indeed the system was too far
developed, the banker too necessary a figure in the affairs of men and
nations, for any one man to effect a change at this stage. He had better
success with the problem, growing large in his reign, of marriages
between Catholics and non-Catholics and his rulings, with but a few
changes, form the law on the subject as it stands today. He was a
prolific author and his great theological and historical works have
survived the test of time. He was always cheerful and his court sparkled
with epigram and humor. The bright mood stayed with him even when death,
a very painful death, approached. He died in his eighty-third year,
cheerful in spirit to the end, and for once the satirists and
scandal-mongers common to the time were silent. So much so that an
amazed observer recorded: "Marvel of marvels! The people speak no evil
of the dead Pope!"

Sixty-two days later the world was informed that the Cardinal Carlos
Rezzonico had become Pope <span class="smallcaps">Clement</span> XIII.
He was sixty-five years old and was born of a noble Venetian family. His
election marked a triumph for the Italian faction. The noisy Romans were
delighted and the ranks of a less boisterous group, the Jesuits, were
stirred with a great hope for the new Clement was their friend and the
time had come when the followers of St. Ignatius sorely needed a
protector. The work of the Order had been a too aggressive and too
successful thing in a human world to escape hostility and resistance;
and the

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

elements against them at this time, the too absolute pretensions of the
sovereigns, the free thinking brand of philosophy as expounded by such
capable men as Rousseau and Voltaire, and the bitter enmity of Jansenist
sympathizers, made, when united, a formidable foe indeed. The amiable
genius of Benedict XIV had stayed the storm but he was now dead and the
attack began.

It was easy to bring the rulers to action. Regalism had reached its
pinnacle but the great princes and in particular the Bourbons were
becoming fretful and suspicious of an intangible something that was in
the air. They did not recognize or understand the elements that were
making for the terrible and significant tragedy of the French Revolution
but they were conscious that unseen and dangerous forces were at work.
Their fears and agitations made them susceptible and willing listeners
to the most preposterous stories; and at every court there was a
statesman ready with the mischief, ready to produce victims for the
wrath of their royal masters. "When we have destroyed the Jesuits we
shall have short work," Voltaire had said and the idea raced and spread
to the courts with the spluttering fury of a quick fuse. The Prime
Minister of Portugal, the villainous Marquis de Pombal, pointed a finger
at the Jesuits and swore he had evidence that they conspired to murder
the King. In France the Duc de Choiseul frightened his monarch with a
similar tale and the royal nights were made miserable by a softer but
more dangerous voice repeating the charges: for the King's Mistress,
Madame de Pompadour, was an ally of the duke. The Spanish king, Charles
III, was persuaded that Father Ricci, the General of the Society of
Jesus, had declared him to be a bastard and thus not entitled to his
throne. The rulers of Parma and Malta and Naples were told of odious
intentions directed at them and the basest calumnies, a long

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

calendar of crimes ranging from the weaknesses of the flesh to
ghastliest use of dagger and poison, flooded Europe with an organized
persistence that was strangely effective. A touch of the mysterious, a
hint of the sinister, had always hovered about the activities of these
men in unadorned black, these learned and disciplined men who professed
to spurn for themselves all wealth and privilege, even the benefices and
titles of the Church.

The first blow was struck in Portugal. By royal edict the Society of
Jesus was suppressed in both the mother country and the colonies and all
property was confiscated. Three of the Fathers were condemned to death
and the rest either imprisoned or loaded aboard ships which were
despatched to the Papal States. "A present for the Pope," declared the
infamous Pombal who was in great humor because of his triumph. In France
similar measures were adopted and four thousand Fathers, deprived of
their churches and colleges, were banished from the country. The fever
spread to Spain and her colonies, where the number of those victimized
exceeded six thousand, and the smaller powers of Parma, Naples, and
Malta, joined the procession of injustice. But even yet the enemies of
the Society were not satisfied. Acting in concert the Ambassadors of
France, Spain, and Naples waited upon the Pope and demanded a *total*
suppression of the Order. He refused. French troops then marched upon
the papal territories of Avignon and Venaissin and Neapolitan soldiery
occupied Benevento, but even more disturbing to the aged pontiff was the
frightening threat of schism which the envoys swore would be a fact
unless the Jesuits were dissolved. Clement was distressed and frantic
but death intervened to solve the problem for him. Before he expired he
made a desperate appeal to the Empress Maria Theresa of Austria; but her
ministers coldly stated that

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

interference was impossible since, in their opinion, the affair of the
Jesuits did not involve religion but was a temporal matter. Clement XIII
died broken hearted and the conclave which followed his death was stormy
and ridden with the intrigues of the determined ambassadors.

The policy to be followed by the next pope sharply divided the Sacred
College into two parties. Should their choice bow to the will of the
nations and so preserve peace and a species of allegiance, or should
they elect one who would pursue the stubborn course, the way that would
lead to disaster and schism? Passionate speeches were made, subtle
arguments were employed, complicated compromises attempted. The right of
veto was invoked abundantly. After three months of such conduct a
majority was found and it was thus that Lorenzo Ganganelli became Pope
<span class="smallcaps">Clement</span> XIV. He was a cardinal and a
Franciscan of unblemished reputation and he had been a pupil of the
Jesuits; yet there is good cause to believe that at the conclave he
promised the Spanish representative that if elected he would be
agreeable to the Bourbon wishes. The transaction is supposed to have
been put in writing and signed by the future pope but extensive searches
have failed to produce such a document. Great pomp and ceremony
surrounded his coronation but underlying the pageantry there was the
nervous ache of suspense and worry for the Jesuits who could not but
feel that a bargain had been made and that the doom of the Order was
assured. No sooner was Clement enthroned than the Spanish and French
Ambassadors pressed forward and arrogantly demanded immediate action.
They were disappointed if they expected abject and quick obedience: for
by every device of conciliation and procrastination at his disposal the
pontiff tried to dispose of the

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

problem without actual compliance to the drastic demands.

For four harassed years he avoided positive decision by pleas and the
showering of honors and the granting of concessions; but finally, after
the threat of schism was again made, the inglorious day arrived when he
was forced to issue the cruel Brief of Suppression, *Dominus ac
Redemptor noster*. The charges against the Society were repeated in the
brief but it is significant that no judgment was passed. "Impelled by
the duty of restoring harmony in the church," the pope said, "convinced
that the Society of Jesus can no longer fulfil the purposes for which it
was founded and moved by other reasons of prudence and governmental
policy which we keep to ourselves, we abolish and annul the Society of
Jesus, with its offices, houses and institutions." With a splendid
exhibition of obedience the twenty-two thousand members of the Society
bowed to the will of the pope, and their General, Father Ricci,
submitted to imprisonment in the Castle of Saint Angelo without trouble
or any show of rancor or revolt. But two monarchs, the Protestant
Frederick II of Prussia and one who professed the Greek Orthodox faith,
Catherine II of the Russias, received the Edict with indignation and
protest and both proclaimed that it would have no force within their
domains.

The Jesuits were vanquished. Or so thought their delighted enemies, who
celebrated their victory with wild and self congratulatory enthusiasm.
The Jesuits were gone and Avignon and the rest of the occupied papal
properties were returned to the Holy See. But no happiness came to ease
the hours of Clement XIV. He had probably acted with all sincerity but
he seemed conscious that he had made a grievous mistake and a great
melancholy and misery descended upon him and stayed with him until he

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

died, fourteen months after the issuance of the ignoble Brief.

Four months marked by conclave activities of the usual sorry kind went
by and then the Cardinal Giovanni Angelo Braschi, who enjoyed the
support of the French interests, was elected as Pope Pius VI. He was not
yet sixty and he was so strikingly handsome that the Romans called him
*Il Papa bello*. His tastes and ways of life fitted the golden days of
the Renaissance rather than his own anxious days. Indeed the Renaissance
tradition provided the pattern for his ambitions and standards. A great
palace was erected to house a nephew whom he enriched and married to an
heiress, and another nephew was given the purple and the means to wear
it with princely dignity. He desired to be a patron of the arts in the
grand manner and he wished his name to be remembered in the Roman story
because of splendid buildings and because of such great projects as the
draining of the Pontine marshes which in their swampy condition were a
perpetual menace to the health of the city. But his attention was soon
drawn from such schemes because it was rapidly becoming evident that the
conciliatory policies of the late pope had ushered in an even greater
contempt for the ancient rights of the papacy. And the affair of the
Jesuits lingered on. The French and Spanish ambassadors had supported
Pius at his election but the astute Pombal of Portugal had suspected him
of harboring sympathies for the Society and the suspicion proved
correct; for when a commission in Rome after extensive investigation
acquitted the Fathers and pronounced the accusations against them to be
groundless, Pius permitted their schools and institutions to continue in
Prussia and Russia where, under the protection of friendly rulers,
continuity was assured the great Order. But he did not repeal the harsh
brief because he was a

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

realist and thought that as yet reinstatement was impossible in those
countries where the ruling cliques held such a violent antipathy to the
Society. Therefore justice was postponed and as the pontiff gloomily
meditated over this matter a new storm broke, this time in Austria.

Maria Theresa had been dead for about three years and her son, Joseph
II, was now the Emperor. He was a man who determinedly and aggressively
believed that the sovereign head of a State should be an absolute ruler
in all things, and this exalted idea naturally meant conflict with the
Holy See. So once again there was to be a repetition of the old story,
the unfortunate and familiar story of a presumptuous prince attempting
to exercise temporal authority over spiritual affairs and ecclesiastical
properties. What had been called Gallicanism in France now blossomed in
full strength in Austria. The Emperor claimed complete jurisdiction over
the Church in his territories and ordered the bishops to cease direct
communication with Rome. Several hundred religious institutions had
their doors closed by Imperial edict and it was forbidden that monies or
alms of any kind should be conveyed to the Holy See. Clerics who showed
any trace of opposition received prompt and severe punishment and the
Imperial interference was so extensive that laws were issued regulating
the size and number of candles and images to be used in the churches.
The ordinary channels and resources of diplomacy seemed inadequate to
the pontiff and he conceived the bold idea of abandoning the usual
practice of negotiating through representatives and proceeding to Vienna
in person. This he did and there were splendid processions and majestic
receptions and great cheering crowds and the complicated etiquette of
the Imperial court paid the requisite respect and deference to the
handsome pope. But no jubilance gladdened his heart

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

for he could detect an insolent spark in the eyes of the Prime Minister
who bent his knee with little grace, and the Imperial words of salute
and greeting were noticeably devoid of enthusiasm or true friendliness.
Two Red Hats were left in Vienna but nothing was gained and the
disappointed Pius returned to Rome saddened and wiser. Any further or
stronger degree of opposition from him would mean schism and this
calamity he had no wish to invite. So all he could do was to wait and
hope for a better day.

The Imperial measures were too hastily contrived and too stringent and
unpopular to be assured of permanence and when Joseph died in 1790, and
was succeeded by his brother Leopold II, most of the innovations were
abandoned; but not until there had been further anxiety for the Pope.
His inability to enforce his authority and his reluctance to risk schism
had not escaped the notice of some of the powerful prelates of Germany
and Italy who, prompted and encouraged by Imperial intrigues, had
proposed to make themselves virtually independent of the Holy See. Their
outrageous resolution and plan was expressed in a document known as the
*Punctation of Ems*, and later the *Synod of Pistoja* professed a
similar insubordination; but Pius proved himself capable of dealing with
both emergencies and neither movement survived a decade. Far greater
troubles were in store for this pontiff but before they came there were
two agreeable incidents. The King of Sweden visited Rome whilst
travelling incognito and finding much to please and nothing to frighten
him gave his consent to the institution of a Vicariate Apostolic in his
country. And across the wide waters of the Atlantic, in the second year
of this remarkable pontificate, the North American colonies of Great
Britain decided to break with the mother country. Several years

<span class="small">Pius VI. Reigned 1775 to 1799.</span>

<span id="img_31200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Pope Pius
VI](tn/31200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/31200.jpg)  
Pope Pius VI  
</span>

<span class="small">He died the prisoner of Napoleon. See pages
[310](#page_310) to [316](#page_316).</span>

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

of bitter fighting brought success to the decision and the famous
Declaration of Independence was assured the devotion of a great nation
and the respect of all peoples. Freedom of worship was the guaranteed
privilege of each citizen in the new commonwealth and the Holy See was
not slow to commence the hierarchy which since has been blessed by
exceptional vigor and success. In 1790 a former Jesuit, John Carroll,
born of Irish parentage in Maryland, was consecrated Bishop of
Baltimore.

But while these gains were being made, Europe was startled by the sudden
violence of a greater and more tragic revolt. The Bastille had been
stormed and freedom and equality for all Frenchmen proclaimed. The
Terror had begun and events were moving swiftly and bloodily to the
monotonous and never ceasing accompaniment of the guillotine's dull
thud. The Church had suffered in France because of the absolute
pretensions of the Kings, but now she was to share with the monarch the
wrath of the mob-inciters, for disorder was incompatible with an
unhindered and officiating clergy, and disorder, particularly wild and
savage, was the irresistible pace of these mad times. The reasons for
the Revolution were understandable enough. Unsuccessful wars had brought
the financial condition of the country to a chaotic state and the lot of
the majority of the people was terribly wretched and miserable; yet the
aristocracy with a limitless apathy had chosen to blind themselves to
the surrounding tragedy and to live within their own unnatural circles
of fashion and caste. The crime of their stupidity was paid by their
blood and sorrow and those who did not die suffered the torments of
concealment or the hardships of exile.

The evils and the weaknesses caused by the trends of Gallicanism and
Jansenism had made the French Church vulnerable to the attack of those
who were possessed by

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

the wild madness to destroy all the ancient things. There were nobly
born bishops whose only qualification for the mitre was the endorsement
of the Crown, and fresh in the memory of many a revolutionary were the
unreasonable severities which had been taught and practiced by clerics
of Jansenist tinge. But the bulk of the serving clergy were neither high
born nor given to theological innovations. They were from the people and
served the people well; but, as opposers of violence and defenders of
order, they too went to the scaffold in crowds. The heads of the King
and Queen also fell to the gory baskets and many a revolutionary leader
was to meet a similar grim fate before normalcy came to the country
again. Policies and decisions changed with dizzy rapidity before the
fickle moods of mobs and the whims of opportunists, and it often seemed
as though the ceaseless rise and drop of the guillotine's sharp edge
would be the only institution of the new régime to enjoy survival and
achieve permanence. The Republic's attitude towards religion veered
sharply at varying times from the project of a state-controlled
non-celibate clergy to plans that called for the complete
dechristianization of France. Rupture with the Holy See came at an early
stage and Avignon and the district of Comte Venaissin were quickly
annexed. Events moved at a torrential speed and there was little the
anguished Pope could do but offer his prayers and give hope and
hospitality to refugees. All the nations regarded the Republic with
repugnance, hostility, and with a mounting fear that the wide
conflagration would not be held at the French frontiers. There were
councils and alliances and hasty plans were made to hold the flanks.

To the south the armies of Austria and Piedmont gathered on the Lombard
Plain and to meet them Paris despatched an Army whose General was young
and confident

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

that he would add his name and exploits to those of Hannibal and
Charlemagne. His bold genius was equal to his large confidence and soon
the courts of Europe were aghast at the lightning speed with which the
victories of Napoleon Bonaparte were accomplished. Austria was
vanquished and most of Italy quickly succumbed before the astounding
triumphs of the young General. The Pope was forced to pay two
indemnities. The first was in the amount of two million francs and some
works of art; but the second demand was for thirty million seven hundred
thousand francs and car-loads of famous paintings, statues, tapestries,
and precious manuscripts. The papal army was disbanded and territories
were stripped from the papal sovereignty.

Joseph Bonaparte, brother of the general, was made French Ambassador to
Rome and promptly set out to further Republican ideas and sympathy.
Victories always kindle a certain admiration and enthusiasm for the
victor and now in the city Republicanism became fashionable and popular.
The ancient days when Rome had been the model Republic were recalled and
lamented by conspirators who rapidly grew in number. There were
treasonable speeches and brawls in the streets and when a French General
was killed in a skirmish between malcontents and papal guards, Joseph
Bonaparte immediately demanded his passports and soon a French army was
advancing upon Rome. The Pope gave the order that there should be no
resistance or fighting and then retired to his quarters as street
orators with much noise and no little absurdity proclaimed the glorious
days of the Republic and the Senate to have arrived again. During the
darkness of the night two French officers burst in upon the Pope and
rudely told him that his temporal power was gone; and to emphasize the
humiliation and helplessness

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

of his position his ring of office was stripped from his finger. Pius VI
was now in his eighty-second year and he was ill and tired. Earnestly he
pleaded that he should be allowed to die where he had lived but the
request was ignored and that same night a strange cavalcade clattered
heavily-armed from the city. There was a brief stay at Siena and for a
month the place of imprisonment was a monastery near Florence. But even
then the dying man was not allowed to restfully. Commands came to take
him across the Alps and it was at Valence, some six weeks later on the
29th August 1799, that the captive pontiff breathed his last.

The death of a pope in such humiliating circumstances caused high glee
amongst the aggressively anti-religious. At last that thing against
which their fury and malice had been directed was vanquished and
finished. There would be no more popes, the pontifical story was at an
end, the long dynasty of St. Peter had been concluded with the miserable
exit of the 248th pope. So it seemed. But elation based on such belief
was as short lived as the new Roman Republic, for the fickle fortunes of
war sent Napoleon to Egypt, the Austrians and Russians pressed forward
again, and the French evacuated Rome shortly after the death of Pius.

In Venice, which was garrisoned by Austrian troops, the cardinals, each
with a tale of adventure and peril to relate, congregated to perform
their traditional duty. They enjoyed the protection of the Emperor,
Francis II, but from him also was suffered a constant interference
during the entire session of the conclave. It was a nervous assemblage,
this gathering of thirty-five aged and harassed men, all bewildered by
the quick events which had changed and which still were changing the
world as they knew it, and all acutely conscious of the awful
responsibility linked

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

to their judgment at this critical movement. On their decision might
rest the fate of the Church. They knew they should produce a champion
and with considerable anguish they realized that a mistake on their part
would easily, so easily, bring further ruin to the papacy. Feverish
appraisal and an anxious scrutiny went to each of their company but what
was seen gave little hope. There were not lacking good men, able and
pious, but there was no superman standing above his fellows, no sign of
the genius that was urgently needed. Should they accept the candidate of
Francis and thus join the destiny of the Church to the fortunes of the
Austrian throne? The idea was not attractive but, as the practical ones
asked, could an independent pope survive? The French Republic was an
active foe of religion and already the world appreciated the fearsome
capabilities of the Republican armies.

A note of hysteria and desperation crept into the discussions but one
voice remained calm and unafraid, a persuasive and persistent voice, but
of the background: for its owner Monsignor Ercole Consalvi was not yet a
member of the Sacred College, merely an attending official. He was an
exceptionally brilliant young churchman and gradually it was his
opinions. which gained the confidence of the assembly. He thought that
the Cardinal Barnabo Chiaramonti, able Bishop of Imola and a
distinguished member of the Benedictine Order, should be pope and
finally the majority of the ballots was given this prelate who became
<span class="smallcaps">Pius</span> VII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nineteenth Century](ptp19)
