[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amu04)  [Next](amu06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141441127/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Modern Utopia*, by H.G. Wells \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER TWO

#### CONCERNING FREEDOMS

### SECTION 1

Now what sort of question would first occur to two men descending upon
the planet of a Modern Utopia? Probably grave solicitude about their
personal freedom. Towards the Stranger, as I have already remarked, the
Utopias of the past displayed their least amiable aspect. Would this new
sort of Utopian State, spread to the dimensions of a world, be any less
forbidding?

We should take comfort in the thought that universal Toleration is
certainly a modern idea, and it is upon modern ideas that this World
State rests. But even suppose we are tolerated and admitted to this
unavoidable citizenship, there will still remain a wide range of
possibility. . . . I think we should try to work the problem out from an
inquiry into first principles, and that we should follow the trend of
our time and kind by taking up the question as one of "Man *versus* the
State," and discussing the compromise of Liberty.

The idea of individual liberty is one that has grown in importance and
grows with every development of modern thought. To the classical
Utopists freedom was relatively trivial. Clearly they considered virtue
and happiness as entirely separable from liberty, and as being
altogether more important things. But the modern view, with its
deepening insistence upon individuality and upon the significance of its
uniqueness, steadily intensifies the value of freedom, until at last we
begin to see liberty as the very substance of life, that indeed it is
life, and that only the dead things, the choiceless things, live in
absolute obedience to law. To have free play for one's individuality is,
in the modern view, the subjective triumph of existence, as survival in
creative work and offspring is its objective triumph. But for all men,
since man is a social creature, the play of will must fall short of
absolute freedom. Perfect human liberty is possible only to a despot who
is absolutely and universally obeyed. Then to will would be to command
and achieve, and within the limits of natural law we could at any moment
do exactly as it pleased us to do. All other liberty is a compromise
between our own freedom of will and the wills of those with whom we come
into contact. In an organised state each one of us has a more or less
elaborate code of what he may do to others and himself, and what others
may do to him. He limits others by his rights, and is limited by the
rights of others, and by considerations affecting the welfare of the
community as a whole.

Individual liberty in a community is not, as mathematicians would say,
always of the same sign. To ignore this is the essential fallacy of the
cult called Individualism. But in truth, a general prohibition in a
state may increase the sum of liberty, and a general permission may
diminish it. It does not follow, as these people would have us believe,
that a man is more free where there is least law and more restricted
where there is most law. A socialism or a communism is not necessarily a
slavery, and there is no freedom under Anarchy. Consider how much
liberty we gain by the loss of the common liberty to kill. Thereby one
may go to and fro in all the ordered parts of the earth, unencumbered by
arms or armour, free of the fear of playful poison, whimsical barbers,
or hotel trap-doors. Indeed, it means freedom from a thousand fears and
precautions. Suppose there existed even the limited freedom to kill in
vendetta, and think what would happen in our suburbs. Consider the
inconvenience not only to each other, but to the neutral pedestrian, the
practical loss of freedoms all about them. The butcher, if he came at
all, would have to come round in an armoured cart. . . .

It follows, therefore, in a modern Utopia, which finds the final hope of
the world in the evolving interplay of unique individualities, that the
State will have effectually chipped away just all those spendthrift
liberties that waste liberty, and not one liberty more, and so have
attained the maximum general freedom.

There are two distinct and contrasting methods of limiting liberty; the
first is Prohibition, "thou shalt not," and the second Command, "thou
shalt." There is, however, a sort of prohibition that takes the form of
a conditional command, and this one needs to bear in mind. It says if
you do so-and-so, you must also do so-and-so; if, for example, you go to
sea with men you employ, you must go in a seaworthy vessel. But the pure
command is unconditional; it says, whatever you have done or are doing
or want to do, you are to do this, as when the social system, working
through the base necessities of base parents and bad laws, sends a child
of thirteen into a factory. Prohibition takes one definite thing from
the indefinite liberty of a man, but it still leaves him an unbounded
choice of actions. He remains free, and you have merely taken a
bucketful from the sea of his freedom. But compulsion destroys freedom
altogether. In this Utopia of ours there may be many prohibitions, but
no indirect compulsions—if one may so contrive it—and few or no
commands. As far as I see it now, in this present discussion, I think,
indeed, there should be no positive compulsions at all in Utopia, at any
rate for the adult Utopian—unless they fall upon him as penalties
incurred.

### SECTION 2

What prohibitions should we be under, we two Uitlanders in this Utopian
world? We should certainly not be free to kill, assault, or threaten any
one we met, and in that we earth-trained men would not be likely to
offend. And until we knew more exactly the Utopian idea of property we
should be very chary of touching anything that might conceivably be
appropriated. If it was not the property of individuals it might be the
property of the State. But beyond that we might have our doubts. Are we
right in wearing the strange costumes we do, in choosing the path that
pleases us athwart this rock and turf, in coming striding with
unfumigated rücksacks and snow-wet hobnails into what is conceivably an
extremely neat and orderly world? We have passed our first Utopian now,
with an answered vague gesture, and have noted, with secret
satisfaction, there is no access of dismay; we have rounded a bend, and
down the valley in the distance we get a glimpse of what appears to be a
singularly well-kept road. . . .

I submit that to the modern minded man it can be no sort of Utopia worth
desiring that does not give the utmost freedom of going to and fro. Free
movement is to many people one of the greatest of life's privileges—to
go wherever the spirit moves them, to wander and see—and though they
have every comfort, every security, every virtuous discipline, they will
still be unhappy if that is denied them. Short of damage to things
cherished and made, the Utopians will surely have this right, so we may
expect no unclimbable walls and fences, nor the discovery of any laws we
may transgress in coming down these mountain places.

And yet, just as civil liberty itself is a compromise defended by
prohibitions, so this particular sort of liberty must also have its
qualifications. Carried to the absolute pitch the right of free movement
ceases to be distinguishable from the right of free intrusion. We have
already, in a comment on More's *Utopia*, hinted at an agreement with
Aristotle's argument against communism, that it flings people into an
intolerable continuity of contact. Schopenhauer carried out Aristotle in
the vein of his own bitterness and with the truest of images when he
likened human society to hedgehogs clustering for warmth, and unhappy
when either too closely packed or too widely separated. Empedocles found
no significance in life whatever except as an unsteady play of love and
hate, of attraction and repulsion, of assimilation and the assertion of
difference. So long as we ignore difference, so long as we ignore
individuality, and that I hold has been the common sin of all Utopias
hitherto, we can make absolute statements, prescribe communisms or
individualisms, and all sorts of hard theoretic arrangements. But in the
world of reality, which—to modernise Heraclitus and Empedocles—is
nothing more nor less than the world of individuality, there are no
absolute rights and wrongs, there are no qualitative questions at all,
but only quantitative adjustments. Equally strong in the normal
civilised man is the desire for freedom of movement and the desire for a
certain privacy, for a corner definitely his, and we have to consider
where the line of reconciliation comes.

The desire for absolute personal privacy is perhaps never a very strong
or persistent craving. In the great majority of human beings, the
gregarious instinct is sufficiently powerful to render any but the most
temporary isolations not simply disagreeable, but painful. The savage
has all the privacy he needs within the compass of his skull; like dogs
and timid women, he prefers ill-treatment to desertion, and it is only a
scarce and complex modern type that finds comfort and refreshment in
quite lonely places and quite solitary occupations. Yet such there are,
men who can neither sleep well nor think well, nor attain to a full
perception of beautiful objects, who do not savour the best of existence
until they are securely alone, and for the sake of these even it would
be reasonable to draw some limits to the general right of free movement.
But their particular need is only a special and exceptional aspect of an
almost universal claim to privacy among modern people, not so much for
the sake of isolation as for congenial companionship. We want to go
apart from the great crowd, not so much to be alone as to be with those
who appeal to us particularly and to whom we particularly appeal; we
want to form households and societies with them, to give our
individualities play in intercourse with them, and in the appointments
and furnishings of that intercourse. We want gardens and enclosures and
exclusive freedoms for our like and our choice, just as spacious as we
can get them—and it is only the multitudinous uncongenial, anxious also
for similar developments in some opposite direction, that checks this
expansive movement of personal selection and necessitates a compromise
on privacy.

Glancing back from our Utopian mountain side down which this discourse
marches, to the confusions of old earth, we may remark that the need and
desire for privacies there is exceptionally great at the present time,
and it was less in the past, that in the future it may be less again,
and that under the Utopian conditions to which we shall come when
presently we strike yonder road, it may be reduced to quite manageable
dimensions. But this is to be effected not by the suppression of
individualities to some common pattern, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) but by the broadening of public charity and
the general amelioration of mind and manners. It is not by assimilation,
that is to say, but by understanding that the modern Utopia achieves
itself. The ideal community of man's past was one with a common belief,
with common customs and common ceremonies, common manners and common
formulæ; men of the same society dressed in the same fashion, each
according to his defined and understood grade, behaved in the same
fashion, loved, worshipped, and died in the same fashion. They did or
felt little that did not find a sympathetic publicity. The natural
disposition of all peoples, white, black, or brown, a natural
disposition that education seeks to destroy, is to insist upon
uniformity, to make publicity extremely unsympathetic to even the most
harmless departures from the code. To be dressed "odd," to behave
"oddly," to eat in a different manner or of different food, to commit,
indeed, any breach of the established convention is to give offence and
to incur hostility among unsophisticated men. But the disposition of the
more original and enterprising minds at all times has been to make such
innovations.

This is particularly in evidence in this present age. The almost
cataclysmal development of new machinery, the discovery of new
materials, and the appearance of new social possibilities through the
organised pursuit of material science, has given enormous and
unprecedented facilities to the spirit of innovation. The old local
order has been broken up or is now being broken up all over the earth,
and everywhere societies deliquesce, everywhere men are afloat amidst
the wreckage of their flooded conventions, and still tremendously
unaware of the thing that has happened. The old local orthodoxies of
behaviour, of precedence, the old accepted amusements and employments,
the old ritual of conduct in the important small things of the daily
life and the old ritual of thought in the things that make discussion,
are smashed up and scattered and mixed discordantly together, one use
with another, and no world-wide culture of toleration, no courteous
admission of differences, no wider understanding has yet replaced them.
And so publicity in the modern earth has become confusedly unsympathetic
for every one. Classes are intolerable to classes and sets to sets,
contact provokes aggressions, comparisons, persecutions and discomforts,
and the subtler people are excessively tormented by a sense of
observation, unsympathetic always and often hostile. To live without
some sort of segregation from the general mass is impossible in exact
proportion to one's individual distinction.

Of course things will be very different in Utopia. Utopia will be
saturated with consideration. To us, clad as we are in mountain-soiled
tweeds and with no money by British bank-notes, negotiable only at a
practically infinite distance, this must needs be a reassuring
induction. And Utopian manners will not only be tolerant, but almost
universally tolerable. Endless things will be understood only by a
scattered few; baseness of bearing, grossness of manner, will be the
distinctive mark of no section of the community whatever. The coarser
reasons for privacy, therefore, will not exist here. And that savage
sort of shyness, too, that makes so many half-educated people on earth
recluse and defensive, that too the Utopians will have escaped by their
more liberal breeding. In the cultivated State we are assuming it will
be ever so much easier for people to eat in public, rest and amuse
themselves in public, and even work in public. Our present need for
privacy in many things marks, indeed, a phase of transition from an ease
in public in the future due to intelligence and good breeding, and in
Utopia that transition will be complete. We must bear that in mind
throughout the consideration of this question.

Yet, after this allowance has been made, there still remains a
considerable claim for privacy in Utopia. The room, or apartments, or
home, or mansion, whatever it may ne a man or woman maintains, must be
private, and under his or her complete dominion; it seems harsh and
intrusive to forbid a central garden plot or peristyle, such as one sees
in Pompeii, within the house walls, and it is almost as difficult to
deny a little private territory beyond the house. Yet if we concede the
possibility that the poorer townsman (if there are to be rich and poor
in the world) will be forced to walk through endless miles of high
fenced villa gardens before he may expand in his little scrap of
reserved open country. Such is already the poor Londoner's miserable
fate. . . . Our Utopia will have, of course, faultless roads and
beautifully arranged inter-urban communications, swift trains or motor
services or what not, to diffuse its population, and without some
anticipatory provisions, the prospect of the residential areas becoming
a vast area of defensively walled villa Edens is all too possible.

This is a quantitive question, be it remembered, and not to be dismissed
by any statement of principle. Our Utopians will meet it, I presume, by
detailed regulations, very probably varying locally with local
conditions. Privacy beyond the house might be made a privilege to be
paid for in proportion to the area occupied, and the tax on these
licences of privacy might increase as the square of the area affected. A
maximum fraction of private enclosure for each urban and suburban square
mile could be fixed. A distinction could be drawn between an absolutely
private garden and a garden private and closed only for a day or a
couple of days a week, and at other times open to the well-behaved
public. Who, in a really civilised community, would grudge that measure
of invasion? Walls could be taxed by height and length, and the
enclosure of really natural beauties, of rapids, cascades, gorges,
viewpoints, and so forth made impossible. So a reasonable compromise
between the vital and conflicting claims of the freedom of movement and
the freedom of seclusion might be attained. . . .

And as we argue thus we draw nearer and nearer to the road that goes up
and over the Gotthard crest and down the Val Tremola towards Italy.

What sort of road would that be?

### SECTION 3

Freedom of movement in a Utopia planned under modern conditions must
involve something more than unrestricted pedestrian wanderings, and the
very proposition of a world-state speaking one common tongue carries
with it the idea of a world population travelled and travelling to an
extent quite beyond anything our native earth has seen. It is now our
terrestrial experience that whenever economic and political developments
set a class free to travel, that class at once begins to travel; in
England, for example, above the five or six hundred pounds a year level,
it is hard to find any one who is not habitually migratory, who has not
been frequently, as people say, "abroad." In the Modern Utopia travel
must be in the common texture of life. To go into fresh climates and
fresh scenery, to meet a different complexion of humanity and a
different type of home and food and apparatus, to mark unfamiliar trees
and plants and flowers and beasts, to climb mountains, to see the snowy
night of the North and the blaze of the tropical midday, to follow great
rivers, to taste loneliness in desert places, to traverse the gloom of
tropical forests and to cross the high seas, will be an essential part
of the reward and adventure of life, even for the commonest people. . .
. This is a bright and pleasant particular in which a modern Utopia must
differ again, and differ diametrically, from its predecessors.

We may conclude from what has been done in places upon our earth that
the whole Utopian world will be open and accessible, and as safe for the
wayfarer as France or England is to-day. The peace of the world will be
established for ever, and everywhere, except in remote and desolate
places, there will be convenient inns, at least as convenient and
trustworthy as those of Switzerland to-day; the touring clubs and hotel
associations that have tariffed that country and France so effectually
will have had their fine Utopia equivalents, and the whole world will be
habituated to the coming and going of strangers. The greater part of the
world will be as secure and cheaply and easily accessible to every one
as is Zermatt or Lucerne to a Western European of the middle-class at
the present time.

On this account alone no places will be so congested as these two are
now on earth. With freedom to go everywhere, with easy access
everywhere, with no dread of difficulties about language, coinage,
custom, or law, why should every one continue to go to just a few
special places? Such congestions are merely the measure of the general
inaccessibility and insecurity and costliness of contemporary life, an
awkward transitory phase in the first beginnings of the travel age of
mankind.

No doubt the Utopian will travel in many ways. It is unlikely there will
be any smoke-disgorging steam railway trains in Utopia, they are already
doomed on earth, already threatened with that obsolescence that will
endear them to the Ruskins of to-morrow, but a thin spider's web of
inconspicuous special routes will cover the land of the world, pierce
the mountain passes and tunnel under the seas. These may be double
railways or monorails or what not—we are no engineers to judge between
such devices—but by means of the the Utopian will travel about the earth
from one chief point to another at a speed of two or three hundred miles
or more per hour. That will abolish the greater distances. . . . One
figures these main communications as something after the manner of
corridor trains, smooth-running and roomy, open from end to end, with
cars in which one may sit and read, cars in which one may take
refreshment, cars into which the news of the day comes printing itself
from the wires beside the track; cars in which one may have privacy and
sleep if one is so disposed, bath-room cars, library cars; a train as
comfortable as a good club. There will be no distinction of class in
such a train, because in a civilised world there would be no offence
between one kind of man and another, and for the good of the whole world
such travelling will be as cheap as it can be, and well within the reach
of any but the almost criminally poor.

Such great tramways as this will be used when the Utopians wish to
travel fast and far; thereby you will glide all over the land surface of
the planet; and feeding them and distributing from them, innumerable
minor systems, clean little electric tramways I picture them, will
spread out over the land in finer reticulations, growing close and dense
in the urban regions and thinning as the population thins. And running
beside these lighter railways, and spreading beyond their range, will be
the smooth minor high roads such as this one we now approach, upon which
independent vehicles, motor-cars, cycles, and what not will go. I doubt
if we shall see any horses upon this fine, smooth, clean road; I doubt
if there will be many horses on the high roads of Utopia, and, indeed,
if they will use draught horses at all upon that planet. Why should
they? Where the world gives turf or sand, or along special tracts, the
horse will perhaps be ridden for exercise and pleasure, but that will be
all the use for him; and as for the other beasts of burthen, on the
remoter mountain tracts the mule will no doubt still be a picturesque
survival, in the desert men will still find a use for the camel, and the
elephant may linger to play a part in the pageant of the East. But the
burthen of the minor traffic, if not the whole of it, will certainly be
mechanical. This is what we shall see even while the road is still
remote, swift and shapely motor-cars going past, cyclists, and in these
agreeable mountain regions there will also be pedestrians upon their
way. Cycle tracks will abound in Utopia, sometimes following beside the
great high roads, but oftener taking their own more agreeable line
amidst woods and crops and pastures; and there will be a rich variety of
foot paths and minor ways. There will be many footpaths in Utopia. There
will be pleasant ways over the scented needles of the mountain
pinewoods, primrose-strewn tracks amidst the budding thickets of the
lower country, paths running beside rushing streams, paths across the
wide spaces of the corn land, and, above all, paths through the flowery
garden spaces amidst which the houses in the towns will stand. And
everywhere about the world, on road and path, by sea and land, the happy
holiday Utopians will go.

The population of Utopia will be a migratory population beyond any
earthly precedent, not simply a travelling population, but migratory.
The old Utopias were all localised, as localised as a parish councillor;
but it is manifest that nowadays even quite ordinary people live over
areas that would have made a kingdom in those former days, would have
filled the Athenian of the *Laws* with incredulous astonishment. Except
for the habits of the very rich during the Roman Empire, there was never
the slightest precedent for this modern detachment from place. It is
nothing to us that we go eighty or ninety miles from home to place of
business, or take an hour's spin of fifty miles to our week-end golf;
every summer it has become a fixed custom to travel wide and far. Only
the clumsiness of communications limit us now, and every facilitation of
locomotion widens not only our potential, but our habitual range. Not
only this, but we change our habitations with a growing frequency and
facility; to Sir Thomas More we should seem a breed of nomads. That old
fixity was (if necessity and not of choice, it was a mere phase in the
development of civilisation, a trick of rooting man learnt for a time
from his new-found friends, the corn and the vine and the hearth; the
untamed spirit of the young has turned for ever to wandering and the
sea. The soul of man has never yet in any land been willingly adscript
to the glebe. Even Mr. Belloc, who preaches the happiness of a peasant
proprietary, is so much wiser than his thoughts that he sails about the
seas in a little yacht or goes afoot from Belgium to Rome. We are
winning our freedom again once more, a freedom renewed and enlarged, and
there is now neither necessity nor advantage in a permanent life
servitude to this place or that. Men may settle down in our Modern
Utopia for love and the family at last, but first and most abundantly
they will see the world.

And with this loosening of the fetters of locality from the feet of men,
necessarily there will be all sorts of fresh distributions of the
factors of life. On our own poor haphazard earth, wherever men work,
wherever there are things to be grown, minerals to be won, power to be
used, there, regardless of all the joys and decencies of life, the
households needs must cluster. But in Utopia there will be wide
stretches of cheerless or unhealthy or toilsome or dangerous land with
never a household; there will be regions of mining and smelting, black
with the smoke of furnaces and gashed and desolated by mines, with a
sort (if weird inhospitable grandeur of industrial desolation, and tile
men will come thither and work for a spell and return to civilisation
again, washing and changing their attire in the swift gliding train. And
by way of compensation there will be beautiful regions of the earth
specially set apart and favoured for children; in them the presence of
children will remit taxation, while in other less wholesome places the
presence of children will be taxed; the lower passes and fore hills of
these very Alps, for example, will be populous with homes, serving the
vast arable levels of Upper Italy.

So we shall see, as we come down by our little lake in the lap of
Lucendro, and even before we reach the road, the first scattered chalets
and households in which these migrant people live, the upper summer
homes. With the Coming of summer, as the snows on the high Alps recede,
a tide of households and schools, teachers and doctors, and all such
attendant services will flow up the mountain masses, and ebb again when
the September snows return. It is essential to the modern ideal of life
that the period of education and growth should be prolonged to as late a
period as possible and puberty correspondingly retarded, and by wise
regulation the statesmen of Utopia will constantly adjust and readjust
regulations and taxation to diminish the proportion of children reared
in hot and stimulating conditions. These high mountains will, in the
bright sweet summer, be populous with youth. Even up towards this high
place where the snow is scarce gone until July, these households will
extend, and below, the whole long valley of Urseren will be a scattered
summer town.

One figures one of the more urban high ways, one of those along which
the light railways of the second order run, such as that in the valley
of Urseren, into which we should presently come. I figure it as one
would see it at night, a band a hundred yards perhaps in width, the
footpath on either side shaded with high trees and lit softly with
orange glowlights; while down the centre the tramway of the road will
go, with sometimes a nocturnal tram-car gliding, lit and gay but almost
noiselessly past. Lantern-lit cyclists will flit along the track like
fireflies, and ever and again some humming motor-car will hurry by, to
or from the Rhoneland or the Rhineland or Switzerland or Italy. Away on
either side the lights of the little country homes up the mountain
slopes will glow.

I figure it at night, because so it is we should see it first

We should come out from our mountain valley into the minor road that
runs down the lonely rock wilderness of the San Gotthard Pass, we should
descend that nine miles of winding route, and so arrive towards twilight
among the clustering homes and upland unenclosed gardens of Realp and
Hospenthal and Andermatt. Between Realp and Andermatt, and down the
Schoellenen gorge, the greater road would run. By the time we reached
it, we should be in the way of understanding our adventure a little
better. We should know already, when we saw those two familiar clusters
of chalets and hotels replaced by a great dispersed multitude of
houses—we should see their window lights, but little else—that we were
the victims of some strange transition in space or time, and we should
come down by dimly-seen buildings into the part that would answer to
Hospenthal, wondering and perhaps a little afraid. We should come out
into this great main roadway—this roadway like an urban avenue—and look
up it and down, hesitating whether to go along the valley Furka-ward, or
down by Andermatt through the gorge that leads to Göschenen. . . .

People would pass us in the twilight, and then more people; we should
see they walked well and wore a graceful, unfamiliar dress, but more we
should not distinguish.

"Good-night!" they would say to us in clear, fine voices. Their dim
faces would turn with a passing scrutiny towards us.

We should answer out of our perplexity: "Good-night!"—for by the
conventions established in the beginning of this book, we are given the
freedom of their tongue.

### SECTION 4

Were this a story, I should tell at length how much we were helped by
the good fortune of picking up a Utopian coin of gold, bow at last we
adventured into the Utopian inn and found it all marvellously easy. You
see us the shyest and most watchful of guests; but of the food they put
before us and the furnishings of the house, and all our entertainment,
it will be better to speak later. We are in a migratory world, we know,
one greatly accustomed to foreigners; our mountain clothes are not
strange enough to attract acute attention, though ill-made and shabby,
no doubt, by Utopian standards; we are dealt with as we might best wish
to be dealt with, that is to say as rather untidy, inconspicuous men. We
look about us and watch for hints and examples, and, indeed, get through
with the thing. And after our queer, yet not unpleasant, dinner, in
which we remark no meat figures, we go out of the house for a breath of
air and for quiet counsel one with another, and there it is we discover
those strange constellations overhead. It comes to us then, clear and
full, that our imagination has realised itself; we dismiss quite finally
a Rip-Van-Winkle fancy we have entertained, all the unfamiliarities of
our descent from the mountain pass gather together into one fullness of
conviction, and we know, we know, we are in Utopia.

We wander under the trees by the main road, watching the dim passers-by
as though they were the phantoms of a dream. We say little to one
another. We turn aside into a little pathway and come to a bridge over
the turbulent Reuss, hurrying down towards the Devil's Bridge in the
gorge below. Far away over the Furka ridge a pallid glow preludes the
rising of the moon.

Two lovers pass us whispering, and we follow them with out eyes. This
Utopia has certainly preserved the fundamental freedom, to love. And
then a sweet-voiced bell from somewhere high up towards Oberalp chimes
two-and-twenty times.

I break the silence. "That might mean ten o'clock," I say.

My companion leans upon the bridge and looks down into the dim river
below. I become aware of the keen edge of the moon like a needle of
incandescent silver creeping over the crest, and suddenly the river is
alive with flashes.

He speaks, and astonishes me with the hidden course his thoughts have
taken.

"We two were boy and girl lovers like that," he says, and jerks a head
at the receding Utopians. "I loved her first and I do not think I have
ever thought of loving any one but her."

It is a curiously human thing, and, upon my honour, not one I had
designed, that when at last I stand in the twilight in the midst of a
Utopian township, when my whole being should be taken up with
speculative wonder, this man should be standing by my side, and lugging
my attention persistently towards himself, towards his limited futile
self. This thing perpetually happens to me, this intrusion of something
small and irrelevant and alive, upon my great impressions. The time I
first saw the Matterhorn, that Queen among the Alpine summits, I was
distracted beyond appreciation by the tale of a man who could not eat
sardines—always sardines did this with him and that; and my first
wanderings along the brown streets of Pompeii, an experience I had
anticipated with a strange intensity, was shot with the most stupidly
intelligent discourse on vehicular tariffs in the chief capitals of
Europe that it is possible to imagine. And now this man, on my first
night in Utopia, talks and talks and talks of his poor little love
affair.

It shapes itself as the most trite and feeble of tragedies, one of those
stories of effortless submission to chance and custom in which Mr. Hardy
or George Gissing might have found a theme. I do but half listen at
first—watching the black figures in the moonlit roadway pacing to and
fro. Yet—I cannot trace how he conveys the subtle conviction to my
mind—the woman he loves is beautiful.

They were boy and girl together, and afterwards they met again as fellow
students in a world of comfortable discretions. He seems to have taken
the decorums of life with a confiding good faith, to have been shy and
innocent in a suppressed sort of way, and of a mental type not made for
worldly successes; but he must have dreamt about her and loved her well
enough. How she felt for him I could never gather; it seemed to be all
of that fleshless friendliness into which we train our girls. Then
abruptly happened stresses. The man who became her husband appeared,
with a very evident passion. He was a year or so older than either of
them, and he had the habit and quality of achieving his ends; he was
already successful, and with the promise of wealth, and I, at least,
perceived, from my botanist's phrasing, that his desire was for her
beauty.

As my botanist talked I seemed to see the whole little drama, rather
clearer than his words gave it me, the actors all absurdly in Hampstead
middle-class raiment, meetings of a Sunday after church (the men in silk
hats, frock coats, and tightly-rolled umbrellas), rare excursions into
evening dress, the decorously vulgar fiction read in their homes, its
ambling sentimentalities of thought, the amiably worldly mothers, the
respectable fathers, the aunts, the "people"—his "people" and her
"people"—the piano music and the song, and in this setting our friend,
"quite clever" at botany and "going in" for it "as a profession," and
the girl, gratuitously beautiful; so I figured the arranged and orderly
environment into which this claw of an elemental force had thrust itself
to grip.

The stranger who had come in got what he wanted; the girl considered
that she thought she had never loved the botanist, had had only
friendship for him—though little she knew of the meaning of those fine
words—they parted a little incoherently and in tears, and it had not
occurred to the young man to imagine she was not going off to
conventional life in some other of the endless Frognals he imagined as
the cellular tissue of the world.

But she wasn't.

He had kept her photograph and her memory sweet, and if ever he had
strayed fro in the severest constancy, it seemed only in the end to
strengthen with the stuff of experience, to enhance by comparative
disappointment his imagination of what she might have meant to hint. . .
. Then eight years afterwards they met again.

By the time lie gets to this part of his story we have, at my
initiative, left the bridge and are walking towards the Utopian guest
house. The Utopian guest house! His voice rises and falls, and sometimes
he holds my arm. My attention comes and goes. "Good-night," two
sweet-voiced Utopians cry to us in their universal tongue, and I answer
them "Good-night."

"You see," he persists, "I saw her only a week ago. It was in Lucerne,
while I was waiting for you to come on from England. I talked to her
three or four times altogether. And her face—the change in her! I can't
get it out of my head—night or day. The miserable waste of her. . . ."

Before us, through the tall pine stems, shine the lights of our Utopian
inn.

He talks vainly of ill-usage. "The husband is vain, boastful, dishonest
to the very confines of the law, and a drunkard. There are scenes and
insults——"

"She told you?"

"Not much, but some one else did. He brings other women almost into her
presence to spite her."

"And it's going on?" I interrupt.

"Yes. *Now*."

"Need it go on?"

"What do you mean?"

"Lady in trouble," I say. "Knight at hand. Why not stop this dismal
grizzling and carry her off?" (*You figure the heroic sweep of the arm
that belongs to the Voice*.) I positively forget for the moment that we
are in Utopia at all.

"You mean?"

"Take her away from him! What's all this emotion of yours worth if it
isn't equal to that!"

Positively he seems aghast at me.

"Do you mean elope with her?"

"It seems a most suitable case."

For a space he is silent, and we go on through the trees. A Utopian
tram-car passes and I see his face, poor bitted wretch looking pinched
and scared in its trailing glow of light.

"That's all very well in a novel," he says. "But how could I go back to
my laboratory, mixed classes with young ladies, you know, after a thing
like that? How could we live and where could we live? We might have a
house in London, but who would call upon us?... Besides, you don't know
her. She is not the sort of woman. . . . Don't think I'm timid or
conventional. Don't think I don't feel. . . . Feel! *You* don't know
what it is to feel in a case of this sort. . . ."

He halts and then flies out viciously: "Ugh! There are times when I
could strangle him with my hands."

Which is nonsense.

He flings out his lean botanising hands in an impotent gesture.

"My dear Man!" I say, and say no more.

For a moment I forget we are in Utopia altogether.

### SECTION 5

Let us come back to Utopia. We were speaking of travel.

Besides road ways and railways and tramways, for those who go to and fro
in the earth the Modern Utopians will have very many other ways of
travelling. There will be rivers, for example, with a vast variety of
boats; canals with diverse sorts of haulage; there will be lakes and
lagoons; and when one comes at last to the borders of the land, the
pleasure craft will be there, coming and going, and the swift great
passenger vessels, very big and steady, doing thirty knots an hour or
more, will trace long wakes as they go dwindling out athwart the
restless vastness of the sea.

They will be just beginning to fly in Utopia. We owe much to M. Santos
Dumont; the world is immeasurably more disposed to believe this wonder
is coming, and coming nearly, than it was five years ago. But unless we
are to suppose Utopian scientific knowledge far in advance of ours—and
though that supposition was not proscribed in our initial undertaking,
it would be inconvenient for us and not quite in the vein of the rest of
our premises—they, too, will only be in the same experimental stage as
ourselves. In Utopia, however, they will conduct research by the army
corps while we conduct it—we don't conduct it! We let it happen Fools
make researches and wise men exploit them—that is our earthly way of
dealing with the question, and we thank Heaven for an assumed abundance
of financially impotent and sufficiently ingenious fools.

In Utopia, a great multitude of selected men, chosen volunteers, will be
collaborating upon this new step in man's struggle with the elements.
Bacon's visionary House of Saloman <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)
will be a thing realised, and it will be humming with this business.
Every university in the world will be urgently working for priority in
this aspect of the problem or that. Reports of experiments, as full and
as prompt as the telegraphic reports of cricket in our more sportive
atmosphere, will go about the world All this will be passing, as it
were, behind the act drop of our first experience, behind this first
picture of the urbanised Urseren valley. The literature of the subject
will be growing and developing with the easy swiftness of an eagle's
swoop as we come down the hillside; unseen in that twilight, unthought
of by us until this moment, a thousand men at a thousand glowing desks,
a busy specialist press, will be perpetually sifting, criticising,
condensing, and clearing the ground for further speculation. Those who
are concerned with the problems of public locomotion will be following
these aeronautic investigations with a keen and enterprising interest,
and so will the physiologist and the sociologist. That Utopian research
will, I say, go like an eagle's swoop in comparison with the blind-man's
fumbling of our terrestrial way. Even before our own brief Utopian
journey is out, we may get a glimpse of the swift ripening of all this
activity that will be in progress at our coming. To-morrow, perhaps, or
in a day or so, some silent, distant thing will come gliding into view
over the mountains, will turn and soar and pass again beyond our
astonished sight. . . .

### SECTION 6

But my friend and his great trouble turn my mind from these questions of
locomotion and the freedoms that cluster about them. In spite of myself
I find myself framing his case. He is a lover, the most conventional of
Anglican lovers, with a heart that has had its training, I should think,
in the clean but limited schoolroom of Mrs. Henry Wood. . . .

In Utopia I think they will fly with stronger pin ions, it will not be
in the superficialities of life merely that movement will be wide and
free, they will mount higher and swoop more steeply than he in his cage
can believe. What will their range be, their prohibitions? what jars to
our preconceptions will he and I receive here?

My mind flows with the free, thin flow that it has at the end of an
eventful day, and as we walk along in silence towards our inn I rove
from issue to issue, I find myself ranging amidst the fundamental things
of the individual life and all the perplexity of desires and passions. I
turn my questionings to the most difficult of all sets of compromises,
those mitigations of spontaneous freedom that constitute the marriage
laws, the mystery of balancing justice against the good of the future,
amidst these violent and elusive passions. Where falls the balance of
freedoms here? I pass for a time from Utopianising altogether, to ask
the question that, after all, Schopenhauer failed completely to answer,
why sometimes in the case of hurtful, pointless, and destructive things
we want so vehemently. . . .

I come back from this unavailing glance into the deeps to the general
question of freedoms in this new relation. I find myself far adrift from
the case of the Frognal botanist, and asking how far a modern Utopia
will deal with personal morals.

As Plato demonstrated long ago, the principles of the relation of State
control to personal morals may be best discussed in the case of
intoxication, the most isolated and least complicated of all this group
of problems. But Plato's treatment of this issue as a question of who
may or may not have the use of wine, though suitable enough in
considering a small State in which everybody was the effectual inspector
of everybody, is entirely beside the mark under modern conditions, in
which we are to have an extraordinarily higher standard of individual
privacy and an amplitude and quantity of migration inconceivable to the
Academic imagination. We may accept this principle and put this
particular freedom (of the use of wine) among the distinctive privileges
of maturity, and still find all that a modern would think of as the
Drink Question untouched.

That question in Utopia will differ perhaps in the proportion of its
factors, but in no other respect, from what it is upon earth. The same
desirable ends will be sought, the maintenance of public order and
decency, the reduction of inducements to form this bad and wasteful
habit to their lowest possible minimum, and the complete protection of
the immature. But the modern Utopians, having systematised their
sociology, will have given some attention to the psychology of minor
officials, a matter altogether too much neglected by the social reformer
on earth. They will not put into the hands of a common policeman powers
direct and indirect that would be dangerous to the public in the hands
of a judge. And they will have avoided the immeasurable error of making
their control of the drink traffic a source of public revenue. Privacies
they will not invade, but they will certainly restrict the public
consumption of intoxicants to specified licensed places and the sale of
them to unmistakable adults, and they will make the temptation of the
young a grave offence. In so migratory a population as the Modern
Utopian, the licensing of inns and bars would be under the same control
as the railways and high roads. Inns exist for the stranger and not for
the locality, and we shall meet with nothing there to correspond with
our terrestrial absurdity of Local Option.

The Utopians will certainly control this trade, and as certainly punish
personal excesses. Public drunkenness (as distinguished from the mere
elation that follows a generous but controlled use of wine) will be an
offence against public decency, and will be dealt with in some very
drastic manner. It will, of course, be an aggravation of, and not an
excuse for, crime.

But I doubt whether the State will go beyond that. Whether an adult
shall use wine or beer or spirits, or not, seems to me entirely a matter
for his doctor and his own private conscience. I doubt if we explorers
shall meet any drunken men, and I doubt not we shall meet many who have
never availed themselves of their adult freedom in this respect. The
conditions of physical happiness will be better understood in Utopia, it
will be worth while to be well there, and the intelligent citizen will
watch himself closely. Half and more of the drunkenness of earth is an
attempt to lighten dull days and hopelessly sordid and disagreeable
lives, and in Utopia they do not suffer these things. Assuredly Utopia
will be temperate, not only drinking, but eating with the soundest
discretion. Yet I do not think wine and good ale will be altogether
wanting there, nor good, mellow whisky, nor, upon occasion, the engaging
various liqueur. I do not think so. My botanist, who abstains
altogether, is of another opinion. We differ here and leave the question
to the earnest reader. I have the utmost respect for all Teetotalers,
Prohibitionists, and Haters and Persecutors of Innkeepers, their energy
of reform awakens responsive notes in me, and to their species I look
for a large part of the urgent repair of our earth; yet for all that——

There is Burgundy, for example, a bottle of soft and kindly Burgundy,
taken to make a sunshine on one's lunch when four strenuous hours of
toil have left one on the further side of appetite. Or ale, a foaming
tankard of ale, ten miles of sturdy tramping in the sleet and slush as a
prelude, and then good bread and good butter and a ripe hollow Stilton
and celery and ale—ale with a certain quantitative freedom. Or, again,
where is the sin in a glass of tawny port three or four times, or it may
be five, a year, when the walnuts come round in their season? If you
drink no port, then what are walnuts for? Such things I hold for the
reward of vast intervals of abstinence; they justify your wide,
immaculate margin, which is else a mere unmeaning blankness on the page
of palate God has given you! I write of these things as a fleshly man,
confessedly and knowingly fleshly, and more than usually aware of my
liability to err; I know myself for a gross creature more given to
sedentary world-mending than to brisk activities, and not one-tenth as
active as the dullest newspaper boy in London. Yet still I have my uses,
uses that vanish in monotony, and still I must ask why should we bury
the talent of these bright sensations altogether? Under no circumstances
can I think of my Utopians maintaining their fine order of life on
ginger ale and lemonade and the ale that is Kops'. Those terrible
Temperance Drinks, solutions of qualified sugar mixed with vast volumes
of gas, as, for example, soda, seltzer, lemonade, and *fire-extincteurs*
hand grenades—*minerals*, they call such stuff in England—fill a man
with wind and self-righteousness. Indeed they do! Coffee destroys brain
and kidney, a fact now universally recognised and advertised throughout
America; and tea, except for a kind of green tea best used with
discretion in punch, tans the entrails and turns honest stomachs into
leather bags. Rather would I be Metchnikoffed  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) at once and have a clean, good stomach of
German silver. No! If we are to have no ale in Utopia, give me the one
clean temperance drink that is worthy to set beside wine, and that is
simple water. Best it is when not quite pure and with a trace of organic
matter, for then it tastes and sparkles. . . .

My botanist would still argue.

Thank Heaven this is my book, and that the ultimate decision rests with
me. It is open to him to write his own Utopia and arrange that everybody
shall do nothing except by the consent of the savants of the Republic,
either in his eating, drinking, dressing or lodging, even as Cabet
proposed. It is open to him to try a *News from Nowhere* Utopia with the
wine left out. I have my short way with him here quite effectually. I
turn in the entrance of our inn to the civil but by no means obsequious
landlord, and with a careful ambiguity of manner for the thing may be
considered an outrage, and I try to make it possible the idea is a
jest—put my test demand. . . .

"You see, my dear Teetotaler?—he sets before me tray and glass and..."
Here follows the necessary experiment and a deep sigh. . . . "Yes, a
bottle of quite *excellent* light beer! So there are also cakes and ale
in Utopia! Let us in this saner and more beautiful world drink perdition
to all earthly excesses. Let us drink more particularly to the coming of
the day when men beyond there will learn to distinguish between
qualitative and quantitative questions, to temper good intentions with
good intelligence, and righteousness with wisdom. One of the darkest
evils of our world is surely the unteachable wildness of the Good."

### SECTION 7

So presently to bed and to sleep, but not at once to sleep. At first my
brain, like a dog in unfamiliar quarters, must turn itself round for a
time or so before it lies down. This strange mystery of a world of which
I have seen so little as yet—a mountain slope, a twilit road, a traffic
of ambiguous vehicles and dim shapes, the window lights of many
homes—fills me with curiosities. Figures and incidents come and go, the
people we have passed, our landlord, quietly attentive and yet, I feel,
with the keenest curiosity peeping from his eyes, the unfamiliar forms
of the house parts and furnishings, the unfamiliar courses of the meal.
Outside this little bedroom is a world, a whole unimagined world. A
thousand million things lie outside in the darkness beyond this lit inn
of ours, unthought-of possibilities, overlooked considerations,
surprises, riddles, incommensurables, a whole monstrous intricate
universe of consequences that I have to do my best to unravel. I attempt
impossible recapitulations and mingle the weird quality of dream stuff
with my thoughts.

Athwart all this tumult of my memory goes this queer figure of my
unanticipated companion, so obsessed by himself and his own egotistical
love that this sudden change to another world seems only a change of
scene for his gnawing, uninvigorating passion. It occurs to me that she
also must have an equivalent in Utopia, and then that idea and all ideas
grow thin and vague, and are dissolved at last in the rising tide of
sleep. . . .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](amu05.htm#fr_2) More's *Utopia*. "Whoso will
may go in, for there is nothing within the houses that is private or
anie man's owne."

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](amu05.htm#fr_3) In *The New Atlantis*.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](amu05.htm#fr_4) See *The Nature of Man*, by
Professor Elie Metchnikoff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Three](amu06)
