[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amu07)  [Next](amu09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141441127/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Modern Utopia*, by H.G. Wells \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER FIVE

#### FAILURE IN A MODERN UTOPIA

### SECTION 1

The old Utopias—save for the breeding schemes of Plato and
Campanella—ignored that reproductive competition among individualities
which is the substance of life, and dealt essentially with its
incidentals. The endless variety of men, their endless gradation of
quality, over which the hand of selection plays, and to which we owe the
unmanageable complication of real life, is tacitly set aside. The real
world is a vast disorder of accidents and incalculable forces in which
men survive or fail. A Modern Utopia, unlike its predecessors, dare not
pretend to change the last condition; it may order and humanise the
conflict, but men must still survive or fail.

Most Utopias present themselves as going concerns, as happiness in
being; they make it an essential condition that a happy land can have no
history, and all the citizens one is permitted to see are well looking
and upright and mentally and morally in tune. But we are under the
dominion of a logic that obliges us to take over the actual population
of the world with only such moral and mental and physical improvements
as lie within their inherent possibilities, and it is our business to
ask what Utopia will do with its congenital invalids, its idiots and
madmen, its drunkards and men of vicious mind, its cruel and furtive
souls, its stupid people, too stupid to be of use to the community, its
lumpish, unteachable and unimaginative people? And what will it do with
the man who is "poor" all round, the rather spiritless, rather
incompetent low-grade man who on earth sits in the den of the sweater,
tramps the streets under the banner of the unemployed, or trembles—in
another man's cast-off clothing, and with an infinity of hat-touching—on
the verge of rural employment?

These people will have to be in the descendant phase, the species must
be engaged in eliminating them; there is no escape from that, and
conversely the people of exceptional quality must be ascendant. The
better sort of people, so far as they can be distinguished, must have
the fullest freedom of public service, and the fullest opportunity of
parentage. And it must be open to every man to approve himself worthy of
ascendancy.

The way of Nature in this process is to kill the weaker and the sillier,
to crush them, to starve them, to overwhelm them, using the stronger and
more cunning as her weapon. But man is the unnatural animal, the rebel
child of Nature and more and more does he turn himself against the harsh
and fitful hand that reared him. He sees with a growing resentment the
multitude of suffering ineffectual lives over which his species tramples
in its ascent. In the Modern Utopia he will have set himself to change
the ancient law. No longer will it be that failures must suffer and
perish lest their breed increase, but the breed of failure must not
increase, lest they suffer and perish, and the race with them.

Now we need not argue here to prove that the resources of the world and
the energy of mankind, were they organised sanely, are am ply sufficient
to supply every material need of every living human being. And if it can
be so contrived that every human being shall live in a state of
reasonable physical and mental comfort, without the reproduction of
inferior types, there is no reason whatever why that should not be
secured. But there must be a competition in life of some sort to
determine who are to be pushed to the edge, and who are to prevail and
multiply. Whatever we do, man will remain a competitive creature, and
though moral and intellectual training may vary and enlarge his
conception of success and fortify him with refinements and consolations,
no Utopia will ever save him completely from the emotional drama of
struggle, from exultations and humiliations, from pride and prostration
and shame. He lives in success and failure just as inevitably as he
lives in space and time.

But we may do much to make the margin of failure endurable. On earth,
for all the extravagance of charity, the struggle for the mass of men at
the bottom resolves itself into a struggle, and often a very foul and
ugly struggle, for food, shelter, and clothing. Deaths outright from
exposure and starvation are now perhaps uncommon, but for the multitude
there are only miserable houses, uncomfortable clothes, and bad and
insufficient food; fractional starvation and exposure, that is to say. A
Utopia planned upon modern lines will certainly have put an end to that.
It will insist upon every citizen be being properly housed, well
nourished, and in good health, reasonably clean and clothed healthily,
and upon that insistence its labour laws will be founded. In a phrasing
that will be familiar to every one interested in social reform, it will
maintain a standard of life. Any house, unless it be a public monument,
that does not come up to its rising standard of healthiness and
convenience, the Utopian State will incontinently pull down, and pile
the material and charge the owner for the labour; any house unduly
crowded or dirty, it must in some effectual manner, directly or
indirectly, confiscate and clear and clean. And any citizen indecently
dressed, or ragged and dirty, or publicly unhealthy, or sleeping abroad
homeless, or in any way neglected or derelict, must come under its care.
It will find him work if he can and will work, it will take him to it,
it will register him and lend him the money wherewith to lead a comely
life until work can be found or made for him, and it will give him
credit and shelter him and strengthen him if he is ill. In default of
private enterprises it will provide inns for him and food, and it
will—by itself acting as the reserve employer—maintain a minimum wage
which will cover the cost of a decent life. The State will stand at the
back of the economic struggle as the reserve employer of labour. This
most excellent idea does, as a matter of fact, underlie the British
institution of the workhouse, but it is jumbled up with the relief of
old age and infirmity, it is administered parochially and on the
supposition that all population is static and localised whereas every
year it becomes more migratory; it is administered without any regard to
the rising standards of comfort and self-respect in a progressive
civilisation, and it is administered grudgingly. The thing that is done
is done as unwilling charity by administrators who are often, in the
rural districts at least, competing for low-priced labour, and who
regard want of employment as a crime. But if it were possible for any
citizen in need of money to resort to a place of public employment as a
right, and there work for a week or month without degradation upon
certain minimum terms, it seems fairly certain that no one would work,
except as the victim of some quite exceptional and temporary accident,
for less.

The work publicly provided would have to be toilsome, but not cruel or
incapacitating. A choice of occupations would need to be afforded,
occupations adapted to different types of training and capacity, with
some residual employment of a purely laborious and mechanical sort for
those who were incapable of doing the things that required intelligence.
Necessarily this employment by the State would be a relief of economic
pressure, but it would not be considered a charity done to the
individual, but a public service. It need not pay, any more than the
police need pay, but it could probably be done at a small margin of
loss. There is a number of durable things bound finally to be useful
that could be made and stored whenever the tide of more highly paid
employment ebbed and labour sank to its minimum, bricks, iron from
inferior ores, shaped and preserved timber, pins, nails, plain fabrics
of cotton and linen, paper, sheet glass, artificial fuel, and so on; new
roads could be made and public buildings reconstructed, inconveniences
of all sorts removed, until under the stimulus of accumulating material,
accumulating investments or other circumstances, the tide of private
enterprise flowed again.

The State would provide these things for its citizen as though it was
his right to require them; he would receive as a shareholder in the
common enterprise and not with any insult of charity. But on the other
hand it will require that the citizen who renders the minimum of service
for these concessions shall not become a parent until he is established
in work at a rate above the minimum, and free of any debt he may have
incurred. The State will never press for its debt, nor put a limit to
its accumulation so long as a man or woman remains childless; it will
not even grudge them temporary spells of good fortune when they may lift
their earnings above the minimum wage. It will pension the age of every
one who cares to take a pension, and it will maintain special guest
homes for the very old to which they may come as paying guests, spending
their pensions there. By such obvious devices it will achieve the
maximum elimination of its feeble and spiritless folk in every
generation with the minimum of suffering and public disorder.

### SECTION 2

But the mildly incompetent, the spiritless and dull, the poorer sort who
are ill, do not exhaust our Utopian problem. There remains idiots and
lunatics, there remain perverse and incompetent persons, there are
people of weak character who become drunkards, drug takers, and the
like. Then there are persons tainted with certain foul and transmissible
diseases. All these people spoil the world for others. They may become
parents, and with most of them there is manifestly nothing to be done
but to seclude them from the great body of the population. You must
resort to a kind of social surgery. You cannot have social freedom in
your public ways, your children cannot speak to whom they will, your
girls and gentle women cannot go abroad while some sorts of people go
free. And there are violent people, and those who will not respect the
property of others, thieves and cheats, they, too, so soon as their
nature is confirmed, must pass out of the free life of our ordered
world. So soon as there can be no doubt of the disease or baseness of
the individual, so soon as the insanity or other disease is assured, or
the crime repeated a third time, or the drunkenness or misdemeanour past
its seventh occasion (let us say), so soon must he or she pass out of
the common ways of men.

The dreadfulness of all such proposals as this lies in the possibility
of their execution falling into the hands of hard, dull, and cruel
administrators. But in the case of a Utopia one assumes the best
possible government, a government as merciful and deliberate as it is
powerful and decisive. You must not too hastily imagine these things
being done—as they would be done on earth at present—by a number of
zealous half-educated people in a state of panic at a quite imaginary
"Rapid Multiplication of the Unfit."

No doubt for first offenders, and for all offenders under
five-and-twenty, the Modern Utopia will attempt cautionary and remedial
treatment. There will be disciplinary schools and colleges for the
young, fair and happy places, but with less confidence and more
restraint than the schools and colleges of the ordinary world. In remote
and solitary regions these enclosures will lie, they will be fenced in
and forbidden to the common run of men, and there, remote from all
temptation, the defective citizen will be schooled. There will be no
masking of the lesson; "which do you value most, the wide world of
humanity, or this evil trend in you?" From that discipline at last the
prisoners will return.

But the others; what would a saner world do with them?

Our world is still vindictive, but the all-reaching State of Utopia will
have the strength that begets mercy. Quietly the outcast will go from
among his fellow-men. There will be no drumming of him out of the ranks,
no tearing off of epaulettes, no smiting in the face. The thing must be
just public enough to obviate secret tyrannies, and that is all.

There would be no killing, no lethal chambers. No doubt Utopia will kill
all deformed and monstrous and evilly diseased births, but for the rest,
the State will hold itself accountable for their being. There is no
justice in Nature perhaps, but the idea of justice must be sacred in any
good society. Lives that statesmanship has permitted, errors it has not
foreseen and educated against, must not be punished by death. If the
State does not keep faith, no one will keep faith. Crime and bad lives
are the measure of a State's failure, all crime in the end is the crime
of the community. Even for murder Utopia will not, I think, kill.

I doubt even if there will be jails. No men are quite wise enough, good
enough and cheap enough to staff jails as a jail ought to be staffed.
Perhaps islands will be chosen, islands lying apart from the highways of
the sea, and to these the State will send its exiles, most of them
thanking Heaven, no doubt, to be quit of a world of prigs. The State
will, of course, secure itself against any children from those people,
that is the primary object in their seclusion, and perhaps it may even
be necessary to make these island prisons a system of island monasteries
and island nunneries. Upon that I am not competent to speak, but if I
may believe the literature of the subject—unhappily a not very well
criticised literature—it is not necessary to enforce this separation.
 <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

About such islands patrol boats will go, there will be no freedoms of
boat-building, and it may be necessary to have armed guards at the
creeks and quays. Beyond that the State will give these segregated
failures just as full a liberty as they can have. If it interferes any
further it will be simply to police the islands against the organisation
of serious cruelty, to maintain the freedom of any of the detained who
wish it to transfer themselves to other islands, and so to keep a check
upon tyranny. The insane, of course, will demand care and control, but
there is no reason why the islands of the hopeless drunkard, for
example, should not each have a virtual autonomy, have at the most a
Resident and a guard. I believe that a community of drunkards might be
capable of organising even its own bad habit to the pitch of tolerable
existence. I do not see why such an island should not build and order
for itself and manufacture and trade. "Your ways are not our ways," the
World State will say; "but here is freedom and a company of kindred
souls. Elect your jolly rulers, brew if you will, and distil; here are
vine cuttings and barley fields; do as it pleases you to do. We will
take care of the knives, but for the rest—deal yourselves with God!"

And you see the big convict steamship standing in to the Island of
Incurable Cheats. The crew are respectfully at their quarters, ready to
lend a hand overboard, but wide awake, and the captain is hospitably on
the bridge to bid his guests good-bye and keep an eye on the movables.
The new citizens for this particular Alsatia, each no doubt with his
personal belongings securely packed and at hand, crowd the deck and
study the nearing coast. Bright, keen faces would be there, and we, were
we by any chance to find ourselves beside the captain, might recognise
the double of this great earthly magnate or that, Petticoat Lane and
Park Lane cheek by jowl. The landing part of the jetty is clear of
people, only a government man or so stands there to receive the boat and
prevent a rush, but beyond the gates a number of engagingly
smart-looking individuals loiter speculatively. One figures a remarkable
building labelled Custom House, an interesting fiscal revival this
population has made, and beyond, crowding up the hill, the painted walls
of a number of comfortable inns clamour loudly. One or two inhabitants
in reduced circumstances would act as hotel touts, there are several
hotel omnibuses and a Bureau de Change, certainly a Bureau de Change.
And a small house with a large board, aimed point-blank seaward,
declares itself a Gratis Information Office, and next to it rises the
graceful dome of a small Casino. Beyond, great hoardings proclaim the
advantages of many island specialities, a hustling commerce, and the
opening of a Public Lottery. There is a large cheap-looking barrack, the
school of Commercial Science for gentlemen of inadequate training. . . .

Altogether a very go-ahead looking little port it would be, and though
this disembarkation would have none of the flow of hilarious good
fellowship that would throw a halo of genial noise about the Islands of
Drink, it is doubtful if the new arrivals would feel anything very
tragic in the moment. Here at last was scope for adventure after their
hearts.

This sounds more fantastic than it is. But what else is there to do,
unless you kill? You must seclude, but why should you torment? All
modern prisons are places of torture by restraint, and the habitual
criminal plays the part of a damaged mouse at the mercy of the cat of
our law. He has his little painful run, and back he comes again to a
state more horrible even than destitution. There are no Alsatias left in
the world. For my own part I can think of no crime, unless it is
reckless begetting or the wilful transmission of contagious disease, for
which the bleak terrors, the solitudes and ignominies of the modern
prison do not see in outrageously cruel. If you want to go so far as
that then kill. Why, once you are rid of them, should you pester
criminals to respect an uncongenial standard of conduct? Into such
islands of exile as this a modern Utopia will have to purge itself.
There is no alternative that I can contrive.

### SECTION 3

Will a Utopian be free to be idle?

Work has to be done, every day humanity is sustained by its collective
effort, and without a constant recurrence of effort in the single man as
in the race as a whole, there is neither health nor happiness. The
permanent idleness of a human being is not only burthensome to the
world, but his own secure misery. But unprofitable occupation is also
intended by idleness, and it may be considered whether that freedom also
will be open to the Utopian. Conceivably it will, like privacy,
locomotion, and almost all the freedoms of life, and on the same
terms—if he possess the money to pay for it.

The last condition may produce a shock in minds accustomed to the
proposition that money is the root of all evil, and to the idea that
Utopia necessarily implies something rather oaken and hand-made and
primitive in all these relations. Of course, money is not the root of
any evil in the world; the root of all evil in the world, and the root
of all good too, is the Will to Live, and money becomes harmful only
when by bad laws and bad economic organisation it is more easily
attained by bad men than good. It is as reasonable to say food is the
root of all disease, because so many people suffer from excessive and
unwise eating. The sane economic ideal is to make the possession of
money the clear indication of public serviceableness, and the more
nearly that ideal is attained, the smaller is the justification of
poverty and the less the hardship of being poor. In barbaric and
disorderly countries it is almost honourable to be indigent and
unquestionably virtuous to give to a beggar, and even in the more or
less civilised societies of earth, so many children come into life
hopelessly handicapped, that austerity to the poor is regarded as the
meanest of mean virtues. But in Utopia every one will have had an
education and a certain minimum of nutrition and training; every one
will be insured against ill-health and accidents; there will be the most
efficient organisation for balancing the pressure of employment and the
presence of disengaged labour, and so to be moneyless will be clear
evidence of unworthiness. In Utopia, no one will dream of giving to a
casual beggar, and no one will dream of begging.

There will need to be, in the place of the British casual wards, simple
but comfortable inns with a low tariff—controlled to a certain extent no
doubt, and even in some cases maintained, by the State. This tariff will
have such a definite relation to the minimum permissible wage, that a
man who has incurred no liabilities through marriage or the like
relationship, will be able to live in comfort and decency upon that
minimum wage, pay his small insurance premium against disease, death,
disablement, or ripening years, and have a margin for clothing and other
personal expenses. But he will get neither shelter nor food, except at
the price of his freedom, unless he can produce money.

But suppose a man without money in a district where employment is not to
be found for him; suppose the amount of employment to have diminished in
the district with such suddenness as to have stranded him there. Or
suppose he has quarrelled with the only possible employer, or that he
does not like his particular work. Then no doubt the Utopian State,
which wants every one to be just as happy as the future welfare of the
race permits, will come to his assistance. One imagines him resorting to
a neat and business-like post office, and stating his case to a civil
and intelligent official. In any sane State the economic conditions of
every quarter of the earth will be watched as constantly as its
meteorological phases, and a daily map of the country within a radius of
three or four hundred miles showing all the places where labour is
needed will hang upon the post office wall. To this his attention will
be directed. The man out of work will decide to try his luck in this
place or that, and the public servant, the official, will make a note of
his name, verify his identity—the freedom of Utopia will not be
incompatible with the universal registration of thumb-marks—and issue
passes for travel and coupons for any necessary inn accommodation on his
way to the chosen destination. There he will seek a new employer.

Such a free change of locality once or twice a year from a region of
restricted employment to a region of labour shortage will be among the
general privileges of the Utopian citizen.

But suppose that in no district in the world is there work within the
capacity of this particular man?

Before we suppose that, we must take into consideration the general
assumption one is permitted to make in all Utopian speculations. All
Utopians will be reasonably well educated upon Utopian lines; there will
be no illiterates unless they are unteachable imbeciles, no
rule-of-thumb toilers as inadaptable as trained beasts. The Utopian
worker will be as versatile as any well-educated man is on earth to-day,
and no Trade Union will impose a limit to his activities. The world will
be his Union. If the work he does best and likes best is not to be
found, there is still the work he likes second best. Lacking his proper
employment, he will turn to some kindred trade.

But even with that adaptability, it may be that sometimes he will not
find work. Such a disproportion between the work to be done and the
people to do it may arise as to present a surplus of labour everywhere.
This disproportion may be due to two causes: to an increase of
population without a corresponding increase of enterprises, or to a
diminution of employment throughout the world due to the completion of
great enterprises, to economies achieved, or to the operation of new and
more efficient labour-saving appliances. Through either cause, a World
State may find itself doing well except for an excess of citizens of
mediocre and lower quality.

But the first cause may be anticipated by wise marriage laws. . . . The
full discussion of these laws will come later, but here one may insist
that Utopia will control the increase of its population. Without the
determination and ability to limit that increase as well as to stimulate
it whenever it is necessary, no Utopia is possible. That was clearly
demonstrated by Malthus for all time.

The second cause is not so easily anticipated, but then, though its
immediate result in glutting the labour market is similar, its final
consequences are entirely different from those of the first. The whole
trend of a scientific mechanical civilisation is continually to replace
labour by machinery and to increase it in its effectiveness by
organisation, and so quite independently of any increase in population
labour must either fall in value until it can compete against and check
the cheapening process, or if that is prevented, as it will be in
Utopia, by a minimum wage, come out of employment. There is no apparent
limit to this process. But a surplus of efficient labour at the minimum
wage is exactly the condition that should stimulate new enterprises, and
that in a State saturated with science and prolific in invention will
stimulate new enterprises. An increasing surplus of available labour
without an absolute increase of population, an increasing surplus of
labour due to increasing economy and not to proliferation, and which,
therefore, does not press on and disarrange the food supply, is surely
the ideal condition for a progressive civilisation. I am inclined to
think that, since labour will be regarded as a delocalised and fluid
force, it will be the World State and not the big municipalities ruling
the force areas that will be the reserve employer of labour. Very
probably it will be convenient for the State to hand over the surplus
labour for municipal purposes, but that is another question. All over
the world the labour exchanges will be reporting the fluctuating
pressure of economic demand and transferring workers from this region of
excess to that of scarcity; and whenever the excess is universal, the
World State—failing an adequate development of private enterprise—will
either reduce the working day and so absorb the excess, or set on foot
some permanent special works of its own, paying the minimum wage and
allowing them to progress just as slowly or just as rapidly as the ebb
and flow of labour dictated. But with sane marriage and birth laws there
is no reason to suppose such calls upon the resources and initiative of
the world more than temporary and exceptional occasions.

### SECTION 4

The existence of our blond bare-footed friend was evidence enough that
in a modern Utopia a man will be free to be just as idle or uselessly
busy as it pleases him, after he has earned the minimum wage. He must do
that, of course, to pay for his keep, to pay his assurance tax against
ill health or old age, and any charge or debt paternity may have brought
upon him. The World State of the modern Utopist is no state of moral
compulsions. If, for example, under the restricted Utopian scheme of
inheritance, a man inherited sufficient money to release him from the
need to toil, he would be free to go where he pleased and do what he
liked. A certain proportion of men at ease is good for the world; work
as a moral obligation is the morality of slaves, and so long as no one
is overworked there is no need to worry because some few are
underworked. Utopia does not exist as a solace for envy. From leisure,
in a good moral and intellectual atmosphere, come experiments, come
philosophy and the new departures.

In any modern Utopia there must be many leisurely people. We are all too
obsessed in the real world by the strenuous ideal, by the idea that the
vehement incessant fool is the only righteous man. Nothing done in a
hurry, nothing done under strain, is really well done. A State where all
are working hard, where none go to and fro, easily and freely, loses
touch with the purpose of freedom.

But inherited independence will be the rarest and least permanent of
Utopian facts; for the most part that wider freedom will have to be
earned, and the inducements to men and women to raise their personal
value far above the minimum wage will be very great indeed. Thereby will
come privacies, more space in which to live, liberty to go everywhere
and do no end of things, the power and freedom to initiate interesting
enterprises and assist and co-operate with interesting people, and
indeed all the best things of life. The modern Utopia will give a
universal security indeed, and exercise the minimum of compulsions to
toil, but it will offer some acutely desirable prizes. The aim of all
these devices, the minimum wage, the standard of life, provision for all
the feeble and unemployed and so forth, is not to rob life of incentives
but to change their nature, to make life not less energetic, but less
panic-stricken and violent and base, to shift the incidence of the
struggle for existence fro in our lower to our higher emotions, so to
anticipate and neutralise the motives of the cowardly and bestial, that
the ambitious and energetic imagination which is man's finest quality
may become the incentive and determining factor in survival.

### SECTION 5

After we have paid for our lunch in the little inn that corresponds to
Wassen, the botanist and I would no doubt spend the rest of the forenoon
in the discussion of various aspects and possibilities of Utopian labour
laws. We should examine our remaining change, copper coins of an
appearance ornamental rather than reassuring, and we should decide that
after what we had gathered from the man with the blond hair, it would,
on the whole, be advisable to come to the point with the labour question
forthwith. At last we should draw the deep breath of resolution and
arise and ask for the Public Office. We should know by this time that
the labour bureau sheltered with the post office and other public
services in one building.

The public office of Utopia would of course contain a few surprises for
two men from terrestrial England. You imagine us entering, the botanist
lagging a little behind me, and my first attempts to be off-hand and
commonplace in a demand for work.

The office is in charge of a quick-eyed little woman of six-and-thirty
perhaps, and she regards us with a certain keenness of scrutiny.

"Where are your papers?" she asks.

I think for a moment of the documents in my pocket, my passport
chequered with visas and addressed in my commendation and in the name of
her late Majesty by *We, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoigne Cecil, Marquess
of Salisbury, Earl of Salisbury, Viscount Cranborne, Baron Cecil*, and
so forth, to all whom it may concern, my *Carte d'Identité* (useful on
minor occasions) of the Touring Club de France, my green ticket to the
Reading Room of the British Museum, and my Letter d'Indication from the
London and County Bank. A foolish humour prompts me to unfold all these,
hand them to her and take the consequences, but I resist.

"Lost," I say briefly.

"Both lost?" she asks, looking at my friend.

"Both," I answer.

"How?"

I astonish myself by the readiness of my answer.

"I fell down a snow slope and they came out of my pocket."

"And exactly the same thing happened to both of you?"

"No. He'd given me his to put with my own." She raised her eyebrows.
"His pocket is defective," I add, a little hastily.

Her manners are too Utopian for her to follow that up. She seems to
reflect on procedure.

"What are your numbers?" she asks abruptly.

A vision of that confounded visitors' book at the inn above comes into
my mind. "Let me *see*," I say, and pat my forehead and reflect,
refraining from the official eye before me. "Let me *see*."

"What is yours?" she asks the botanist.

"A. B.," he says slowly, "little *a*, nine four seven, I *think*——"

"Don't you know?"

"Not exactly," says the botanist, very agreeably. "No."

"Do you mean to say neither of you know your own numbers?" says the
little postmistress, with a rising note.

"Yes," I say, with an engaging smile and trying to keep up a good social
tone. "It's queer, isn't it? We've both forgotten."

"You're joking," she suggests.

"Well," I temporise.

"I suppose you've got your thumbs?"

"The fact is——" I say and hesitate. "We've got our thumbs, of course."

"Then I shall have to send a thumb-print down to the office and get your
number from that. But are you sure you haven't your papers or numbers?
It's very queer."

We admit rather sheepishly that it's queer, and question one another
silently.

She turns thoughtfully for the thumb-marking slab, and as she does so, a
man enters the office. At the sight of him she asks with a note of
relief, "What am I to do, sir, here?"

He looks from her to us gravely, and his eye lights to curiosity at our
dress. "What is the matter, madam?" he asks, in a courteous voice.

She explains.

So far the impression we have had of our Utopia is one of a quite
unearthly sanity, of good management and comprehensive design in every
material thing, and it has seemed to us a little incongruous that all
the Utopians we have talked to, our host of last night, the postmistress
and our garrulous tramp, have been of the most commonplace type. But
suddenly there looks out from this man's pose and regard a different
quality, a quality altogether nearer that of the beautiful tramway and
of the gracious order of the mountain houses. Here is a well-built man
of perhaps five-and-thirty. with the easy movement that comes with
perfect physical condition, his face is clean shaven and shows the firm
mouth of a disciplined man, and his grey eyes are clear and steady. His
legs are clad in some woven stuff deep-red in colour, and over this he
wears a white shirt fitting pretty closely, and with a woven purple hem.
His general effect reminds me somehow of the Knights Templars. On his
head is a cap of thin leather and still thinner steel, and with the
vestiges of ear-guards—rather like an attenuated version of the clips
that were worn by Cromwell's Ironsides.

He looks at us, and we interpolate a word or so as she explains, and
feel a good deal of embarrassment at the foolish position we have made
for ourselves. I determine to cut my way out of this entanglement before
it complicates itself further

"The fact is——" I say.

"Yes?" he says, with a faint smile.

"We've perhaps been disingenuous. Our position is so entirely
exceptional, so difficult to explain——"

"What have you been doing?"

"No," I say, with decision; "it can't be explained like that."

He looks down at his feet. "Go on," he says.

I try to give the thing a quiet, matter-of-fact air. "You see," I say,
in the tone one adopts for really lucid explanations, "we come from
another world. Consequently, whatever thumb-mark registration or
numbering you have in this planet doesn't apply to us, and we don't know
our numbers because we haven't got any. We are really, you know,
explorers, strangers——"

"But what world do you mean?"

"It's a different planet—a long way away. Practically at an infinite
distance."

He looks up in my face with the patient expression of a man who listens
to nonsense.

"I know it sounds impossible," I say, "but here is the simple fact—we
*appear* in your world. We appeared suddenly upon the neck of
Lucendro—the Passo Lucendro—yesterday afternoon, and I defy you to
discover the faintest trace of us before that time. Down we marched into
the San Gotthard road and here we are! That's our fact. And as for
papers——! Where in your world have you seen papers like this?"

I produce my pocket-book, extract my passport, and present it to him.

His expression has changed. He takes the document and examines it, turns
it over, looks at me, and smiles that faint smile of his again.

"Have some more," I say, and proffer the card of the T.C.F.

I follow up that blow with my green British Museum ticket, as tattered
as a flag in a knight's chapel.

"You'll get found out," he says, with my documents in his hand. "You've
got your thumbs. You'll be measured. They'll refer to the central
registers, and there you'll be!"

"That's just it," I say. "we shan't be."

He reflects. "It's a queer sort of joke for you two men to play," he
decides, handing me back my documents.

"It's no joke at all," I say, replacing them in my pocket-book.

The postmistress intervenes. "What would you advise me to do?"

"No money?" he asks.

"No."

He makes some suggestions. "Frankly," he says, "I think you have escaped
from some island. How you got so far as here I can't imagine, or what
you think you'll do. . . . But anyhow, there's the stuff for your
thumbs."

He points to the thumb-marking apparatus and turns to attend to his own
business.

Presently we emerge from the office in a state between discomfiture and
amusement, each with a tramway ticket for Lucerne in his hand and with
sufficient money to pay our expenses until the morrow. We are to go to
Lucerne because there there is a demand for comparatively unskilled
labour in carving wood, which seems to us a sort of work within our
range and a sort that will not compel our separation.

### SECTION 6

The old Utopias are sessile organisations; the new must square itself to
the needs of a migratory population, to an endless coming and going, to
a people as fluid and tidal as the sea. It does not enter into the
scheme of earthly statesmanship, but indeed all local establishments,
all definitions of place, are even now melting under our eyes. Presently
all the world will be awash with anonymous stranger men.

Now the simple laws of custom, the homely methods of identification that
served in the little communities of the past when every one knew every
one, fail in the face of this liquefaction. If the modern Utopia is
indeed to be a world of responsible citizens, it must have devised some
scheme by which every person in the world can be promptly and certainly
recognised, and by which any one missing can be traced and found.

This is by no means an impossible demand. The total population of the
world is, on the most generous estimate, not more than 1,500,000,000,
and the effectual indexing of this number of people, the record of their
movement hither and thither, the entry of various material facts, such
as marriage, parentage, criminal convictions and the like, the entry of
the new-born and the elimination of the dead, colossal task though it
would be, is still not so great as to be immeasurably beyond comparison
with the work of the post offices in the world of to-day, or the
cataloguing of such libraries as that of the British Museum, or such
collections as that of the insects in Cromwell Road. Such an index could
be housed quite comfortably on one side of Northumberland Avenue, for
example. It is only a reasonable tribute to the distinctive lucidity of
the French mind to suppose the central index housed in a vast series of
buildings at or near Paris. The index would be classified primarily by
some unchanging physical characteristic, such as we are told the
thumb-mark and finger-mark afford, and to these would be added any other
physical traits that were of material value. The classification of
thumb-marks and of inalterable physical characteristics goes on
steadily, and there is every reason for assuming it possible that each
human being could be given a distinct formula, a number or "scientific
name," under which he or she could be docketed.  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) About the buildings in which this great
main index would be gathered, would be a system of other indices with
cross references to the main one, arranged under names, under
professional qualifications, under diseases, crimes and the like.

These index cards might conceivably be transparent and so contrived as
to give a photographic copy promptly whenever it was needed, and they
could have an attachment into which would slip a ticket bearing the name
of the locality in which the individual was last reported. A little army
of attendants would be at work upon this index day and night. From
substations constantly engaged in checking back thumb-marks and numbers,
an incessant stream of information would come, of births, of deaths, of
arrivals at inns, of applications to post offices for letters, of
tickets taken for long journeys, of criminal convictions, marriages,
applications for public doles and the like. A filter of offices would
sort the stream, and all day and all night for ever a swarm of clerks
would go to and fro correcting this central register, and photographing
copies of its entries for transmission to the subordinate local
stations, in response to their inquiries. So the inventory of—the State
would watch its every man and the wide world write its history as the
fabric of its destiny flowed on. At last, when the citizen died, would
come the last entry of all, his age and the cause of his death and the
date and place of his cremation, and his card would be taken out and
passed on to the universal pedigree, to a place of greater quiet, to the
ever-growing galleries of the records of the dead.

Such a record is inevitable if a Modern Utopia is to be achieved.

Yet at this, too, our blond-haired friend would no doubt rebel. One of
the many things to which some will make claim as a right, is that of
going unrecognised and secret whither one will. But that, so far as
one's fellow wayfarers were concerned, would still be possible. Only the
State would share the secret of one's little concealment. To the
eighteenth-century Liberal, to the old-fashioned nineteenth-century
Liberal, that is to say to all professed Liberals, brought up to be
against the Government on principle, this organised clairvoyance will be
the most hateful of dreams. Perhaps, too, the Individualist would see it
in that light. But these are only the mental habits acquired in an evil
time. The old Liberalism assumed bad government, the more powerful the
government the worse it was, just as it assumed the natural
righteousness of the free individual. Darkness and secrecy were, indeed,
the natural refuges of liberty when every government had in it the near
possibility of tyranny, and the Englishman or American looked at the
papers of a Russian or a German as one might look at the chains of a
slave. You imagine that father of the old Liberalism, Rousseau, slinking
off from his offspring at the door of the Foundling Hospital, and you
can understand what a crime against natural virtue this quiet eye of the
State would have seemed to him. But suppose we do not assume that
government is necessarily bad, and the individual necessarily good—and
the hypothesis upon which we are working practically abolishes either
alternative—then we alter the case altogether. The government of a
modern Utopia will be no perfection of intentions ignorantly ruling the
world. . . .  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

Such is the eye of the State that is now slowly beginning to apprehend
our existence as two queer and inexplicable parties disturbing the fine
order of its field of vision, the eye that will presently be focusing
itself upon us with a growing astonishment and interrogation. "Who in
the name of Galton and Bertillon," one fancies Utopia exclaiming, "are
*you*?"

I perceive I shall cut a queer figure in that focus. I shall affect a
certain spurious ease of carriage no doubt. "The fact is, I shall begin.
. . ."

### SECTION 7

And now see how an initial hypothesis may pursue and overtake its maker.
Our thumb-marks have been taken, they have travelled by pneumatic tube
to the central office of the municipality hard by Lucerne, and have gone
on thence to the headquarters of the index at Paris. There, after a
rough preliminary classification, I imagined them photographed on glass,
and flung by means of a lantern in colossal images upon a screen, all
finely squared, and the careful experts marking and measuring their
several convolutions. And then off goes a brisk clerk to the long
galleries of the index building.

I have told them they will find no sign of us, but you see him going
from gallery to gallery, from bay to bay, from drawer to drawer, and
from card to card. "Here he is!" he mutters to himself, and he whips out
a card and reads. "But that is impossible!" he says. . . .

You figure us returning after a day or so of such Utopian experiences as
I must presently describe, to the central office in Lucerne, even as we
have been told to do.

I make my way to the desk of the man who has dealt with us before.
"Well?" I say, cheerfully, "have you heard!"

His expression dashes me a little. "We've heard," he says, and adds,
"it's very peculiar."

"I told you you wouldn't find out about us," I say triumphantly.

"But we have," he says; "but that makes your freak none the less
remarkable."

"You've heard! You know who we are! Well—tell us! We had an idea, but
we're beginning to doubt."

"You," says the official, addressing the botanist, "are——!"

And he breathes his name. Then he turns to me and gives me mine.

For a moment I am dumbfounded. Then I think of the entries we made at
the inn in the Urserenthal, and then in a flash I have the truth. I rap
the desk smartly with my finger-tips and shake my index-finger in my
friend's face.

"By Jove!" I say in English. "They've got our doubles!"

The botanist snaps his fingers. "Of course! I didn't think of that."

"Do you mind," I say to this official, "telling us some more about
ourselves?"

"I can't think why you keep it up," he remarks, and then almost wearily
tells me the facts about my Utopian self. They are a little difficult to
understand. He says I am one of the *samurai*, which sounds Japanese,
"but you will be degraded," he says, with a gesture almost of despair.
He describes my position in this world in phrases that convey very
little.

"The queer thing," he remarks, "is that you were in Norway only three
days ago."

"I am there still. At least——I'm sorry to be so much trouble to you, but
do you mind following up that last clue and inquiring if the person to
whom the thumb-mark really belongs isn't in Norway still?"

The idea needs explanation. He says something incomprehensible about a
pilgrimage. "Sooner or later," I say, "you will have to believe there
are two of us with the same thumb-mark. I won't trouble you with any
apparent nonsense about other planets and so forth again. Here I am. If
I was in Norway a few days ago, you ought to be able to trace my journey
hither. And my friend?"

"He was in India." The official is beginning to look perplexed.

"It seems to me," I say, "that the difficulties in this case are only
just beginning. How did I get from Norway hither? Does my friend look
like hopping from India to the Saint Gotthard at one hop? The situation
is a little more difficult than that——"

"But here!" says the official, and waves what are no doubt photographic
copies of the index cards.

"But we are not those individuals!"

"You *are* those individuals."

"You will see," I say.

He dabs his finger argumentatively upon the thumb-marks. "I see now," he
says.

"There is a mistake," I maintain, "an unprecedented mistake. There's the
difficulty. If you inquire you will find it begin to unravel. What
reason is there for us to remain casual workmen here, when you allege we
are men of position in the world, if there isn't something wrong? We
shall stick to this wood-carving work you have found us here, and
meanwhile I think you ought to inquire again. That's how the thing
shapes to me."

"Your case will certainly have to be considered further," he says, with
the faintest of threatening notes in his tone. "But at the same
time"—hand out to those copies from the index again—"there you are, you
know!"

### SECTION 8

When my botanist and I have talked over and exhausted every possibility
of our immediate position, we should turn, I think, to more general
questions.

I should tell him the thing that was becoming more and more apparent in
my own mind. Here, I should say, is a world, obviously on the face of it
well organised. Compared with our world, it is like a well-oiled engine
beside a scrap-heap. It has even got this confounded visual organ
swivelling about in the most alert and lively fashion. But that's by the
way. . . . You have only to look at all these houses below. (We should
be sitting on a seat on the Gütsch and looking down on the Lucerne of
Utopia, a Lucerne that would, I insist, quite arbitrarily, still keep
the Wasserthurm and the Kapellbrucke.) You have only to mark the beauty,
the simple cleanliness and balance of this world, you have only to see
the free carriage, the unaffected graciousness of even the common
people, to understand how fine and complete the arrangements of this
world must be. How are they made so? We of the twentieth century are not
going to accept the sweetish, faintly nasty slopes of Rousseauism that
so gratified our great-great-grandparents in the eighteenth. We know
that order and justice do not come by Nature—"if only the policeman
would go away." These things mean intention, will, carried to a scale
that our poor vacillating, hot and cold earth has never known. What I am
really seeing more and more clearly is the will beneath this visible
Utopia. Convenient houses, admirable engineering that is no offence
amidst natural beauties, beautiful bodies, and a universally gracious
carriage, these are only the outward and visible signs of an inward and
spiritual grace. Such an order means discipline. It means triumph over
the petty egotisms and vanities that keep men on our earth apart; it
means devotion and a nobler hope; it cannot exist without a gigantic
process of inquiry, trial, forethought and patience in an atmosphere of
mutual trust and concession. Such a world as this Utopia is not made by
the chance occasional co-operations of self-indulgent men, by autocratic
rulers or by the bawling wisdom of the democratic leader. And an
unrestricted competition for gain, an enlightened selfishness, that too
fails us. . . .

I have compared the system of indexing humanity we have come upon to an
eye, an eye so sensitive and alert that two strangers cannot appear
anywhere upon the planet without discovery. Now an eye does not see
without a brain, an eye does not run round and look without a will and
purpose. A Utopia that deals only with appliances and arrangements is a
dream of superficialities; the essential problem here, the body within
these garments, is a moral and an intellectual problem. Behind all this
material order, these perfected communications, perfected public
services and economic organisations, there must be men and women willing
these things. There must be a considerable number and a succession of
these men and women of will. No single person, no transitory group of
people, could order and sustain this vast complexity. They must have a
collective if not a common width of aim, and that involves a spoken or
written literature, a living literature to sustain the harmony of their
general activity. In some way they must have put the more immediate
objects of desire into a secondary place, and that means renunciation.
They must be effectual in action and persistent in will, and that means
discipline. But in the modern world in which progress advances without
limits, it will be evident that whatever common creed or formula they
have must be of the simplest sort; that whatever organisation they have
must be as mobile and flexible as a thing alive. All this follows
inevitably from the general propositions of our Utopian dream. When we
made those, we bound ourselves helplessly to come to this. . . .

The botanist would nod an abstracted assent.

I should cease to talk. I should direct my mind to the confused mass of
memories three days in Utopia will have given us. Besides the
personalities with whom we have come into actual contact, our various
hosts, our foreman and workfellows, the blond man, the public officials,
and so on, there will be a great multitude of other impressions. There
will be many bright snapshots of little children, for example, of girls
and women and men, seen in shops and offices and streets, on quays, at
windows and by the wayside, people riding hither and thither and walking
to and fro. A very human crowd it has seemed to me. But among them were
there any who might be thought of as having a wider interest than the
others, who seemed in any way detached from the rest by a purpose that
passed beyond the seen?

Then suddenly I recall that clean-shaven man who talked with us for a
little while in the public office at Wassen, the man who reminded me of
my boyish conception of a Knight Templar, and with him come momentary
impressions of other lithe and serious-looking people dressed after the
same manner, words and phrases we have read in such scraps of Utopian
reading as have come our way, and expressions that fell from the loose
mouth of the man with the blond hair. . . .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](amu08.htm#fr_17) See, for example, Dr. W.
A. Chapple's *The Fertility of the Unfit*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](amu08.htm#fr_18) It is quite possible that
the actual thumbmark may play only a small part in the work of
identification, but it is an obvious convenience to our thread of story
to assume that it is the one sufficient feature.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](amu08.htm#fr_19) In the typical modern
State of our own world, with its population of many millions and its
extreme facility of movement, undistinguished men who adopt an alias can
make themselves untraceable with the utmost ease. The temptation of the
opportunities thus offered has developed a new type of criminality, the
Deeming or Crossman type, base men who subsist and feed their heavy
imaginations in the wooing, betrayal, ill-treatment, and sometimes even
the murder of undistinguished women. This is a large, a growing, and,
what is gravest, a prolific class, fostered by the practical anonymity
of the common man. It is only the murderers who attract much public
attention, but the supply of low-class prostitutes is also largely due
to these free adventures of the base. It is one of the by-products of
State Liberalism, and at present it is very probably drawing ahead in
the race against the development of police organisation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Six](amu09)
