[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amu11)  [Next](amu13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141441127/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Modern Utopia*, by H.G. Wells \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER NINE

#### THE SAMURAI

### SECTION 1

Neither my Utopian double nor I love emotion sufficiently to cultivate
it, and my feelings are in a state of seemly subordination when we meet
again. He is now in possession of some clear, general ideas about my own
world, and I can broach almost at once the thoughts that have been
growing and accumulating since my arrival in this planet of my dreams.
We find our interest in a humanised state-craft makes us, in spite of
our vast difference in training and habits, curiously akin.

I put it to him that I came to Utopia with but very vague ideas of the
method of government, biased, perhaps, a little in favour of certain
electoral devices, but for the rest indeterminate, and that I have come
to perceive more and more clearly that the large intricacy of Utopian
organisation demands more powerful and efficient method of control than
electoral methods can give. I have come to distinguish among the varied
costumes and the innumerable types of personality Utopia presents,
certain men and women of a distinctive costume and bearing, and I know
now that these people constitute an order, the *samurai*, the "voluntary
nobility," which is essential in the scheme of the Utopian State. I know
that this order is open to every physically and mentally healthy adult
in the Utopian State who will observe its prescribed austere rule of
living, that much of the responsible work of the State is reserved for
it, and I am inclined now at the first onset of realisation to regard it
as far more significant than it really is in the Utopian scheme, as
being, indeed, in itself and completely the Utopian scheme. My
predominant curiosity concerns the organisation of this order. As it has
developed in my mind, it has reminded me more and more closely of that
strange class of guardians which constitutes the essential substance of
Plato's *Republic*, and it is with an implicit reference to Plato's
profound intuitions that I and my double discuss this question.

To clarify our comparison he tells me something of the history of
Utopia, and incidentally it becomes necessary to make a correction in
the assumptions upon which I have based my enterprise. We are assuming a
world identical in every respect with the real planet Earth, except for
the profoundest differences in the mental content of life. This implies
a different literature, a different philosophy, and a different history,
and so soon as I come to talk to him I find that though it remains
unavoidable that we should assume the correspondence of the two
populations, man for man—unless we would face unthinkable
complications—we must assume also that a great succession of persons of
extraordinary character and mental gifts, who on earth died in childhood
or at birth, or who never learnt to read, or who lived and died amidst
savage or brutalising surroundings that gave their gifts no scope, did
in Utopia encounter happier chances, and take up the development and
application of social theory—from the time of the first Utopists in a
steady onward progress, down to the present hour.  <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) The differences of conditions, therefore,
had widened with each successive year. Jesus Christ had been born into a
liberal and progressive Roman Empire that spread from the Arctic Ocean
to the Bight of Benin, and was to know no Decline and Fall, and Mahomet,
instead of embodying the dense prejudices of Arab ignorance, opened his
eyes upon an intellectual horizon already nearly as wide as the world.

And through this empire the flow of thought, the flow of intention,
poured always more abundantly. There were wars, but they were conclusive
wars that established new and more permanent relations, that swept aside
obstructions, and abolished centres of decay; there were prejudices
tempered to an ordered criticism, and hatreds that merged at last in
tolerant reactions. It was several hundred years ago that the great
organisation of the *samurai* came into its present form. And it was
this organisation's widely sustained activities that had shaped and
established the World State in Utopia.

This organisation of the *samurai* was a quite deliberate invention. It
arose in the course of social and political troubles and complications,
analogous to those of our own time on earth, and was, indeed, the last
of a number of political and religious experiments dating back to the
first dawn of philosophical state-craft in Greece. That hasty despair of
specialisation for government that gave our poor world individualism,
democratic liberalism, and anarchism, and that curious disregard of the
fund of enthusiasm and self-sacrifice in men, which is the fundamental
weakness of worldly economics, do not appear in the history of Utopian
thought. All that history is pervaded with the recognition of the fact
that self-seeking is no more the whole of human life than the
satisfaction of hunger; that it is an essential of a man's existence no
doubt, and that under stress of evil circumstances it may as entirely
obsess him as would the food hunt during famine, but that life may pass
beyond to an illimitable world of emotions and effort. Every sane person
consists of possibilities beyond the unavoidable needs, is capable of
disinterested feeling, even if it amounts only to enthusiasm for a sport
or an industrial employment well done, for an art, or for a locality or
class. In our world now, as in the Utopian past, this impersonal energy
of a man goes out into religious emotion and work, into patriotic
effort, into artistic enthusiasms, into games and amateur employments,
and an enormous proportion of the whole world's fund of effort wastes
itself in religious and political misunderstandings and conflicts, and
in unsatisfying amusements and unproductive occupations. In a modern
Utopia there will, indeed, be no perfection; in Utopia there must also
be friction, conflicts, and waste, but the waste will be enormously less
than in our world. And the co-ordination of activities this relatively
smaller waste will measure, will be the achieved end for which the order
of the *samurai* was first devised.

Inevitably such an order must have first arisen among a clash of social
forces and political systems as a revolutionary organisation. It must
have set before itself the attainment of some such Utopian ideal as this
modern Utopia does, in the key of mortal imperfection, realise. At first
it may have directed itself to research and discussion, to the
elaboration of its ideal, to the discussion of a plan of campaign, but
at some stage it must have assumed a more militant organisation, and
have prevailed against and assimilated the pre-existing political
organisations, and to all intents and purposes have become this present
synthesised World State. Traces of that militancy would, therefore,
pervade it still, and a campaigning quality—no longer against specific
disorders, but against universal human weaknesses, and the inanimate
forces that trouble man—still remain as its essential quality.

"Something of this kind," I should tell my double, "had arisen in our
thought"—I jerk my head back to indicate an infinitely distant
planet—"just before I came upon these explorations. The idea had reached
me, for example, of something to be called a New Republic, which was to
be in fact an organisation for revolution something after the fashion of
your *samurai*, as I understand them—only most of the organisation and
the rule of life still remained to be invented. All sorts of people were
thinking of something in that way about the time of my coming. The idea,
as it reached me, was pretty crude in several respects. It ignored the
high possibility of a synthesis of languages in the future; it came from
a literary man, who wrote only English, and, as I read him—he was a
little vague in his proposals—it was to be a purely English-speaking
movement. And his ideas were coloured too much by the peculiar
opportunism of his time; he seemed to have more than half an eye for a
prince or a millionaire of genius; he seemed looking here and there for
support and the structural elements of a party. Still, the idea of a
comprehensive movement of disillusioned and illuminated men behind the
shams and patriotisms, the spites and personalities of the ostensible
world, was there."

I added some particulars.

"Our movement had something of that spirit in the beginning," said my
Utopian double. "But while your men seem to be thinking disconnectedly,
and upon a very narrow and fragmentary basis of accumulated conclusions,
ours had a fairly comprehensive science of human association, and a very
careful analysis of the failures of preceding beginnings to draw upon.
After all, your world must be as full as ours was of the wreckage and
decay of previous attempts; churches, aristocracies, orders, cults. . .
."

"Only at present we seem to have lost heart altogether and now there are
no new religions, no new orders, no new cults—no beginnings any more."

"But that's only a resting phase, perhaps. You were saying——"

"Oh!—let that distressful planet alone for a time! Tell me how you
manage in Utopia."

### SECTION 2

The social theorists of Utopia, my double explained, did not base their
schemes upon the classification of men into labour and capital, the
landed interest, the liquor trade, and the like. They esteemed these as
accidental categories, indefinitely amenable to statesmanship, and they
looked for some practical and real classification upon which to base
organisation.  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) But, on the other
hand, the assumption that men are unclassifiable, because practically
homogeneous, which underlies modern democratic methods and all the
fallacies of our equal justice, is even more alien to the Utopian mind.
Throughout Utopia there is, of course, no other than provisional
classifications, since every being is regarded as finally unique, but
for political and social purposes things have long rested upon a
classification of temperaments, which attends mainly to differences in
the range and quality and character of the individual imagination.

This Utopian classification was a rough one, but it served its purpose
to determine the broad lines of political organisation; it was so far
unscientific that many individuals fall between or within two or even
three of its classes. But that was met by giving the correlated
organisation a compensatory looseness of play. Four main classes of mind
were distinguished, called, respectively, the Poietic, the Kinetic, the
Dull, and the Base. The former two are supposed to constitute the living
tissue of the State; the latter are the fulcra and resistances, the bone
and cover of its body. They are not hereditary classes, nor is there any
attempt to develop any class by special breeding, simply because the
intricate interplay of heredity is untraceable and incalculable. They
are classes to which people drift of their own accord. Education is
uniform until differentiation becomes unmistakable, and each man (and
woman) must establish his position with regard to the lines of this
abstract classification by his own quality, choice, and development. . .
.

The Poietic or creative class of mental individuality embraces a wide
range of types, but they agree in possessing imaginations that range
beyond the known and accepted, and that involve the desire to bring the
discoveries made in such excursions, into knowledge and recognition. The
scope and direction of the imaginative excursion may vary very greatly.
It may be the invention of something new or the discovery of something
hitherto unperceived. When the invention or discovery is primarily
beauty then we have the artistic type of Poietic mind; when it is not
so, we have the true scientific man. The range of discovery may be
narrowed as it is in the art of Whistler or the science of a cytologist,
or it may embrace a wide extent of relevance, until at last both artist
or scientific inquirer merge in the universal reference of the true
philosopher. To the accumulated activities of the Poietic type, reacted
upon by circumstances, are due almost all the forms assumed by human
thought and feeling. All religious ideas, all ideas of what is good or
beautiful, entered life through the Poietic inspirations of man. Except
for processes of decay, the forms of the human future must come also
through men of this same type, and it is a primary essential to our
modern idea of an abundant secular progress that these activities should
be unhampered and stimulated.

The Kinetic class consists of types, various, of course, and merging
insensibly along the boundary into the less representative constituents
of the Poietic group, but distinguished by a more restricted range of
imagination. Their imaginations do not range beyond the known,
experienced, and accepted, though within these limits they may imagine
as vividly or more vividly than members of the former group. They are
often very clever and capable people, but they do not do, and they do
not desire to do, new things. The more vigorous individuals of this
class are the most teachable people in the world, and they are generally
more moral and more trustworthy than the Poietic types. They live—while
the Poietics are always something of experimentalists with life. The
characteristics of either of these two classes may be associated with a
good or bad physique, with excessive or defective energy, with
exceptional keenness of the senses in some determinate direction or
such-like "bent," and the Kinetic type, just as the Poietic type, may
display an imagination of restricted or of the most universal range. But
a fairly energetic Kinetic is probably the nearest thing to that ideal
our earthly anthropologists have in mind when they speak of the "Normal"
human being. The very definition of the Poietic class involves a certain
abnormality.

The Utopians distinguished two extremes of this Kinetic class according
to the quality of their imaginative preferences. the Dan and Beersheba,
as it were, of this division. At one end is the mainly intellectual,
unoriginal type, which, with energy of personality, makes an admirable
judge or administrator and without it an uninventive, laborious, common
mathematician, or common scholar, or common scientific man; while at the
other end is the mainly emotional, unoriginal man, the type to which—at
a low level of personal energy—my botanist inclines. The second type
includes, amidst its energetic forms, great actors, and popular
politicians and preachers. Between these extremes is a long and wide
region of varieties, into which one would put most of the people who
form the reputable workmen, the men of substance, the trustworthy men
and women, the pillars of society on earth.

Below these two classes in the Utopian scheme of things, and merging
insensibly into them, come the Dull. The Dull are persons of altogether
inadequate imagination, the people who never seem to learn thoroughly,
or hear distinctly, or think clearly. (I believe if every one is to be
carefully educated they would be considerably in the minority in the
world, but it is quite possible that will not be the reader's opinion.
It is clearly a matter of an arbitrary line.) They are the stupid
people, the incompetent people, the formal, imitative people, the people
who, in any properly organised State, should, as a class, gravitate
towards and below the minimum wage that qualifies for marriage. The laws
of heredity are far too mysterious for such offspring as they do produce
to be excluded from a fair chance in the world, but for themselves, they
count neither for work nor direction in the State.

Finally, with a bold disregard of the logician's classificatory rules,
these Utopian statesmen who devised the World State, hewed out in theory
a class of the Base. The Base may, indeed, be either poietic, kinetic,
or dull, though most commonly they are the last, and their definition
concerns not so much the quality of their imagination as a certain bias
in it, that to a statesman makes it a matter for special attention. The
Base have a narrower and more persistent egoistic reference than the
common run of humanity; they may boast, but they have no frankness; they
have relatively great powers of concealment, and they are capable of,
and sometimes have an aptitude and inclination towards, cruelty. In the
queer phrasing of earthly psychology with its clumsy avoidance of
analysis, they have no "moral sense." They count as an antagonism to the
State organisation.

Obviously, this is the rudest of classifications, and no Utopian has
ever supposed it to be a classification for individual application, a
classification so precise that one can say, this man is "poietic," and
that man is "base." In actual experience these qualities mingle and vary
in every possible way. It is not a classification for Truth, but a
classification to an end. Taking humanity as a multitude, of unique
individuals in mass, one may, for practical purposes, deal with it far
more conveniently by disregarding its uniqueness and its mixed cases
altogether, and supposing it to be an assembly of poietic, kinetic,
dull, and base people. In many respects it behaves as if it were that.
The State, dealing as it does only with non-individualised affairs, is
not only justified in disregarding, but is bound to disregard, a man's
special distinction, and to provide for him on the strength of his
prevalent aspect as being on the whole poietic, kinetic, or what not. In
a world of hasty judgments and carping criticism, it cannot be repeated
too often that the fundamental ideas of a modern Utopia imply everywhere
and in everything, margins and elasticities, a certain universal
compensatory looseness of play.

### SECTION 3

Now these Utopian statesmen who founded the World State put the problem
of social organisation in the following fashion:—To contrive a
revolutionary movement that shall absorb all existing governments and
fuse them with itself, and that must be rapidly progressive and
adaptable, and yet coherent, persistent, powerful, and efficient.

The problem of combining progress with political stability had never
been accomplished in Utopia before that time, any more than it has been
accomplished on earth. Just as on earth, Utopian history was a
succession of powers rising and falling in an alternation of efficient
conservative with unstable liberal States. Just as on earth, so in
Utopia, the kinetic type of men had displayed a more or less
unintentional antagonism to the poietic. The general life-history of a
State had been the same on either planet. First, through poietic
activities, the idea of a community has developed, and the State has
shaped itself; poietic men have arisen first in this department of
national life, and then that, and have given place to kinetic men of a
high type—for it seems to be in their nature that poietic men should be
mutually repulsive, and not succeed and develop one another
consecutively—and a period of expansion and vigour has set in. The
general poietic activity has declined with the development of an
efficient and settled social and political organisation; the statesman
has given way to the politician who has incorporated the wisdom of the
statesman with his own energy, the original genius in arts, letters,
science, and every department of activity to the cultivated and
scholarly man. The kinetic man of wide range, who has assimilated his
poietic predecessor, succeeds with far more readiness than his poietic
contemporary in almost every human activity. The latter is by his very
nature undisciplined and experimental, and is positively hampered by
precedents and good order. With this substitution of the efficient for
the creative type, the State ceases to grow, first in this department of
activity, and then in that, and so long as its conditions remain the
same it remains orderly and efficient. But it has lost its power of
initiative and change; its power of adaptation is gone, and with that
secular change of conditions which is the law of life, stresses must
arise within and without, and bring at last either through revolution or
through defeat the release of fresh poietic power. The process, of
course, is not in its entirety simple; it may be masked by the fact that
one department of activity may be in its poietic stage, while another is
in a phase of realisation. In the United States of America, for example,
during the nineteenth century, there was great poietic activity in
industrial organisation, and none whatever in political philosophy; but
a careful analysis of the history of any period will show the rhythm
almost invariably present, and the initial problem before the Utopian
philosopher, therefore, was whether this was an inevitable alternation,
whether human progress was necessarily a series of developments,
collapses, and fresh beginnings, after an interval of disorder, unrest,
and often great unhappiness, or whether it was possible to maintain a
secure, happy, and progressive State beside an unbroken flow of poietic
activity.

Clearly they decided upon the second alternative. If, indeed, I am
listening to my Utopian self, then they not only decided the problem
could be solved, but they solved it.

He tells me how they solved it.

A modern Utopia differs from all the older Utopias in its recognition of
the need of poietic activities—one sees this new consideration creeping
into thought for the first time in the phrasing of Comte's insistence
that "spiritual" must precede political reconstruction, and in his
admission of the necessity of recurrent books and poems about
Utopias—and at first this recognition appears to admit only an added
complication to a problem already unmanageably complex. Comte's
separation of the activities of a State into the spiritual and material
does, to a certain extent, anticipate this opposition of poietic and
kinetic, but the intimate texture of his mind was dull and hard, the
conception slipped from him again, and his suppression of literary
activities, and his imposition of a rule of life upon the poietic types,
who are least able to sustain it, mark how deeply he went under. To a
large extent he followed the older Utopists in assuming that the
philosophical and constructive problem could be done once for all, and
he worked the results out simply under an organised kinetic government.
But what seems to be merely an addition to the difficulty may in the end
turn out to be a simplification, just as the introduction of a fresh
term to an intricate irreducible mathematical expression will at times
bring it to unity.

Now philosophers after my Utopian pattern, who find the ultimate
significance in life in individuality, novelty, and the undefined, would
not only regard the poietic element as the most important in human
society, but would perceive quite clearly the impossibility of its
organisation. This, indeed, is simply the application to the moral and
intellectual fabric of the principles already applied in discussing the
State control of reproduction (in Chapter Six, Section 2). But just as
in the case of births it was possible for the State to frame limiting
conditions within which individuality plays more freely than in the
void, so the founders of this modern Utopia believed it possible to
define conditions under which every individual born with poietic gifts
should be enabled and encouraged to give them a full development, in
art, philosophy, invention, or discovery. Certain general conditions
presented themselves as obviously reasonable:—to give every citizen as
good an education as he or she could acquire, for example; to so frame
it that the directed educational process would never at any period
occupy the whole available time of the learner, but would provide
throughout a marginal free leisure with opportunities for developing
idiosyncrasies, and to ensure by the expedient of a minimum wage for a
specified amount of work, that leisure and opportunity did not cease
throughout life.

But, in addition to thus making poietic activities universally possible,
the founders of this modern Utopia sought to supply incentives, which
was an altogether more difficult research, a problem in its nature
irresolvably complex, and admitting of no systematic solution. But my
double told me of a great variety of devices by which poetic men and
women were given honour and enlarged freedoms, so soon as they produced
an earnest of their quality, and he explained to me how great an
ambition they might entertain.

There were great systems of laboratories attached to every municipal
force station at which research could be conducted under the most
favourable conditions, and every mine, and, indeed, almost every great
industrial establishment, was saddled under its lease with similar
obligations. So much for poietic ability and research in physical
science. The World State tried the claims of every living contributor to
any materially valuable invention, and paid or charged a royalty on its
use that went partly to him personally, and partly to the research
institution that had produced him. In the matter of literature and the
philosophical and sociological sciences, every higher educational
establishment carried its studentships, its fellowships, its occasional
lectureships, and to produce a poem, a novel, a speculative work of
force or merit, was to be come the object of a generous competition
between rival Universities. In Utopia, any author has the option either
of publishing his works through the public bookseller as a private
speculation, or, if he is of sufficient merit, of accepting a University
endowment and conceding his copyright to the University press. All sorts
of grants in the hands of committees of the most varied constitution,
supplemented these academic resources, and ensured that no possible
contributor to the wide flow of the Utopian mind slipped into neglect.
Apart from those who engaged mainly in teaching and administration, my
double told me that the world-wide House of Saloman  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) thus created sustained over a million
men. For all the rarity of large fortunes, therefore, no original man
with the desire and capacity for material or mental experiments went
long without resources and the stimulus of attention, criticism, and
rivalry.

"And finally," said my double, "our Rules ensure a considerable
understanding of the importance of poietic activities in the majority of
the *samurai*, in whose hands as a class all the real power of the world
resides."

"Ah!" said I, "and now we come to the thing that interests me most. For
it is quite clear, in my mind, that these *samurai* form the real body
of the State. All this time that I have spent going to and fro in this
planet, it has been growing upon me that this order of men and women,
wearing such a uniform as you wear, and with faces strengthened by
discipline and touched with devotion, is the Utopian reality; but that
for them, the whole fabric of these fair appearances would crumble and
tarnish, shrink and shrivel, until at last, back I should be amidst the
grime and disorders of the life of earth. Tell me about these *samurai*,
who remind me of Plato's guardians, who look like Knights Templars, who
bear a name that recalls the swordsmen of Japan... and whose uniform you
yourself are wearing. What are they? Are they an hereditary caste, a
specially educated order, an elected class? For, certainly, this world
turns upon them as a door upon its hinges."

### SECTION 4

"I follow the Common Rule, as many men do," said my double, answering my
allusion to his uniform almost apologetically. "But my own work is, in
its nature, poietic; there is much dissatisfaction with our isolation of
criminals upon islands, and I am analysing the psychology of prison
officials and criminals in general with a view to some better scheme. I
am supposed to be ingenious with expedients in this direction.
Typically, the *samurai* are engaged in administrative work. Practically
the whole of the responsible rule of the world is in their hands; all
our head teachers and disciplinary heads of colleges, our judges,
barristers, employers of labour beyond a certain limit, practising
medical men, legislators, must be *samurai*, and all the executive
committees, and so forth, that play so large a part in our affairs are
drawn by lot exclusively from them. The order is not hereditary—we know
just enough of biology and the uncertainties of inheritance to know how
silly that would be—and it does not require an early consecration or
novitiate or ceremonies and initiations of that sort. The *samurai* are,
in fact, volunteers. Any intelligent adult in a reasonably healthy and
efficient state may, at any age after five-and-twenty, become one of the
*samurai*, and take a hand in the universal control."

"Provided he follows the Rule."

"Precisely—provided he follows the Rule."

"I have heard the phrase, \`voluntary nobility.'"

"That was the idea of our Founders. They made a noble and privileged
order—open to the whole world. No one could complain of an unjust
exclusion, for the only thing that could exclude from the order was
unwillingness or inability to follow the Rule."

"But the Rule might easily have been made exclusive of special lineages
and races."

"That wasn't their intention. The Rule was planned to exclude the dull,
to be unattractive to the base, and to direct and co-ordinate all sound
citizens of good intent."

"And it has succeeded?"

"As well as anything finite can. Life is still imperfect, still a thick
felt of dissatisfactions and perplexing problems, but most certainly the
quality of all its problems has been raised, and there has been no war,
no grinding poverty, not half the disease, and an enormous increase of
the order, beauty, and resources of life since the *samurai*, who began
as a private aggressive cult, won their way to the rule of the world."

"I would like to have that history," I said. "I expect there was
fighting?" He nodded. "But first—tell me about the Rule."

"The Rule aims to exclude the dull and base altogether, to discipline
the impulses and emotions, to develop a moral habit and sustain a man in
periods of stress, fatigue, and temptation, to produce the maximum
co-operation of all men of good intent, and, in fact, to keep all the
*samurai* in a state of moral and bodily health and efficiency. It does
as much of this as well as it can, but, of course, like all general
propositions, it does not do it in any case with absolute precision. On
the whole, it is so good that most men who, like myself, are doing
poietic work, and who would be just as well off without obedience, find
a satisfaction in adhesion. At first, in the militant days, it was a
trifle hard and uncompromising; it had rather too strong an appeal to
the moral prig and harshly righteous man, but it has undergone, and
still undergoes, revision and expansion, and every year it becomes a
little better adapted to the need of a general rule of life that all men
may try to follow. We have now a whole literature, with many very fine
things in it, written about the Rule."

He glanced at a little book on his desk, took it up as if to show it me,
then put it down again.

"The Rule consists of three parts; there is the list of things that
qualify, the list of things that must not be done, and the list of
things that must be done. Qualification exacts a little exertion, as
evidence of good faith, and it is designed to weed out the duller dull
and many of the base. Our schooling period ends now about fourteen, and
a small number of boys and girls—about three per cent.—are set aside
then as unteachable, as, in fact, nearly idiotic; the rest go on to a
college or upper school."

"All your population?"

"With that exception."

"Free?"

"Of course. And they pass out of college at eighteen. There are several
different college courses, but one or other must be followed and a
satisfactory examination passed at the end—perhaps ten per cent.
fail—and the Rule requires that the candidate for the *samurai* must
have passed."

"But a very good man is sometimes an idle schoolboy."

"We admit that. And so any one who has failed to pass the college
leaving examination may at any time in later life sit for it again and
again and again. Certain carefully specified things excuse it
altogether."

"That makes it fair. But aren't there people who cannot pass
examinations?"

"People of nervous instability——"

"But they may be people of great though irregular poietic gifts."

"Exactly. That is quite possible. But we don't want that sort of people
among our *samurai*. Passing an examination is a proof of a certain
steadiness of purpose, a certain self-control and submission——"

"Of a certain \`ordinariness.'"

"Exactly what is wanted."

"Of course, those others can follow other careers."

"Yes. That's what we want them to do. And, besides these two educational
qualifications, there are two others of a similar kind of more debatable
value. One is practically not in operation now. Our Founders put it that
a candidate for the *samurai* must possess what they called a Technique,
and, as it operated in the beginning, he had to hold the qualification
for a doctor, for a lawyer, for a military officer, or an engineer, or
teacher, or have painted acceptable pictures, or written a book, or
something of the sort. He had, in fact, as people say, to \`be
something,' or to have \`done something.' It was a regulation of vague
intention even in the beginning, and it became catholic to the pitch of
absurdity. To play a violin skilfully has been accepted as sufficient
for this qualification. There may have been a reason in the past for
this provision; in those days there were many daughters of prosperous
parents—and even some sons—who did nothing whatever but idle
uninterestingly in the world, and the organisation might have suffered
by their invasion, but that reason has gone now, and the requirement
remains a merely ceremonial requirement. But, on the other hand, another
has developed. Our Founders made a collection of several volumes, which
they called, collectively, the Book of the Samurai, a compilation of
articles and extracts, poems and prose pieces, which were supposed to
embody the idea of the order. It was to play the part for the *samurai*
that the Bible did for the ancient Hebrews. To tell you the truth, the
stuff was of very unequal merit; there was a lot of very second-rate
rhetoric, and some nearly namby-pamby verse. There was also included
some very obscure verse and prose that had the trick of seeming wise.
But for all such defects, much of the Book, from the very beginning, was
splendid and inspiring matter. From that time to this, the Book of the
Samurai has been under revision, much has been added, much rejected, and
some deliberately rewritten. Now, there is hardly anything in it that is
not beautiful and perfect in form. The whole range of noble emotions
finds expression there, and all the guiding ideas of our Modern State.
We have recently admitted some terse criticism of its contents by a man
named Henley."

"Old Henley!"

"A man who died a little time ago."

"I knew that man on earth. And he was in Utopia, too! He was a great
red-faced man, with fiery hair, a noisy, intolerant maker of enemies,
with a tender heart—and he was one of the *samurai*?"

"He defied the Rules."

"He was a great man with wine. He wrote like wine; in our world he wrote
wine; red wine with the light shining through."

"He was on the Committee that revised our Canon. For the revising and
bracing of our Canon is work for poietic as well as kinetic men. You
knew him in your world?"

"I wish I had. But I have seen him. On earth he wrote a thing... it
would run—

"Out of the night that covers me, Black as the pit from pole to pole, I
thank whatever Gods may be, For my unconquerable soul. . . ."

"We have that here. All good earthly things are in Utopia also. We put
that in the Canon almost as soon as he died," said my double.

### SECTION 5

"We have now a double Canon, a very fine First Canon, and a Second Canon
of work by living men and work of inferior quality, and a satisfactory
knowledge of both of these is the fourth intellectual qualification for
the *samurai*."

"It must keep a sort of uniformity in your tone of thought."

"The Canon pervades our whole world. As a matter of fact, very much of
it is read and learnt in the schools. . . . Next to the intellectual
qualification comes the physical, the man must be in sound health, free
from certain foul, avoidable, and demoralising diseases, and in good
training. We reject men who are fat, or thin and flabby, or whose nerves
are shaky—we refer them back to training. And finally the man or woman
must be fully adult."

"Twenty-one? But you said twenty-five!"

"The age has varied. At first it was twenty-five or over; then the
minimum became twenty-five for men and twenty-one for women. Now there
is a feeling that it ought to be raised. We don't want to take advantage
of mere boy and girl emotions—men of my way of thinking, at any rate,
don't—we want to get our *samurai* with experiences, with a settled
mature conviction. Our hygiene and regimen are rapidly pushing back old
age and death, and keeping men hale and hearty to eighty and more.
There's no need to hurry the young. Let them have a chance of wine,
love, and song; let them feel the bite of full-bodied desire, and know
what devils they have to reckon with."

"But there is a certain fine sort of youth that knows the desirability
of the better things at nineteen."

"They may keep the Rule at any time—without its privileges. But a man
who breaks the Rule after his adult adhesion at five-and-twenty is no
more in the *samurai* for ever. Before that age he is free to break it
and repent."

"And now, what is forbidden?"

"We forbid a good deal. Many small pleasures do no great harm, but we
think it well to forbid them, none the less, so that we can weed out the
self-indulgent. We think that a constant resistance to little seductions
is good for a man's quality. At any rate, its show that a man is
prepared to pay something for his honour and privileges. We prescribe a
regimen of food, forbid tobacco, wine, or any alcoholic drink, all
narcotic drugs——"

"Meat?"

"In all the round world of Utopia there is no meat. There used to be.
But now we cannot stand the thought of slaughter-houses. And, in a
population that is all educated, and at about the same level of physical
refinement, it is practically impossible to find any one who will hew a
dead ox or pig. We never settled the hygienic question of meat-eating at
all. This other aspect decided us. I can still remember, as a boy, the
rejoicings over the closing of the last slaughter-house."

"You eat fish."

"It isn't a matter of logic. In our barbaric past horrible flayed
carcasses of brutes dripping blood were hung for sale in the public
streets." He shrugged his shoulders.

"They do that still in London—in *my* world," I said.

He looked again at my laxer, coarser face, and did not say whatever
thought had passed across his mind.

"Originally the *samurai* were forbidden usury, that is to say the
lending of money at fixed rates of interest. They are still under that
interdiction, but since our commercial code practically prevents usury
altogether, and our law will not recognise contracts for interest upon
private accommodation loans to unprosperous borrowers, it is now
scarcely necessary. The idea of a man growing richer by mere inaction
and at the expense of an impoverishing debtor, is profoundly distasteful
to Utopian ideas, and our State insists pretty effectually now upon the
participation of the lender in the borrower's risks. This, however, is
only one part of a series of limitations of the same character. It is
felt that to buy simply in order to sell again brings out many unsocial
human qualities; it makes a man seek to enhance profits and falsify
values, and so the *samurai* are forbidden to buy to sell on their own
account or for any employer save the State, unless some process of
manufacture changes the nature of the commodity (a mere change in bulk
or packing does not suffice), and they are forbidden salesmanship and
all its arts. Consequently they cannot be hotel-keepers, or hotel
proprietors, or hotel shareholders, and a doctor—all practising doctors
must be *samurai*—cannot sell drugs except as a public servant of the
municipality or the State."

"That, of course, runs counter to all our current terrestrial ideas," I
said. "We are obsessed by the power of money. These rules will work out
as a vow of moderate poverty, and if your *samurai* are an order of poor
men——"

"They need not be. *Samurai* who have invented, organised, and developed
new industries, have become rich men, and many men who have grown rich
by brilliant and original trading have subsequently become *samurai*."

"But these are exceptional cases. The bulk of your money-making business
must be confined to men who are not *samurai*. You must have a class of
rich, powerful outsiders——"

"*Have* we?"

"I don't see the evidences of them."

"As a matter of fact, we have such people! There are rich traders, men
who have made discoveries in the economy of distribution, or who have
called attention by intelligent, truthful advertisement to the
possibilities of neglected commodities, for example."

"But aren't they a power?"

"Why should they be?"

"Wealth *is* power."

I had to explain that phrase.

He protested. "Wealth," he said, "is no sort of power at all unless you
make it one. If it is so in your world it is so by inadvertency. Wealth
is a State-made thing, a convention, the most artificial of powers. You
can, by subtle statesmanship, contrive what it shall buy and what it
shall not. In your world it would seem you have made leisure, movement,
any sort of freedom, life itself, *purchasable*. The more fools you! A
poor working man with you is a man in discomfort and fear. No wonder
your rich have power. But here a reasonable leisure, a decent life, is
to be had by every man on easier terms than by selling himself to the
rich. And rich as men are here, there is no private fortune in the whole
world that is more than a little thing beside the wealth of the State.
The *samurai* control the State and the wealth of the State, and by
their vows they may not avail themselves of any of the coarser pleasures
wealth can still buy. Where, then, is the power of your wealthy man?"

"But, then—where is the incentive——?"

"Oh! a man gets things for himself with wealth—no end of things. But
little or no power over his fellows—unless they are exceptionally weak
or self-indulgent persons."

I reflected. "What else may not the *samurai* do?"

"Acting, singing, or reciting are forbidden them, though they may
lecture authoritatively or debate. But professional mimicry is not only
held to be undignified in a man or woman, but to weaken and corrupt the
soul; the mind becomes foolishly dependent on applause, over-skilful in
producing tawdry and momentary illusions of excellence; it is our
experience that actors and actresses as a class are loud, ignoble, and
insincere. If they have not such flamboyant qualities then they are
tepid and ineffectual players. Nor may the *samurai* do personal
services, except in the matter of medicine or surgery; they may not be
barbers, for example, nor inn waiters, nor boot cleaners. But, nowadays,
we have scarcely any barbers or boot cleaners; men do these things for
themselves. Nor may a man under the Rule be any man's servant, pledged
to do whatever he is told. He may neither be a servant nor keep one; he
must shave and dress and serve himself, carry his own food from the
helper's place to the table, redd his sleeping room, and leave it clean.
. . ."

"That is all easy enough in a world as ordered as yours. I suppose no
*samurai* may bet?"

"Absolutely not. He may insure his life and his old age for the better
equipment of his children, or for certain other specified ends, but that
is all his dealings with chance. And he is also forbidden to play games
in public or to watch them being played. Certain dangerous and hardy
sports and exercises are prescribed for him, but not competitive sports
between man and man or side and side. That lesson was learnt long ago
before the coming of the *samurai*. Gentlemen of honour, according to
the old standards, rode horses, raced chariots, fought, and played
competitive games of skill, and the dull, cowardly and base came in
thousands to admire, and howl, and bet. The gentlemen of honour
degenerated fast enough into a sort of athletic prostitute, with all the
defects, all the vanity, trickery, and self-assertion of the common
actor, and with even less intelligence. Our Founders made no peace with
this organisation of public sports. They did not spend their lives to
secure for all men and women on the earth freedom, health, and leisure,
in order that they might waste lives in such folly."

"We have those abuses," I said, "but some of our earthly games have a
fine side. There is a game called cricket. It is a fine, generous game."

"Our boys play that, and men too. But it is thought rather puerile to
give very much time to it; men should have graver interests. It was
undignified and unpleasant for the *samurai* to play conspicuously ill,
and impossible for them to play so constantly as to keep hand and eye in
training against the man who was fool enough and cheap enough to become
an expert. Cricket, tennis, fives, billiards——You will find clubs and a
class of men to play all these things in Utopia, but not the *samurai*.
And they must play their games as games, not as displays; the price of a
privacy for playing cricket, so that they could charge for admission,
would be overwhelmingly high. . . . Negroes are often very clever at
cricket. For a time, most of the *samurai* had their sword-play, but few
do those exercises now, and until about fifty years ago they went out
for military training, a fortnight in every year, marching long
distances, sleeping in the open, carrying provisions, and sham fighting
over unfamiliar ground dotted with disappearing targets. There was a
curious inability in our world to realise that war was really over for
good and all."

"And now," I said, "haven't we got very nearly to the end of your
prohibitions? You have forbidden alcohol, drugs, smoking, betting, and
usury, games, trade, servants. But isn't there a vow of Chastity?"

"That is the Rule for your earthly orders?"

"Yes—except, if I remember rightly, for Plato's Guardians."

"There is a Rule of Chastity here—but not of Celibacy. We know quite
clearly that civilisation is an artificial arrangement, and that all the
physical and emotional instincts of man are too strong, and his natural
instinct of restraint too weak, for him to live easily in the civilised
State. Civilisation has developed far more rapidly than man has
modified. Under the unnatural perfection of security, liberty, and
abundance our civilisation has attained, the normal untrained human
being is disposed to excess in almost every direction; he tends to eat
too much and too elaborately, to drink too much, to become lazy faster
than his work can be reduced, to waste his interest upon displays, and
to make love too much and too elaborately. He gets out of training, and
concentrates upon egoistic or erotic broodings. The past history of our
race is very largely a history of social collapses due to demoralisation
by indulgences following security and abundance. In the time of our
Founders the signs of a world-wide epoch of prosperity and relaxation
were plentiful. Both sexes drifted towards sexual excesses, the men
towards sentimental extravagances, imbecile devotions, and the
complication and refinement of physical indulgences; the women towards
those expansions and differentiations of feeling that find expression in
music and costly and distinguished dress. Both sexes became unstable and
promiscuous. The whole world seemed disposed to do exactly the same
thing with its sexual interest as it had done with its appetite for food
and drink—make the most of it."

He paused.

"Satiety came to help you," I said.

"Destruction may come before satiety. Our Founders organised motives
from all sorts of sources, but I think the chief force to give men
self-control is Pride. Pride may not be the noblest thing in the soul,
but it is the best King there, for all that. They looked to it to keep a
man clean and sound and sane. In this matter, as in all matters of
natural desire, they held no appetite must be glutted, no appetite must
have artificial whets, and also and equally that no appetite should be
starved. A man must come from the table satisfied, but not replete. And,
in the matter of love, a straight and clean desire for a clean and
straight fellow-creature was our Founders' ideal. They enjoined marriage
between equals as the *samurai's* duty to the race, and they framed
directions of the precisest sort to prevent that uxorious
inseparableness, that connubiality which will reduce a couple of people
to something jointly less than either. That Canon is too long to tell
you now. A man under the Rule who loves a woman who does not follow it,
must either leave the *samurai* to marry her, or induce her to accept
what is called the Woman's Rule, which, while it excepts her from the
severer qualifications and disciplines, brings her regimen of life into
a working harmony with his."

"Suppose she breaks the Rule afterwards?"

"He must leave either her or the order."

"There is matter for a novel or so in that."

"There has been matter for hundreds."

"Is the Woman's Rule a sumptuary law as well as a regimen? I mean—may
she dress as she pleases?"

"Not a bit of it," said my double. "Every woman who could command money
used it, we found, to make underbred aggressions on other women. As men
emerged to civilisation, women seemed going back to savagery—to paint
and feathers. But the *samurai*, both men and women, and the women under
the Lesser Rule also, all have a particular dress. No difference is made
between women under either the Great or the Lesser Rule. You have seen
the men's dress—always like this I wear. The women may wear the same,
either with the hair cut short or plaited behind them, or they may have
a high-waisted dress of very fine, soft woollen material, with their
hair coiled up behind."

"I have seen it," I said. Indeed, nearly all the women had seemed to be
wearing variants of that simple formula. "It seems to me a very
beautiful dress. The other—I'm not used to. But I like it on girls and
slender woman."

I had a thought, and added, "Don't they sometimes, well—take a good deal
of care, dressing their hair?"

My double laughed in my eyes. "They do," he said.

"And the Rule?"

"The Rule is never fussy," said my double, still smiling.

"We don't want women to cease to be beautiful, and consciously
beautiful, if you like," he added. "The more real beauty of form and
face we have, the finer our world. But costly sexualised trappings——"

"I should have thought," I said, "a class of women who traded on their
sex would have arisen, women, I mean, who found an interest and an
advantage in emphasising their individual womanly beauty. There is no
law to prevent it. Surely they would tend to counteract the severity of
costume the Rule dictates."

"There are such women. But for all that the Rule sets the key of
everyday dress. If a woman is possessed by the passion for gorgeous
raiment she usually satisfies it in her own private circle, or with rare
occasional onslaughts upon the public eye. Her everyday mood and the
disposition of most people is against being conspicuous abroad. And I
should say there are little liberties under the Lesser Rule; a discreet
use of fine needlework and embroidery, a wider choice of materials."

"You have no changing fashions?"

"None. For all that, are not our dresses as beautiful as yours?"

"Our women's dresses are not beautiful at all," I said, forced for a
time towards the mysterious philosophy of dress. "Beauty? That isn't
their concern."

"Then what are they after?"

"My dear man! What is all my world after?"

### SECTION 6

I should come to our third talk with a great curiosity to hear of the
last portion of the Rule, of the things that the *samurai* are obliged
to do.

There would be many precise directions regarding his health, and rules
that would aim at once at health and that constant exercise of will that
makes life good. Save in specified exceptional circumstances, the
*samurai* must bathe in cold water, and the men must shave every day;
they have the precisest directions in such matters; the body must be in
health, the skin and muscles and nerves in perfect tone, or the
*samurai* must go to the doctors of the order, and give implicit
obedience to the regimen prescribed. They must sleep alone at least four
nights in five; and they must eat with and talk to any one in their
fellowship who cares for their conversation for an hour, at least, at
the nearest clubhouse of the *samurai* once on three chosen days in
every week. Moreover, they must read aloud from the Book of the Samurai
for at least ten minutes every day. Every month they must buy and read
faithfully through at least one book that has been published during the
past five years, and the only intervention with private choice in that
matter is the prescription of a certain minimum of length for the
monthly book or books. But the full Rule in these minor compulsory
matters is voluminous and detailed, and it abounds with alternatives.
Its aim is rather to keep before the *samurai* by a number of sample
duties, as it were, the need of, and some of the chief methods towards
health of body and mind, rather than to provide a comprehensive rule,
and to ensure the maintenance of a community of feeling and interests
among the *samurai* through habit, intercourse, and a living
contemporary literature. These minor obligations do not earmark more
than an hour in the day. Yet they serve to break down isolations of
sympathy, all sorts of physical and intellectual sluggishness and the
development of unsocial preoccupations of many sorts.

Women *samurai* who are married, my double told me, must bear
children—if they are to remain married as well as in the order—before
the second period for terminating a childless marriage is exhausted. I
failed to ask for the precise figures from my double at the time, but I
think it is beyond doubt that it is from *samurai* mothers of the
Greater or Lesser Rule that a very large proportion of the future
population of Utopia will be derived. There is one liberty accorded to
women *samurai* which is refused to men, and that is to marry outside
the Rule, and women married to men not under the Rule are also free to
become *samurai*. Here, too, it will be manifest there is scope for
novels and the drama of life. In practice, it seems that it is only men
of great poietic distinction outside the Rule, or great commercial
leaders, who have wives under it. The tendency of such unions is either
to bring the husband under the Rule, or take the wife out of it. There
can be no doubt that these marriage limitations tend to make the
*samurai* something of an hereditary class. Their children, as a rule,
become *samurai*. But it is not an exclusive caste; subject to the most
reasonable qualifications, any one who sees fit can enter it at any
time, and so, unlike all other privileged castes the world has seen, it
increases relatively to the total population, and may indeed at last
assimilate almost the whole population of the earth.

### SECTION 7

So much my double told me readily.

But now he came to the heart of all his explanations, to the will and
motives at the centre that made men and women ready to undergo
discipline, to renounce the richness and elaboration of the sensuous
life, to master emotions and control impulses, to keep in the key of
effort while they had abundance about them to rouse and satisfy all
desires, and his exposition was more difficult.

He tried to make his religion clear to me.

The leading principle of the Utopian religion is the repudiation of the
doctrine of original sin; the Utopians hold that man, on the whole, is
good. That is their cardinal belief. Man has pride and conscience, they
hold, that you may refine by training as you refine his eye and ear; he
has remorse and sorrow in his being, coming on the heels of all
inconsequent enjoyments. How can one think of him as bad? He is
religious; religion is as natural to him as lust and anger, less
intense, indeed, but coming with a wide-sweeping inevitableness as peace
comes after all tumults and noises. And in Utopia they understand this,
or, at least, the *samurai* do, clearly. They accept Religion as they
accept Thirst, as something inseparably in the mysterious rhythms of
life. And just as thirst and pride and all desires may be perverted in
an age of abundant opportunities, and men may be degraded and wasted by
intemperance in drinking, by display, or by ambition, so, too, the
nobler complex of desires that constitutes religion may be turned to
evil by the dull, the base, and the careless. Slovenly indulgence in
religious inclinations, a failure to think hard and discriminate as
fairly as possible in religious matters, is just as alien to the men
under the Rule as it would be to drink deeply because they were thirsty,
eat until glutted, evade a bath because the day was chilly, or make love
to any bright-eyed girl who chanced to look pretty in the dusk. Utopia,
which is to have every type of character that one finds on earth, will
have its temples and its priests, just as it will have its actresses and
wine, but the *samurai*, will be forbidden the religion of dramatically
lit altars, organ music, and incense, as distinctly as they are
forbidden the love of painted women, or the consolations of brandy. And
to all the things that are less than religion and that seek to
comprehend it, to cosmogonies and philosophies, to creeds and formulæ,
to catechisms and easy explanations, the attitude of the *samurai*, the
note of the Book of Samurai, will be distrust. These things, the
*samurai* will say, are part of the indulgences that should come before
a man submits himself to the Rule; they are like the early
gratifications of young men, experiences to establish renunciation. The
*samurai* will have emerged above these things.

The theology of the Utopian rulers will be saturated with that same
philosophy of uniqueness, that repudiation of anything beyond
similarities and practical parallelisms, that saturates all their
institutions. They will have analysed exhaustively those fallacies and
assumptions that arise between the One and the Many, that have troubled
philosophy since philosophy began. Just as they will have escaped that
delusive unification of every species under its specific definition that
has dominated earthly reasoning, so they will have escaped the delusive
simplification of God that vitiates all terrestrial theology. They will
hold God to be complex and of an endless variety of aspects, to be
expressed by no universal formula nor approved in any uniform manner.
Just as the language of Utopia will be a synthesis, even so will its God
be. The aspect of God is different in the measure of every man's
individuality, and the intimate thing of religion must, therefore, exist
in human solitude, between man and God alone. Religion in its
quintessence is a relation between God and man; it is perversion to make
it a relation between man and man, and a man may no more reach God
through a priest than love his wife through a priest. But just as a man
in love may refine the interpretation of his feelings and borrow
expression from the poems and music of poietic men, so an individual man
may at his discretion read books of devotion and hear music that is in
harmony with his inchoate feelings. Many of the *samurai*, therefore,
will set themselves private regimens that will help their secret
religious life, will pray habitually, and read books of devotion, but
with these things the Rule of the order will have nothing to do.

Clearly the God of the *samurai* is a transcendental and mystical God.
So far as the *samurai* have a purpose in common in maintaining the
State, and the order and progress of the world, so far, by their
discipline and denial, by their public work and effort, they worship God
together. But the fount of motive lies in the individual life, it lies
in silent and deliberate reflections, and at this, the most striking of
all the rules of the *samurai* aims. For seven consecutive days in the
year, at least, each man or woman under the Rule must go right out of
all the life of man into some wild and solitary place, must speak to no
man or woman, and have no sort of intercourse with mankind. They must go
bookless and weaponless, without pen or paper, or money. Provisions must
be taken for the period of the journey, a rug or sleeping sack—for they
must sleep under the open sky—but no means of making a fire. They may
study maps beforehand to guide them, showing any difficulties and
dangers in the journey, but they may not carry such helps. They must not
go by beaten ways or wherever there are inhabited houses, but into the
bare, quiet places of the globe—the regions set apart for them.

This discipline, my double said, was invented to secure a certain
stoutness of heart and body in the members of the order, which otherwise
might have lain open to too many timorous, merely abstemious, men and
women. Many things had been suggested, swordplay and tests that verged
on torture, climbing in giddy places and the like, before this was
chosen. Partly, it is to ensure good training and sturdiness of body and
mind, but partly, also, it is to draw their minds for a space from the
insistent details of life, from the intricate arguments and the fretting
effort to work, from personal quarrels and personal affections, and the
things of the heated room. Out they must go, clean out of the world.

Certain great areas are set apart for these yearly pilgrimages beyond
the securities of the State. There are thousands of square miles of
sandy desert in Africa and Asia set apart; much of the Arctic and
Antarctic circles; vast areas of mountain land and frozen marsh;
secluded reserves of forest, and innumerable unfrequented lines upon the
sea. Some are dangerous and laborious routes; some merely desolate; and
there are even some sea journeys that one may take in the halcyon days
as one drifts through a dream. Upon the seas one must go in a little
undecked sailing boat, that may be rowed in a calm; all the other
journeys one must do afoot, none aiding. There are, about all these
desert regions and along most coasts, little offices at which the
*samurai* says good-bye to the world of men, and at which they arrive
after their minimum time of silence is overpast. For the intervening
days they must be alone with Nature, necessity, and their own thoughts.

"It is good?" I said.

"It is good," my double answered. "We civilised men go back to the stark
Mother that so many of us would have forgotten were it not for this
Rule. And one thinks. . . . Only two weeks ago I did my journey for the
year. I went with my gear by sea to Tromso, and then inland to a
starting-place, and took my ice-axe and rücksack, and said good-bye to
the world. I crossed over four glaciers; I climbed three high mountain
passes, and slept on moss in desolate valleys. I saw no human being for
seven days. Then I came down through pine woods to the head of a road
that runs to the Baltic shore. Altogether it was thirteen days before I
reported myself again, and had speech with fellow creatures."

"And the women do this?"

"The women who are truly *samurai*—yes. Equally with the men. Unless the
coming of children intervenes."

I asked him how it had seemed to him, and what he thought about during
the journey.

"There is always a sense of effort for me," he said, "when I leave the
world at the outset of the journey. I turn back again and again, and
look at the little office as I go up my mountain side. The first day and
night I'm a little disposed to shirk the job—every year it's the same—a
little disposed, for example, to sling my pack from my back, and sit
down, and go through its contents, and make sure I've got all my
equipment."

"There's no chance of any one overtaking you?"

"Two men mustn't start from the same office on the same route within six
hours of each other. If they come within sight of each other, they must
shun an encounter, and make no sign—unless life is in danger. All that
is arranged beforehand."

"It would be, of course. Go on telling me of your journey."

"I dread the night. I dread discomfort and bad weather. I only begin to
brace up after the second day."

"Don't you worry about losing your way?"

"No. There are cairns and skyline signs. If it wasn't for that, of
course, we should be worrying with maps the whole time. But I'm only
sure of being a man after the second night, and sure of my power to go
through."

"And then?"

"Then one begins to get into it. The first two days one is apt to have
the events of one's journey, little incidents of travel, and thoughts of
one's work and affairs, rising and fading and coming again, but then the
perspectives begin. I don't sleep much at nights on these journeys; I
lie awake and stare at the stars. About dawn, perhaps, and in the
morning sunshine, I sleep! The nights this last time were very short,
never more than twilight, and I saw the glow of the sun always, just
over the edge of the world. But I had chosen the days of the new moon,
so that I could have a glimpse of the stars. . . . Years ago, I went
from the Nile across the Libyan Desert east, and then the stars—the
stars in the later days of that journey—brought me near weeping. . . .
You begin to feel alone on the third day, when you find yourself out on
some shiny snowfield, and nothing of mankind visible in the whole world
save one landmark, one remote thin red triangle of iron, perhaps, in the
saddle of the ridge against the sky. All this us world that has done so
much and so marvellously, and is still so little—you see it little as it
is—and far off. All day long you go and the night comes, and it might be
another planet. Then, in the quiet, waking hours, one thinks of one's
self and the great external things, of space and eternity, and what one
means by God."

He mused.

"You think of death?"

"Not of my own. But when I go among snows and desolations—and usually I
take my pilgrimage in mountains or the north—I think very much of the
Night of this World—the time when our sun will be red and dull, and air
and water will lie frozen together in a common snowfield where now the
forests of the tropics are steaming. . . . I think very much of that,
and whether it is indeed God's purpose that our kind should end, and the
cities we have built, the books we have written, all that we have given
substance and a form, should lie dead beneath the snows."

"You don't believe that?"

"No. But if it is not so——. I went threading my way among gorges and
precipices, with my poor brain dreaming of what the alternative should
be, with my imagination straining and failing. Yet, in those high airs
and in such solitude, a kind of exaltation comes to men. . . . I
remember that one night I sat up and told the rascal stars very
earnestly how they should not escape us in the end."

He glanced at me for a moment as though he doubted I should understand.

"One becomes a personification up there," he said. "One becomes the
ambassador of mankind to the outer world.

"There is time to think over a lot of things. One puts one's self and
one's ambition in a new pair of scales. . . .

"Then there are hours when one is just exploring the wilderness like a
child. Sometimes perhaps one gets a glimpse from some precipice edge of
the plains far away, and houses and roadways, and remembers there is
still a busy world of men. And at last one turns one's feet down some
slope, some gorge that leads back. You come down, perhaps, into a pine
forest, and hear that queer clatter reindeer make—and then, it may be,
see a herdsman very far away, watching you. You wear your pilgrim's
badge, and he makes no sign of seeing you. . . .

"You know, after these solitudes, I feel just the same queer
disinclination to go back to the world of men that I feel when I have to
leave it. I think of dusty roads and hot valleys, and being looked at by
many people. I think of the trouble of working with colleagues and
opponents. This last journey I outstayed my time, camping in the pine
woods for six days. Then my thoughts came round to my proper work again.
I got keen to go on with it, and so I came back into the world. You come
back physically clean—as though you had had your arteries and veins
washed out. And your brain has been cleaned, too. . . . I shall stick to
the mountains now until I am old, and then I shall sail a boat in
Polynesia. That is what so many old men do. Only last year one of the
great leaders of the *samurai*—a white-haired man, who followed the Rule
in spite of his one hundred and eleven years—was found dead in his boat
far away from any land, far to the south, lying like a child asleep. . .
."

"That's better than a tumbled bed," said I, "and some boy of a doctor
jabbing you with injections, and distressful people hovering about you."

"Yes," said my double; "in Utopia we who are samurai die better than
that. . . . Is that how your great men die?"

It came to me suddenly as very strange that, even as we sat and talked,
across deserted seas, on burning sands, through the still aisles of
forests, and in all the high and lonely places of the world, beyond the
margin where the ways and houses go, solitary men and women sailed alone
or marched alone, or clambered—quiet, resolute exiles; they stood alone
amidst wildernesses of ice, on the precipitous banks of roaring
torrents, in monstrous caverns, or steering a tossing boat in the little
circle of the horizon amidst the tumbled, incessant sea, all in their
several ways communing with the emptiness, the enigmatic spaces and
silences, the winds and torrents and soulless forces that lie about the
lit and ordered life of men.

I saw more clearly now something I had seen dimly already, in the
bearing and the faces of this Utopian chivalry, a faint persistent tinge
of detachment from the immediate heats and hurries, the little graces
and delights, the tensions and stimulations of the daily world. It
pleased me strangely to think of this steadfast yearly pilgrimage of
solitude, and how near men might come then to the high distances of God.

### SECTION 8

After that I remember we fell talking of the discipline of the Rule, of
the Courts that try breaches of it, and interpret doubtful cases—for,
though a man may resign with due notice and be free after a certain time
to rejoin again, one deliberate breach may exclude a man for ever—of the
system of law that has grown up about such trials, and of the triennial
council that revises and alters the Rule. From that we passed to the
discussion of the general constitution of this World State. Practically
all political power vests in the *samurai*. Not only are they the only
administrators, lawyers, practising doctors, and public officials of
almost all kinds, but they are the only voters. Yet, by a curious
exception, the supreme legislative assembly must have one-tenth, and may
have one-half of its members outside the order, because, it is alleged,
there is a sort of wisdom that comes of sin and laxness, which is
necessary to the perfect ruling of life. My double quoted me a verse
from the Canon on this matter that my unfortunate verbal memory did not
retain, but it was in the nature of a prayer to save the world from
"unfermented men." It would seem that Aristotle's idea of a rotation of
rulers, an idea that crops up again in Harrington's *Oceana*, that first
Utopia of "the sovereign people" (a Utopia that, through Danton's
readings in English, played a disastrous part in the French Revolution),
gets a little respect in Utopia. The tendency is to give a practically
permanent tenure to good men. Every ruler and official, it is true, is
put on his trial every three years before a jury drawn by lot, according
to the range of his activities, either from the *samurai* of his
municipal area or from the general catalogue of the *samurai*, but the
business of this jury is merely to decide whether to continue him in
office or order a new election. In the majority of cases the verdict is
continuation. Even if it is not so the official may still appear as a
candidate before the second and separate jury which fills the vacant
post. . . .

My double mentioned a few scattered details of the electoral methods,
but as at that time I believed we were to have a number of further
conversations, I did not exhaust my curiosities upon this subject.
Indeed, I was more than a little preoccupied and inattentive. The
religion of the *samurai* was after my heart, and it had taken hold of
me very strongly. . . . But presently I fell questioning him upon the
complications that arise in the Modern Utopia through the differences
between the races of men, and found my attention returning. But the
matter of that discussion I shall put apart into a separate chapter. In
the end we came back to the particulars of this great Rule of Life that
any man desiring of joining the *samurai* must follow.

I remember how, after our third bout of talking, I walked back through
the streets of Utopian London to rejoin the botanist at our hotel.

My double lived in an apartment in a great building—I should judge about
where, in our London, the Tate Gallery squats, and, as the day was fine,
and I had no reason for hurry, I went not by the covered mechanical way,
but on foot along the broad, tree-set terraces that follow the river on
either side.

It was afternoon, and the mellow Thames Valley sunlight, warm and
gentle, lit a clean and gracious world. There were many people abroad,
going to and fro, unhurrying, but not aimless, and I watched them so
attentively that were you to ask me for the most elementary details of
the buildings and terraces that lay back on either bank, or of the
pinnacles and towers and parapets that laced the sky, I could not tell
you them. But of the people I could tell a great deal.

No Utopians wear black, and for all the frequency of the *samurai*
uniform along the London ways the general effect is of a gaily-coloured
population. You never see any one noticeably ragged or dirty; the
police, who answer questions and keep order (and are quite distinct from
the organisation for the pursuit of criminals) see to that; and shabby
people are very infrequent. People who want to save money for other
purposes, or who do not want much bother with their clothing, seem to
wear costumes of rough woven cloth, dyed an unobtrusive brown or green,
over fine woollen under-clothing, and so achieve a decent comfort in its
simplest form. Others outside the Rule of the *samurai* range the
spectrum for colour, and have every variety of texture; the colours
attained by the Utopian dyers seem to me to be fuller and purer than the
common range of stuffs on earth; and the subtle folding of the woollen
materials witness that Utopian Bradford is no whit behind her earthly
sister. White is extraordinarily frequent; white woollen tunics and
robes into which are woven bands of brilliant colour, abound. Often
these ape the cut and purple edge that distinguishes the *samurai*. In
Utopian London the air is as clear and less dusty than it is among high
mountains; the roads are made of unbroken surfaces, and not of friable
earth; all heating is done by electricity, and no coal ever enters the
town; there are no horses or dogs, and so there is not a suspicion of
smoke and scarcely a particle of any sort of dirt to render white
impossible.

The radiated influence of the uniform of the *samurai* has been to keep
costume simple, and this, perhaps, emphasises the general effect of
vigorous health, of shapely bodies. Every one is well grown and well
nourished; every one seems in good condition; every one walks well, and
has that clearness of eye that comes with cleanness of blood. In London
I am apt to consider myself of a passable size and carriage; here I feel
small and mean-looking. The faint suspicions of spinal curvatures, skew
feet, unequal legs, and ill-grown bones, that haunt one in a London
crowd, the plain intimations—in yellow faces, puffy faces, spotted and
irregular complexions, in nervous movements and coughs and colds—of bad
habits and an incompetent or disregarded medical profession, do not
appear here. I notice few old people, but there seems to be a greater
proportion of men and women at or near the prime of life.

I hang upon that. I have seen one two fat people here—they are all the
more noticeable because they are rare. But wrinkled age? Have I yet in
Utopia set eyes on a bald head?

The Utopians have brought a sounder physiological science than ours to
bear upon regimen. People know better what to do and what to avoid, how
to foresee and forestall coming trouble, and how to evade and suppress
the subtle poisons that blunt the edge of sensation. They have put off
the years of decay. They keep their teeth, they keep their digestions,
they ward off gout and rheumatism, neuralgia and influenza, and all
those cognate decays that bend and wrinkle men and women in the middle
years of existence. They have extended the level years far into the
seventies, and age, when it comes, comes swiftly and easily. The
feverish hurry of our earth, the decay that begins before growth has
ceased, is replaced by a ripe prolonged maturity. This modern Utopia is
an adult world. The flushed romance, the predominant eroticisms, the
adventurous uncertainty of a world in which youth prevails, gives place
here to a grave deliberation, to a fuller and more powerful emotion, to
a broader handling of life.

Yet youth is here.

Amidst the men whose faces have been made fine by thought and steadfast
living, among the serene-eyed women, comes youth, gaily-coloured,
buoyantly healthy, with challenging eyes, with fresh and eager face. . .
.

For every one in Utopia who is sane enough to benefit, study and
training last until twenty; then comes the travel year, and many are
still students until twenty-four or twenty-five. Most are still, in a
sense, students throughout life, but it is thought that, unless
responsible action is begun in some form in the early twenties, will
undergo a partial atrophy. But the full swing of adult life is hardly
attained until thirty is reached. Men marry before the middle thirties,
and the women rather earlier, few are mothers before five-and-twenty.
The majority of those who become *samurai* do so between twenty-seven
and thirty-five. And, between seventeen and thirty, the Utopians have
their dealings with love, and the play and excitement of love is a chief
interest in life. Much freedom of act is allowed them so that their
wills may grow freely. For the most part they end mated, and love gives
place to some special and more enduring interest, though, indeed, there
is love between older men and fresh girls, and between youths and
maturer women. It is in these most graceful and beautiful years of life
that such freedoms of dress as the atmosphere of Utopia permits are to
be seen, and the crude bright will and imagination of youth peeps out in
ornament and colour.

Figures come into my sight and possess me for a moment and pass, and
give place to others; there comes a dusky little Jewess, red-lipped and
amber-clad, with a deep crimson flower—I know not whether real or
sham—in the dull black of her hair. She passes me with an unconscious
disdain; and then I am looking at a brightly-smiling, blue-eyed girl,
tall, ruddy, and freckled warmly, clad like a stage Rosalind, and
talking gaily to a fair young man, a novice under the Rule. A red-haired
mother under the Lesser Rule goes by, green-gowned, with dark green
straps crossing between her breasts, and her two shock-headed children,
bare-legged and lightly shod, tug at her hands on either side. Then a
grave man in a long, fur-trimmed robe, a merchant, maybe, debates some
serious matter with a white-tunicked clerk. And the clerk's face——? I
turn to mark the straight, blue-black hair. The man must be Chinese. . .
.

Then come two short-bearded men in careless indigo-blue raiment, both of
them convulsed with laughter—men outside the Rule, who practise,
perhaps, some art—and then one of the *samurai*, in cheerful altercation
with a blue-robed girl of eight. "But you *could* have come back
yesterday, Dadda," she persists. He is deeply sunburnt, and suddenly
there passes before my mind the picture of a snowy mountain waste at
nightfall and a solitary small figure under the stars. . . .

When I come back to the present thing again, my eye is caught at once by
a young negro, carrying books in his hand, a prosperous-looking,
self-respecting young negro, in a trimly-cut coat of purple-blue and
silver.

I am reminded of what my double said to me of race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](amu12.htm#fr_30) One might assume as an
alternative to this that amidst the four-fifths of the Greek literature
now lost to the world, there perished, neglected, some book of
elementary significance, some earlier *Novum* *Organum*, that in Utopia
survived to achieve the profoundest consequences.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](amu12.htm#fr_31) In that they seem to have
profited by a more searching criticism of early social and political
speculations than our earth has yet undertaken. The social speculations
of the Greeks, for example, had just the same primary defect as the
economic speculations of the eighteenth century they began with the
assumption that the general conditions of the prevalent state of affairs
were permanent.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](amu12.htm#fr_32) *The New Atlantis*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Ten](amu13)
