[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](amu13)  [Next](amu15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0141441127/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Modern Utopia*, by H.G. Wells \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER ELEVEN

#### THE BUBBLE BURSTS

### SECTION 1

As I walk back along the river terrace to the hotel where the botanist
awaits me, and observe the Utopians I encounter, I have no thought that
my tenure of Utopia becomes every moment more precarious. There float in
my mind vague anticipations of more talks with my double and still more,
of a steady elaboration of detail, of interesting journeys of
exploration. I forget that a Utopia is a thing of the imagination that
becomes more fragile with every added circumstance, that, like a
soap-bubble, it is most brilliantly and variously coloured at the very
instant of its dissolution. This Utopia is nearly done. All the broad
lines of its social organisation are completed now, the discussion of
all its general difficulties and problems. Utopian individuals pass me
by, fine buildings tower on either hand; it does not occur to me that I
may look too closely. To find the people assuming the concrete and
individual, is not, as I fondly imagine, the last triumph of
realisation, but the swimming moment of opacity before the film gives
way. To come to individual emotional cases, is to return to the earth.

I find the botanist sitting at a table in the hotel courtyard.

"Well?" I say, standing before him.

"I've been in the gardens on the river terrace," he answers, "hoping I
might see her again."

"Nothing better to do?"

"Nothing in the world."

"You'll have your double back from India to-morrow. Then you'll have
conversation."

"I don't want it," he replies compactly.

I shrug my shoulders, and he adds, "At least with him."

I let myself down into a seat beside him.

For a time I sit restfully enjoying his companionable silence, and
thinking fragmentarily of those *samurai* and their Rules. I entertain
something of the satisfaction of a man who has finished building a
bridge; I feel that I have joined together things that I had never
joined before. My Utopia seems real to me, very real, I can believe in
it, until the metal chair-back gives to my shoulder blades, and Utopian
sparrows twitter and hop before my feet. I have a pleasant moment of
unhesitating self-satisfaction; I feel a shameless exultation to be
there. For a moment I forget the consideration the botanist demands; the
mere pleasure of completeness, of holding and controlling all the
threads possesses me.

"You *will* persist in believing," I say, with an aggressive expository
note, "that if you meet this lady she will be a person with the memories
and sentiments of her double on earth. You think she will understand and
pity, and perhaps love you. Nothing of the sort is the case." I repeat
with confident rudeness, "Nothing of the sort is the case. Things are
different altogether here; you can hardly tell even now how different
are——"

I discover he is not listening to me.

"What is the matter?" I ask abruptly.

He makes no answer, but his expression startles me.

"What is the matter?" and then I follow his eyes.

A woman and a man are coming through the great archway—and instantly I
guess what has happened. She it is arrests my attention first—long ago I
knew she was a sweetly beautiful woman. She is fair, with frank blue
eyes, that look with a sort of tender receptivity into her companion's
face. For a moment or so they remain, greyish figures in the cool
shadow, against the sunlit greenery of the gardens beyond.

"It is Mary," the botanist whispers with white lips, but he stares at
the form of the man. His face whitens, it becomes so transfigured with
emotion that for a moment it does not look weak. Then I see that his
thin hand is clenched.

I realise how little I understand his emotions.

A sudden fear of what he will do takes hold of me. He sits white and
tense as the two come into the clearer light of the courtyard. The man,
I see, is one of the *samurai*, a dark, strong-faced man, a man I have
never seen before, and she is wearing the robe that shows her a follower
of the Lesser Rule.

Some glimmering of the botanist's feelings strikes through to my slow
sympathies. Of course—a strange man! I put out a restraining hand
towards his arm. "I told you," I say, "that very probably, most
probably, she would have met some other. I tried to prepare you."

"Nonsense," he whispers, without looking at me. "It isn't that.
It's—that scoundrel——"

He has an impulse to rise. "That scoundrel," he repeats.

"He isn't a scoundrel," I say. "How do you know? Keep still! Why are you
standing up?"

He and I stand up quickly, I as soon as he. But now the full meaning of
the group has reached me. I grip his arm. "Be sensible," I say, speaking
very quickly, and with my back to the approaching couple. "He's not a
scoundrel here. This world is different from that. It's caught his pride
somehow and made a man of him. Whatever troubled them there——"

He turns a face of white wrath on me, of accusation, and for the moment
of unexpected force. "This is *your* doing," he says. "You have done
this to mock me. He—of all men!" For a moment speech fails him, then;
"You—you have done this to mock me."

I try to explain very quickly. My tone is almost propitiatory.

"I never thought of it until now. But he's——How did I know he was the
sort of man a disciplined world has a use for?"

He makes no answer, but he looks at me with eyes that are positively
baleful, and in the instant I read his mute but mulish resolve that
Utopia must end.

"Don't let that old quarrel poison all this," I say almost entreatingly.
"It happened all differently here—everything is different here. Your
double will be back to-morrow. Wait for him. Perhaps then you will
understand——"

He shakes his head, and then bursts out with, "What do I want with a
double? Double! What do I care if things have been different here?
This——"

He thrusts me weakly back with his long, white hand. "My God!" he says
almost forcibly, "what nonsense all this is! All these dreams! All
Utopias! There she is——! Oh, but I have dreamt of her! And now——"

A sob catches him. I am really frightened by this time. I still try to
keep between him and these Utopians, and to hide his gestures from them.

"It's different here," I persist. "It's different here. The emotion you
feel has no place in it. It's a scar from the earth—the sore scar of
your past——"

"And what are we all but scars? What is life but a scarring? It's
*you*—you who don't understand! Of course we are covered with scars, we
live to be scarred, we are scars! We are the scars of the past! These
*dreams*, these childish dreams——!"

He does not need to finish his sentence, he waves an unteachable
destructive arm.

My Utopia rocks about me.

For a moment the vision of that great courtyard hangs real. There the
Utopians live real about me, going to and fro, and the great archway
blazes with sunlight from the green gardens by the riverside. The man
who is one of the *samurai*, and his lady, whom the botanist loved on
earth, pass out of sight behind the marble flower-set Triton that spouts
coolness in the middle of the place. For a moment I see two working men
in green tunics sitting on a marble seat in the shadow of the colonnade,
and a sweet little silver-haired old lady, clad all in violet, and
carrying a book, comes towards us, and lifts a curious eye at the
botanist's gestures. And then——

"Scars of the past! Scars of the past! These fanciful, useless dreams!"

### SECTION 2

There is no jerk, no sound, no hint of material shock. We are in London,
and clothed in the fashion of the town. The sullen roar of London fills
our ears. . . .

I see that I am standing beside an iron seat of poor design in that grey
and gawky waste of asphalt—Trafalgar Square, and the botanist, with
perplexity in his face, stares from me to a poor, shrivelled, dirt-lined
old woman—my God! what a neglected thing she is!—who proffers a box of
matches. . . .

He buys almost mechanically, and turns back to me.

"I was saying," he says, "the past rules us absolutely. These dreams——"

His sentence does not complete itself. He looks nervous and irritated.

"You have a trick at times," he says instead, "of making your
suggestions so vivid——"

He takes a plunge. "If you don't mind," he says in a sort of quavering
ultimatum, "we won't discuss that aspect of the question—the lady, I
mean—further."

He pauses, and there still hangs a faint perplexity between us.

"But——" I begin.

For a moment we stand there, and my dream of Utopia runs off me like
water from an oiled slab. Of course—we lunched at our club. We came back
from Switzerland by no dream train but by the ordinary Bâle express. We
have been talking of that Lucerne woman he harps upon, and I have made
some novel comment on his story. I have touched certain possibilities.

"You can't conceivably understand," he says.

"The fact remains," he goes on, taking up the thread of his argument
again with an air of having defined our field, "we are the scars of the
past. That's a thing one can discuss—without personalities."

"No," I say rather stupidly, "no."

"You are always talking as though you could kick the past to pieces; as
though one could get right out from oneself and begin afresh. It is your
weakness—if you don't mind my being frank—it makes you seem harsh and
dogmatic. Life has gone easily for you; you have never been badly tried.
You have been lucky—you do not understand the other way about. You
are—hard."

I answer nothing.

He pants for breath. I perceive that in our discussion of his case I
must have gone too far, and that he has rebelled. Clearly I must have
said something wounding about that ineffectual love story of his.

"You don't allow for my position," he says, and it occurs to me to say,
"I'm obliged to look at the thing from my own point of view. . . ."

One or other of us makes a move. What a lot of filthy, torn paper is
scattered about the world! We walk slowly side by side towards the
dirt-littered basin of the fountain, and stand regarding two grimy
tramps who sit and argue on a farther seat. One holds a horrible old
boot in his hand, and gesticulates with it, while his other hand
caresses his rag-wrapped foot. "Wot does Cham'lain *si*?" his words
drift to us. " W'y, 'e says, wot's the good of 'nvesting your kepital
where these 'ere Americans may dump it flat any time they like. . . ."

(Were there not two men in green sitting on a marble seat?)

### SECTION 3

We walk on, our talk suspended, past a ruthlessly clumsy hoarding,
towards where men and women and children are struggling about a string
of omnibuses. A newsvendor at the corner spreads a newspaper placard
upon the wood pavement, pins the corners down with stones, and we
glimpse something about:

MASSACRE IN ODESSA

DISCOVERY OF HUMAN REMAINS AT CHERTSEY

SHOCKING LYNCHING OUTRAGE IN NEW

YORK STATE

GERMAN INTRIGUES GET A SET-BACK

THE BIRTHDAY HONOURS—FULL LIST

Dear old familiar world!

An angry parent in conversation with a sympathetic friend jostles
against us. "I'll knock his blooming young 'ed orf if 'e cheeks me
again. It's these 'ere brasted Board Schools——"

An omnibus passes, bearing on a board beneath an incorrectly drawn Union
Jack an exhortation to the true patriot to "Buy Bumper's British-Boiled
Jam."...

I am stunned beyond the possibility of discussion for a space. In this
very place it must have been that the high terrace ran with the gardens
below it, along which I came from my double to our hotel. I am going
back, but now through reality, along the path I passed so happily in my
dream. And the people I saw then are the people I am looking at now—with
a difference.

The botanist walks beside me, white and nervously jerky in his
movements, his ultimatum delivered.

We start to cross the road. An open carriage drives by, and we see a
jaded, red-haired woman, smeared with paint, dressed in furs, and
petulantly discontented. Her face is familiar to me, her face with a
difference.

Why do I think of her as dressed in green?

Of course!—she it was I saw leading her children by the hand!

Comes a crash to our left, and a running of people to see a cab-horse
down on the slippery, slanting pavement outside St. Martin's Church.

We go on up the street.

A heavy-eyed young Jewess, a draggled prostitute—no crimson flower for
her hair, poor girl!—regards us with a momentary speculation, and we get
a whiff of foul language from two newsboys on the kerb.

"We can't go on talking," the botanist begins, and ducks aside just in
time to save his eyes from the ferrule of a stupidly held umbrella. He
is going to treat our little tiff about that lady as closed. He has the
air of picking up our conversation again at some earlier point.

He steps into the gutter, walks round outside a negro hawker, just
escapes the wheel of a hansom, and comes to my side again.

"We can't go on talking of your Utopia," he says, "in a noise and crowd
like this."

We are separated by a portly man going in the opposite direction, and
join again. "We can't go on talking of Utopia," he repeats, "in London.
. . . Up in the mountains—and holiday-time—it was all right. We let
ourselves go!"

"I've been living in Utopia," I answer, tacitly adopting his tacit
proposal to drop the lady out of the question.

"At times," he says, with a queer laugh, "you've almost made me live
there, too."

He reflects. "It doesn't do, you know. *No!* And I don't know whether,
after all, I want——"

We are separated again by half a dozen lifted flagstones, a burning
brazier, and two engineers concerned with some underground business or
other—in the busiest hour of the day's traffic.

"Why shouldn't it do?" I ask.

"It spoils the world of everyday to let your mind run on impossible
perfections."

"I wish," I shout against the traffic, "I could *smash* the world of
everyday."

My note becomes quarrelsome. "You may accept *this* as the world of
reality, *you* may consent to be one scar in an ill-dressed compound
wound, but so—not I! This is a dream, too—this world. *Your* dream, and
you bring me back to it—out of Utopia——"

The crossing of Bow Street gives me pause again.

The face of a girl who is passing westward, a student girl, rather
carelessly dressed, her books in a carrying-strap, comes across my field
of vision. The westward sun of London glows upon her face. She has eyes
that dream, surely no sensuous nor personal dream.

After all, after all, dispersed, hidden, disorganised, undiscovered,
unsuspected even by themselves, the *samurai* of Utopia are in this
world, the motives that are developed and organised there stir dumbly
here and stifle in ten thousand futile hearts. . . .

I overtake the botanist, who got ahead at the crossing by the advantage
of a dust-cart.

"You think this is real because you can't wake out of it," I say. "It's
all a dream, and there are people—I'm just one of the first of a
multitude—between sleeping and waking—who will presently be rubbing it
out of their eyes."

A pinched and dirty little girl, with sores upon her face stretches out
a bunch of wilting violets, in a pitifully thin little fist, and
interrupts my speech. "Bunch o' vi'lets—on'y a penny."

"No!" I says curtly, hardening my heart.

A ragged and filthy nursing mother, with her last addition to our
Imperial People on her arm, comes out of a drinkshop, and stands a
little unsteadily, and wipes mouth and nose comprehensively with the
back of a red chapped hand. . . .

### SECTION 4

"Isn't *that* reality?" says the botanist, almost triumphantly, and
leaves me aghast at his triumph.

"*That!*" I say belatedly. "It's a thing in a nightmare!"

He shakes his head and smiles—exasperatingly.

I perceive quite abruptly that the botanist and I have reached the
limits of our intercourse.

"The world dreams things like that," I say, "because it suffers from an
indigestion of such people as you."

His low-toned self-complacency, like the faded banner of an obstinate
fort, still flies unconquered. And you know, he's not even a happy man
with it all!

For ten seconds or more I am furiously seeking in my mind for a word,
for a term of abuse, for one compendious verbal missile that shall smash
this man for ever. It has to express total inadequacy of imagination and
will, spiritual anæmia, dull respectability, gross sentimentality, a
cultivated pettiness of heart. . . .

That word will not come. But no other word will do. Indeed the word does
not exist. There is nothing with sufficient vituperative concentration
for this moral and intellectual stupidity of educated people. . . .

"Er——" he begins.

No! I can't endure him.

With a passionate rapidity of movement, I leave his side, dart between a
carriage and a van, duck under the head of a cab-horse, and board a bus
going westward somewhere—but anyhow, going in exactly the reverse
direction to the botanist. I clamber up the steps and thread my swaying
way to the seat immediately behind the driver.

"There!" I say, as I whack myself down on the seat and pant.

When I look round the botanist is out of sight.

### SECTION 5

But I am back in the world for all that, and my Utopia is done.

It is good discipline for the Utopist to visit this world occasionally.

But from the front seat on the top of an omnibus on a sunny September
afternoon, the Strand, and Charing Cross corner, and Whitehall, and the
great multitude of people, the great uproar of vehicles, streaming in
all directions, is apt to look a world altogether too formidable. It has
a glare, it has a tumult and vigour that shouts one down. It shouts one
down, if shouting is to carry it. What good was it to trot along the
pavement through this noise and tumult of life, pleading Utopia to that
botanist? What good would it be to recommend Utopia in this driver's
preoccupied ear?

There are moments in the life of every philosopher and dreamer when he
feels himself the flimsiest of absurdities, when the Thing in Being has
its way with him, its triumphant way, when it asks in a roar,
unanswerably, with a fine solid use of the current vernacular, "What
Good is all this—Rot about Utopias?"

One inspects the Thing in Being with something of the diffident
speculation of primitive man, peering from behind a tree at an angry
elephant.

(There is an omen in that image. On how many occasions must that
ancestor of ours have had just the Utopist's feeling of ambitious
unreality, have decided that on the whole it was wiser to go very
quietly home again, and leave the big beast alone? But, in the end, men
rode upon the elephant's head, and guided him this way or that. . . .
The Thing in Being that roars so tremendously about Charing Cross corner
seems a bigger antagonist than an elephant, but then we have better
weapons than chipped flint blades. . . .)

After all, in a very little time everything that impresses me so
mightily this September afternoon will have changed or passed away for
ever, everything. These omnibuses, these great, stalwart, crowded
many-coloured things that jostle one another, and make so handsome a
clatter-clamour, will all have gone; they and their horses and drivers
and organisation; you will come here and you will not find them.
Something else will be here, some different sort of vehicle, that is now
perhaps the mere germ of an idea in some engineer student's brain. And
this road and pavement will have changed, and these impressive great
buildings; other buildings will be here, buildings that are as yet more
impalpable than this page you read, more formless and flimsy by far than
anything that is reasoned here. Little plans sketched on paper, strokes
of a pen or of a brush, will be the first materialisations of what will
at last obliterate every detail and atom of these re-echoing actualities
that overwhelm us now. And the clothing and gestures of these
innumerable people, the character of their faces and bearing, these,
too, will be recast in the spirit of what are now obscure and impalpable
beginnings.

The new things will be indeed of the substance of the things that is,
but differing just in the measure of the will and imagination that goes
to make them. They will be strong and fair as the will is sturdy and
organised and the imagination comprehensive and bold; they will be ugly
and smeared with wretchedness as the will is fluctuating and the
imagination timid and mean.

Indeed Will is stronger than Fact, it can mould and overcome Fact. But
this world has still to discover its will, it is a world that slumbers
inertly, and all this roar and pulsation of life is no more than its
heavy breathing. . . . My mind runs on to the thought of an awakening.

As my omnibus goes lumbering up Cockspur Street, through the clatter
rattle of the cabs and carriages, there comes another fancy in my mind.
. . . Could one but realise an apocalyptic image and suppose an angel,
such as was given to each of the seven churches of Asia, given for a
space to the service of the Greater Rule. I see him as a towering figure
of flame and colour, standing between earth and sky, with a trumpet in
his hands, over there above the Haymarket, against the October glow; and
when he sounds, all the *samurai*, all who are *samurai* in Utopia, will
know themselves and one another. . . .

(Whup! says a motor brougham, and a policeman stays the traffic with his
hand.)

All of us who partake of the *samurai* would know ourselves and one
another!

For a moment I have a vision of this resurrection of the living, of a
vague, magnificent answer, of countless myriads at attention, of all
that is fine in humanity at attention, round the compass of the earth.

Then that philosophy of individual uniqueness resumes its sway over my
thoughts, and my dream of a world's awakening fades.

I had forgotten. . . .

Things do not happen like that. God is not simple, God is not
theatrical, the summons comes to each man in its due time for him, with
an infinite subtlety of variety. . . .

If that is so, what of my Utopia?

This infinite world must needs be flattened to get it on one retina. The
picture of a solid thing, although it is flattened and simplified, is
not necessarily a lie. Surely, surely, in the end, by degrees, and
steps, something of this sort, some such understanding, as this Utopia
must come. First here, then there, single men and then groups of men
will fall into line—not indeed with my poor faulty hesitating
suggestions—but with a great and comprehensive plan wrought out by many
minds and in many tongues. It is just because my plan is faulty, because
it mis-states so much, and omits so much, that they do not now fall in.
It will not be like *my* dream, the world that is coming. My dream is
just my own poor dream, the thing sufficient for me. We fail in
comprehension, we fail so variously and abundantly. We see as much as it
is serviceable for us to see, and we see no further. But the fresh
undaunted generations come to take on our work beyond our utmost effort,
beyond the range of our ideas. They will learn with certainty things
that to us are guesses and riddles. . . .

There will be many Utopias. Each generation will have its new version of
Utopia, a little more certain and complete and real, with its problems
lying closer and closer to the problems of the Thing in Being. Until at
last from dreams Utopias will have come to be working drawings, and the
whole world will be shaping the final World State, the fair and great
and fruitful World State, that will only not be a Utopia because it will
be this world. So surely it must be——

———————

The policeman drops his hand. "Come up," says the bus driver, and the
horses strain; "Clitter, clatter, cluck, clak," the line of hurrying
hansoms overtakes the omnibus going west. A dexterous lad on a bicycle
with a bale of newspapers on his back dodges nimbly across the head of
the column and vanishes up a side street.

The omnibus sways forward. Rapt and prophetic, his plump hands clasped
round the handle of his umbrella, his billycock hat a trifle askew, this
irascible little man of the Voice, this impatient dreamer, this scolding
Optimist, who has argued so rudely and dogmatically about economics and
philosophy and decoration, and indeed about everything under the sun,
who has been so hard on the botanist and fashionable women, and so
reluctant in the matter of beer, is carried onward, dreaming dreams,
dreams that with all the inevitable ironies of difference, may be
realities when you and I are dreams.

He passes, and for a little space we are left with his egoisms and
idiosyncrasies more or less in suspense.

But why was he intruded? you ask. Why could not a modern Utopia be
discussed without this impersonation—impersonally? It has confused the
book, you say, made the argument hard to follow, and thrown a quality of
insincerity over the whole. Are we but mocking at Utopias, you demand,
using all these noble and generalised hopes as the back cloth against
which two bickering personalities jar and squabble? Do I mean we are
never to view the promised land again except through a foreground of
fellow-travellers? There is a common notion that the reading of a Utopia
should end with a swelling heart and clear resolves, with lists of
names, formation of committees, and even the commencement of
subscriptions. But this Utopia began upon a philosophy of fragmentation,
and ends, confusedly, amidst a gross tumult of immediate realities, in
dust and doubt, with, at the best, one individual's aspiration. Utopias
were once in good faith, projects for a fresh creation of the world and
of a most unworldly completeness; this so-called Modern Utopia is a mere
story of personal adventures among Utopian philosophies.

Indeed, that came about without the writer's intention. So it was the
summoned vision came. For I see about me a great multitude of little
souls and groups of souls as darkened, as derivative as my own, with the
passage of years I understand more and more clearly the quality of the
motives that urge me and urge them to do whatever we do. . . . Yet that
is not all I see, and I am not altogether bounded by my littleness. Ever
and again, contrasting with this immediate vision, come glimpses of a
comprehensive scheme, in which these personalities float, the scheme of
a synthetic wider being, the great State, mankind, in which we all move
and go, like blood corpuscles, like nerve cells, it may be at times like
brain cells, in the body of a man. But the two visions are not seen
consistently together, at least by me, and I do not surely know that
they exist consistently together. The motives needed for those wider
issues come not into the interplay of my vanities and wishes. That
greater scheme lies about the men and women I know, as I have tried to
make the vistas and spaces, the mountains, cities, laws, and order of
Utopia lie about my talking couple, too great for their sustained
comprehension. When one focuses upon these two that wide landscape
becomes indistinct and distant, and when one regards that then the real
persons one knows grow vague and unreal. Nevertheless, I cannot separate
these two aspects of human life, each commenting on the other. In that
in congruity between great and individual inheres the incompatibility I
could not resolve, and which, therefore, I have had to present in this
conflicting form. At times that great scheme does seem to me to enter
certain men's lives as a passion, as a real and living motive; there are
those who know it almost as if it was a thing of desire; even for me,
upon occasion, the little lures of the immediate life are seen small and
vain, and the soul goes out to that mighty Being, to apprehend it and
serve it and possess. But this is an illumination that passes as it
comes, a rare transitory lucidity, leaving the soul's desire suddenly
turned to presumption and hypocrisy upon the lips. One grasps at the
Universe and attains—Bathos. The hungers, the jealousies, the prejudices
and habits have us again, and we are forced back to think that it is so,
and not otherwise, that we are meant to serve the mysteries; that in
these blinkers it is we are driven to an end we cannot understand. And
then, for measured moments in the night watches, or as one walks alone,
or while one sits in thought and speech with a friend, the wider
aspirations glow again with a sincere emotion, with the colours of
attainable desire. . . .

That is my all about Utopia, and about the desire and need for Utopia,
and how that planet lies to this planet that bears the daily lives of
men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix](amu15)
