[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bog00)  [Next](bog02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Book of the Goddess*, by Anna Livia Plurabelle, \[© 2002 Anna Livia
Plurabelle, All rights reserved\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

In the name of Annah the Allmaziful, the Everliving, the Bringer of
Plurabilities, haloed be her eve, her singtime sung, her rill be run,
unhemmed as it is uneven! Her untitled mamafesta memorialising the
Mosthighest has gone by many names at disjointed times....

--James Joyce, Finnegans Wake

This is a work in progress...

My spiritual beliefs emerged at an early age, circa 1970, influenced by
Robert Graves' The White Goddess, as well as many other religions which
I was exposed to in the California of the sixties. However, unlike many
Neopagans, I didn't gravitate to Wicca, Gardnerian or otherwise. It
always seemed to be a desperate attempt to recreate a past that never
was, one that I wasn't eager to participate in. If I wanted to play
Renaissance dress-up I would have joined the Society for Creative
Anachronism; however, I have no intention of being burned at the stake,
pretend or otherwise. Also, since we live an pluralistic, secular
society, *in theory*, there should be nothing to fear. So why perpetuate
an underground mentality?

After I researched the history of Wicca, I came to realize that it was
completely synthetic, and at its heart a forgery. Based on English
ceremonial magic--Golden Dawn, Crowleys' Thelema, Rosicrucianism, John
Dee's Enochian Magic, and Kabbalah; Wicca was stitched together from
whole cloth by Gerald Gardiner circa 1948, and from deeply patriarchal
sources at that. There are living Pagan traditions that go back further
than the nineteenth century, such as Afro-Caribbean religions like Vodun
and Santeria. But trust me, Wicca is not one of them. So why not make a
more palatable synthesis?

I don't think that the Goddess is displeased by Wicca; she must be
laughing, though, at all of the silly things that people do to try to
contact her. The Goddess is all around us. She's right here. In you,
your mother, your daughter, your sister, your girlfriend. She is in *you
and me*. She's right there. She loves you.

Magic *happens* when you are in love with the Goddess. It doesn't
require circles, candles, special wands/knives/pentacles. Unbidden,
magical, seeming coincidental things will start to happen. You can use
rituals, shamanistic methods such as
drums/ethenogens/chanting/prayer/power lunch, but if you are truly in
love with the Goddess, they are, on one level at least, superfluous.
That's not to say that rituals, altars, ceremonies should be spurned,
however:--the Goddess loves play, song, dance and beautiful arrangements
of found objects and texts. The point is, you can make up your own
rituals, create your own ceremonies, dream up new names for the Goddess
and see if they stick. There is no single 'right' or 'proper' way to
give homage to the Goddess; as her diversity of form is manifest, so we
shouldn't have to worship her in one way only. *What is written in this
book is just one possible synthesis*.

I believe that to worship the Goddess you shouldn't have to wait 'a year
and a day' to join a coven, or go to Wicca post-graduate school just to
start your own group. If you sincerely affirm her reality, that is
sufficient.

The Book of the Goddess is obviously a pastiche of other religious
texts. I sincerely hope that nobody will interpret this as mockery, but
as respect. I want a 'monotheaistic' Goddess-based religion, and to do
so, one must go to the great monotheistic religions. I want a religion
which doesn't negate its predecessors, but incorporates the best of
them. In this Book you'll find echoes and outright plagiarism of
Buddhist, Christian, Taoist, Jewish, Sikh, Hindu, Islamic, and even some
Pagan texts. After all, the patriarchal religions started out by
appropriating the myths and traditions that preceded them; it's time to
return the favor.

According to Marija Gimbutas, the Neolithic culture of 6500-3500 BCE
which emerged after the last Ice Age was a peaceful agrarian society
which worshipped only a Mother Goddess, with no images of a Father god.
It was an epoch of peace and sexual equality. Technology was used to
improve life rather than oppress and degrade people, or destroy the
Earth. Time was regarded as cyclic and regenerative rather than
culminating in an apocalypse where unbelievers are consigned to eternal
torture. This is the inspiration for this synthesis. *May the
summer-time come again*.

Magic is alive, Goddess is afoot...

--Anna Livia Plurabelle,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Nine Principles of the Goddess](bog02)
