[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bog21)  [Next](bog23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Book of the Goddess*, by Anna Livia Plurabelle, \[© 2002 Anna Livia
Plurabelle, All rights reserved\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 1. I acknowledge that there is one Goddess in essence, Creatrix of all existences; Her forms are infinite, She manifests Herself in our love, and we are all Her lovers.

The Goddess, in her form Amaterasu is the spirit of the first principle.

The Sun, the center of our solar system, symbolizes the central place of
the Goddess in existence. The planets which revolve around Her are
dwarfed by comparison. By acknowledging the central place of the Goddess
in our lives we pass from the dark night of the patriarchy to the dawn
of the Goddess. She dawns in her heart when we accept her principles.
This illuminates our spirits and enables us to live in balance once
more.

Ideally the ritual of acknowledgement of the Goddess should be performed
in the company of others who have done so previously. There is no reason
it cannot be done alone. After doing so, an informal celebration can
occur. There is no particular ritual required other than the three-fold
recitation of the first principle, and no documentation need be created.

When performing the ritual of the acknowledgement of the Goddess, you
should select a Goddess name to use in the circle of the Goddess; this
is typically a name of a historical Goddess, or a female name associated
with a Goddess in some way. Both women and men do so. There is no need
to disclose this name to those not on the path of the Goddess, or
actually change you legal name. The Goddess name is not particularly
secret. You can change this name if you want at any time. It is just a
mental exercise to remind you that the Goddess is in you as in all.

The Invocation of Amaterasu (time of day: dawn): "Blessed Amaterasu,
lead me into your light from the shadows. I walk in beauty. I walk in
peace. I walk in balance on the path of the Goddess. Blessed be."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Principle: Kali](bog23.md)
