[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bog26)  [Next](bog28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Book of the Goddess*, by Anna Livia Plurabelle, \[© 2002 Anna Livia
Plurabelle, All rights reserved\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 6. In the circle of the Goddess create consensus while respecting diversity of opinion. On the path of the Goddess there are many paths.

The Goddess in her form Athena is the spirit of the sixth principle.

Athena symbolizes power and the exercise of wisdom and justice. She is a
warrior Goddess, but her warcraft is not exercised in the name of
oppression; she comes to liberate. She dispenses mercy and enforces
peace where the patriarchy has created ruin. Instead of war for war's
sake, Her violence is only unleashed as a final resort. And then she
uses stealth, knowledge, and skill to overcome her enemies.

In the civilization of the Goddess, female did not dominate male, but
led by consensus; it was not just a topsy-turvy version of patriarchy.
In the patriarchy, males govern all by force, mystification and
oppression. A new civilization of the Goddess will be based on complete
sexual equality, and restore leadership by consensus, not hierarchy.

By living by these principles within the circle of the Goddess, we build
the foundation for a new society. As a stone cast into the water sends
out concentric waves, one act of reconciliation can be a powerful source
of inspiration.

One being, or any group of finite beings, can not claim to have final
answers to all questions, and the path of the Goddess is multifold, just
as the multiverse is. This is one of the key distinctions between the
religion of the Goddess and those of the patriarchy.

The Invocation of Athena (when you must resolve a conflict): "Blessed
Athena. Give us the wisdom to listen to and hear other's opinions. Help
us find the common ground so that all may be free of this dispute.
Blessed be."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seventh Principle: Maria](bog28)
