[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wil03)  [Next](wil05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

# CHAPTER II

### THE EASTERN MOTHER

THESE eighteen centuries has Europe been dreaming of the idyll of the
Oriental woman. For Asia is one, and the wondrous Maiden of all
Christian art, from the Byzantines down to yesterday--who is she, of
what is she aware, save that she is a simple Eastern mother? Of what
fasts and vigils are we told in her case, that she should have known
herself, or been known, as Queen of Saints? A rapt humility, as of one
whose robe was always, indeed, her veil; a touch of deep silence, and
that gracious richness of maternity which we can infer from the full and
rounded sweetness of the Child who grew within her shadow--what more do
we know of the Blessed Virgin than these things?

What more we may desire to know we can learn in the East itself--in
India as well as anywhere. For in the period before Islam had defined
itself, overflowing Chaldea, with the impulse, perhaps, of the pastoral
life, become aggressive, to re-make the desert--in the days when
Palestine and Lebanon were cultivated lands, inhabited by peasants of
the early type, not as yet made a burnt-offering on the altar of
crusading fury, in the closing centuries of the pre-Christian era--the
common life of Syria had a still wider identity with that of Hindus than
it has to-day. The ceremonial washings of Pharisees and Sadducees, the
constant purifying of the cup and

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

platter, the habitual repetition of a single name or prayer, which some
later phase of the Christianising consciousness has stigmatised as
"vain"--these things were not *like*, they *were*, what we know today as
Hinduism, being merely those threads of the one great web of Asiatic
life that happened to touch the Mediterranean coast.

And in matters so fundamental as the relation of mother and child,
religious teachers come only to enforce the message of the race. Is it
not said by the Prophet himself that the man who kisses the feet of his
mother finds himself in Paradise?

Yet how frail and slight and young is often the mother so tenderly
adored! No Madonna of the Sistine Chapel can give that lofty purity of
brow or delicate untouched virginity of look of any one of these Hindu
mother-maidens, whose veil half covers, half reveals, as he rests on her
left arm, her son!

The picture is too central to Indian life to have demanded literary
idealising. Poetic and mythological presentments of the perfect wife
there are in plenty: of motherhood, none. Only God is worshipped as such
by men and children and by mothers themselves as the Holy Child! Here
the half pathos of Western maternity, with its perpetual suggestion of
the brood-hen whose fledglings are about to escape her, is gone, and an
overwhelming sense of tenderness and union takes its place. To one's
mother one always remains a baby. It would be unmanly to disguise the
fact. And yet for her sake most of all it is needful to play the man,
that she may have a support on which to lean in the hour of darkness and
need. Even a wife has no power to bring division between a mother and
her son, for the wife belongs almost more to her husband's mother than
to himself. There can, therefore, be no jealousy at the entry of another
woman into his life. Instead of this, it is she who urges the marriage;
every

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

offering is sent out in her name; and the procession that wends from the
bridegroom's house to the bride's some few days before the wedding,
bearing unguents and fragrant oils for the ceremonial bath, carries her
loving invitation and goodwill to the new and longed-for daughter.

Even in Indian home life, then, full as this is of intensity of
sweetness, there is no other tie to be compared in depth to that which
binds together the mother and her child. With the coming of her
firstborn, be it boy or girl, the young wife has been advanced, as it
were, out of the novitiate. She has become a member of the authoritative
circle. It is as if the whole world recognises that henceforth there
will be one soul at least to whom her every act is holy, before whom she
is entirely without fault, and enters into the conspiracy of maintaining
her child's reverence.

For there are no circumstances sufficient in Eastern eyes to justify
criticism of a mother by her child. Their horror of the fault of
Gertrude is almost exaggerated, yet Hamlet's spell is invariably broken
when he speaks of the fact. To him, her sin should be sacred, beyond
reproach; he ought not to be able to think of it as other than his own.

The freedom and pleasantries of filial sentiment in the West are thus
largely wanting in that of the East. A determined stampede of babies of
from three to six may, indeed, take place day after day through the room
where their mother is at prayer. There may even be an attempt at such an
hour to take the city by assault, the children leaping vociferously on
the back of that good mother, whose quiet of conscience depends, as they
well know, on her perfect silence, so that she can punish them only by
turning towards them the sweetest of smiles. "Why, mother," said her
family priest to one who appealed to him regarding devotions interrupted

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

thus, "the Lord knows that you are a mother, and He makes allowance for
these things!" But though, in the Oriental home, the wickedness of rive
years old may find such vent as this, the off-hand camaraderie that
learns later to dub its parents "mater" and "governor" suggests a state
little short of savagery, and the daughter who permits herself to
precede her father is held guilty of sacrilege. The tenderness of
parents corresponds to this veneration of children, and we only learn
the secret of feelings so deep-rooted when we find that every child is a
nurseling for its first two years of life. Consciousness and even
thought are thus awakened long before the closest intimacy is broken,
and a dependence that to us of the West is but a vague imagination, to
the Eastern man or woman is a living memory.

How completely this may become an ingrained motive we see in the case of
that Mogul Emperor who is remembered simply as "the Great." For Akbar
had a foster-brother in the Rajput household whither his father Humayum
had fled before his birth and where his first six years of life were
passed. Akbar's mother dying, the Rajput Queen took the babe to nurse
with her own son, and brought up the boys in this respect as brothers,
though the guest was a Mussulman of Tamerlane's descent, and her own the
proudest Hindu blood on earth. Events swept the children apart in
boyhood, and, destiny fulfilling itself, he who came of a race of
conquerors ascended the throne of Delhi, after many years, as Emperor of
India. Then he found his Rajput subjects difficult indeed to subjugate.
In them, the national idea renewed itself again and again, and
insurrection followed insurrection. There was one name, moreover, in
every list of rebels, and men wondered at the indulgence with which the
august ruler passed it by so often. At last some

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

one ventured to point it out, protesting that justice must surely be
done now. "Justice, my friend!" said the lofty Akbar, turning on his
counsellor, "there is an ocean of milk between him and me and that
justice cannot cross!"

This long babyhood creates a tie that nothing can break. The thoughts
and feelings of womanhood never become ridiculous in the eyes of the
Indian man. It is no shame to him that his mother could not bear a
separation; it is right and natural that he should be guided by this
wish of hers. None but the hopelessly degraded ever reacts against
woman's weakness in active cruelty. If one asks some hard worker in his
old age to what he owes his habit of industry or his determined
perseverance over detail, it is more than likely that his reply will
take us back to his infancy, and the wishes that a young mother, long
dead, may have expressed for him. Or the man, in perplexity as to the
course he should pursue, will go as naturally as a child, to test his
question in the light of her feminine intuition. In all probability, she
is utterly unlearned, but he knows well the directness of her mind, and
judges rightly that wisdom lies in love and experience, having but
little to do with letters.

Surely one of the sweetest happenings was that of a little boy of six
who became in later life extremely distinguished. His mother, too shy to
express the wish for instruction to her learned husband, confided in her
son, and day after day he would toddle home from the village school,
slate and pencil in hand, to go once more through his morning's lesson
with her, and so, with mutual secrecy, she was taught to read by her own
child! With almost all great men in India the love of their mothers has
been a passion. It is told of a famous Bengali judge who died some
twenty-five years ago--one whose judicial decisions were recorded and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

quoted, even by the Englishmen who heard them, as precedents in English
law, it is told of this man, when on his deathbed, that his mother
stumbled and hurt her foot on the threshold of his room one morning, as
she came after bathing to visit him. Another moment, and, weak as he
was, he had crept across the floor, and lay before her, kissing the
wounded foot again and again, and bathing it in hot tears of
self-reproach for the pain it suffered. Such stories are remembered and
repeated in Indian society, not because they occasion. surprise, but
because they make the man's own name holy. The death scene with Aase
would redeem Peer Gynt himself. None who is sound in this basic
relationship of life can be altogether corrupt in the rest, nor can his
decisions, however adverse, be completely repugnant to us. How curious
are the disputes that agitate Christendom as to the sentiment one may
fittingly indulge towards the mother of a beloved Son! Is her supreme
position in His life not self-evident? What, then, could be more
convincing of union with Him than sweetness of feeling and words of
endearment addressed to her? And so, with its wonderful simplicity, the
great heart of the East sweeps aside our flimsy arguments and holds up
to us the fact itself.

But it is not the great alone who worship motherhood in India. Never can
I forget the long hours of one hot March day, when I sat by the bedside
of a boy who was dying of plague. His home was of the humblest, a mud
hut with a thatched roof. His family were Sudras, or working-folk. Even
his father, it appeared, could not read or write. The boy was eleven or
twelve years of age, an only child, and he was doomed. The visitor's
sole real usefulness lay in taking precautions against the spread of the
disease.

Amongst the veiled and silent women who came

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

and went at the other side of the little court where the boy lay, was
one who slipped noiselessly to his bedside whenever she could, and
exposed herself to the infection with a recklessness born of ignorance.
At last I attempted to reason with her, urging her, as gently as I
could, to remain at some distance from the lad, and thus avoid the
danger for herself and others.

She turned to obey without a word, but as she went the tears poured down
her poor thin cheeks, and lifting the corner of her sari to wipe them
away, she tried to stifle the sobs she could not altogether repress. At
that moment the words reached me from the doorway. "She is his mother."
What I did can be imagined. Suddenly I discovered that the boy must be
fanned, and that there was a place behind his pillow out of the line of
the air current. Here, with his head almost resting on her feet, his
mother sat henceforth, crouched up, attending to her child through happy
hours.

Often he would grow delirious, and forget her presence. Then he would
toss his head from side to side, and his fever-lighted eyes stared
blankly at me, while he uttered his one cry, "Ma! Ma! Mataji!--Mother!
Mother? *honoured* Mother!" To my Western ears it seemed a strange cry
for a child of the slums! Sometimes, as memory returned, he would smile
at me, mistaking me for her, and once he snatched at my hand and then
carried his own to his lips. Sweet, unknown mother, forgive me these
thefts of love, that rent the veil from a graciousness so perfect, an
adoration so deep!

That day, alas, was their last together. All through the hours, the
child had struggled to repeat the name of God. Late in the afternoon he
stumbled on a hymn that was much sung at the time about the streets; but
he could not say it, and it was my part to take up the words and stand
repeating them

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

beside him. A smile of relief passed over his face; he lay quiet for a
moment. Then his breath came shorter and shorter, and as the sun set,
with his mother's eyes upon his face, he died.

Of such stuff as this are the teeming millions of the Hindu people made.
In moments of mortal agony, when Western lips would frame a prayer,
perhaps half an oath, the groan that they utter is ever the cry of the
child in its deepest need, "Oh, Mother!"

But it is easy to multiply instances. What we want is that epic of
motherhood, of which each separate mother and her child are but a single
line or stanza, that all-compelling imagination of the race, which must
for ever be working itself out through the individual.

We talk glibly of Dante's "Vision of Hell." How many of us have looked
into hell, or even seen it from afar off, that we should appreciate what
it means to descend there? When the gloom of insanity falls upon the
soul so that it turns to rend and destroy its dearest and best, when the
blight of some dread imagination covers us with its shadow, is it lover,
or child, or servant, who will still find in our maimed and maleficent
presence his chiefest good? There is One indeed whom we cannot imagine
as forsaking us. One whose will for us has been the law of
righteousness, and yet for whose help we shall cry out instinctively in
the moment of the commission of a crime. And like the love of God in
this respect is, to Hindu thinking, that of a mother. Transcending the
wife's, which may fluctuate with the sweetness bestowed upon it, the
mother's affection, by its very nature, grows deeper with deep need, and
follows the beloved even into hell. A yearning love that can never
refuse us; a benediction that for ever abides with us; a presence from
which we cannot grow away; a heart in which

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

we are always safe; sweetness unfathomed, bond unbreakable, holiness
without a shadow--all these indeed, and more, is motherhood. Small
wonder that the innermost longing of every Hindu is to find himself at
home in the Universe, with all that comes thereby of joy or sorrow, even
as a baby lying against its mother's heart! This is the dream that is
called Nirvana, Freedom. It is the ceasing from those preferences that
withhold us that is called Renunciation.

The very word "mother" is held to be sacred, and good men offer it to
good women for their protection. There is no timely service that may not
be rendered to one, however young or beautiful, by the passing stranger,
if only he first address her thus. Even a father, looking at some small
daughter, and struggling to express the mystery of futurity that he
beholds in her, may address her as "little mother." And the mother of
the nation, Uma Himavutee, is portrayed always as a child, thought of
always as a daughter of the house. In motherhood alone does marriage
become holy; without it, the mere indulgence of affection has no right
to be. This is the true secret of the longing for children. And to reach
that height of worship in which the husband feels his wife to be his
mother, is at once to crown and end all lower ties.

Who that has ever watched it can forget a Hindu woman's worship of the
Holy Child? A small brass image of the Baby Krishna lies, or kneels at
play, in a tiny cot, and through the hours of morning, after her bath
and before her cooking, the woman, who may or may not herself be wife
and mother, sits offering to this image flowers and the water of the
bath, fruits, sweets, and other things--her oblations interspersed with
constant acts of meditation and silent prayer. She is striving to

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

worship God as the Child Saviour, struggling to think of herself as the
Mother of God. She is ready enough to give her reason, if we ask her.
"Does my feeling for my children change according to what they do for
me?" she questions in return: "Even so should one love God. Mothers love
most those who need most. Even so should one love God." The simple
answer is worth a world of theology. Nor is it forgotten presently that
the other children, made of flesh and blood, and answering to her call,
are likewise His images. In every moment of feeding, or training, or
play, of serving or using or enjoying, she may make her dealing with
these an act of devotion. It was her object, during the hours of
worship, to come face to face with the Universal Self. Has she done
this, or has she brooded over the ideal sentiment till she has made of
herself the perfect mother?

By her child, again, her intention can never be doubted. She may turn on
him now a smile and then a face of sorrow, now a word of praise and
again an indignant reproach. But always, equally, she remains the
mother. The heart of hearts of her deed is unfailing love. She knows
well, too, that nothing her babies do can mean anything else. The sunny
and the petulant, the obedient and the wilful, are only seeking so many
different ways to express a self-same dependence. To each she accords
the welcome of his own nature. In such a reconciliation of opposites, in
such a discovery of unity in variety, lies the whole effort and trend of
Eastern religion.

For what thought is it that speaks supremely to India in the great word
"Mother"? Is it not the vision of a love that never seeks to possess,
that is, content simply to *be*--a giving that could not wish return: a
radiance that we do not even dream of grasping, but in which we are
content to bask,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

letting the eternal sunshine play around and through us?

And yet, and yet, was there ever an ideal of such strength as this, that
was not firm-based on some form of discipline? What, then, is the price
that is paid by Hindu women for a worship so precious? The price is the
absolute inviolability of marriage. The worship is, at bottom, the
worship of steadfastness and purity. If it were conceivable to the Hindu
son that his mother could cease for one moment to be faithful to his
father--whatever the provocation, the coldness, or even cruelty, to
which she might be subjected--at that moment his idealism of her would
become a living pain. A widow remarried is no better in Hindu eyes than
a woman of no character, and this is the case even where the marriage
was only betrothal, and the young *fiancée* has become what we know as a
child-widow.

This inviolability of the marriage tie has nothing whatever to do with
attraction and mutual love. Once a wife, always a wife, even though the
bond be shared with others, or remain always only a name. That other men
should be only as shadows to her, that her feet should be ready at all
times to go forth on any path, even that of death, as the companion of
her husband, these things constitute the purity of the wife in India. It
is told of some wives with bated breath, how, on hearing of the
approaching death of the beloved, they have turned, smiling, and gone to
sleep, saying, "I must precede, not follow!" and from that sleep they
never woke again.

But if we probe deep enough, what, after all, is purity? Where and when
can we say it is, and how are we to determine that here and now it is
not? What is there sacred in one man's monopoly? or if it be of the mind
alone, how can any physical test be rightly imposed?

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

Purity in every one of its forms is the central pursuit of Indian life.
But even the passion of this search grows pale beside the remorseless
truthfulness of Hindu logic. There is ultimately, admits India, no
single thing called purity: there is the great life of the impersonal,
surging through the individual, and each virtue in its turn is but
another name for this.

And so the idea of the sanctity of motherhood, based on the
inviolability of marriage, finds due and logical completion in the still
greater doctrine of the sacredness of religious celibacy. It is the
towering ideal of the supersocial life--"As Mount Meru to a fire-fly"
compared to that of the householder--which gives sanction and relation
to all social bonds. In proportion as the fact of manhood becomes
priesthood, does it attain its full glory; and the mother, entering into
the prison of a sweet dedication, that she may bestow upon her own child
the mystery of breath, makes possible in his eyes, by the perfect
stainlessness of her devotion, the thought of that other life whose head
touches the stars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of the Hindu Woman as Wife](wil05.md)
