[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wil07)  [Next](wil09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# CHAPTER VI

### THE IMMEDIATE PROBLEMS OF THE ORIENTAL WOMAN

THE student of Greek vases cannot fail to be struck by the frequent
repetition of a single theme--the procession of women to and from the
well. In ancient Greece, in Palestine, and in India up to the era of
water-taps and street hydrants, that is to say till the other day, the
women had an established social centre, the well from which the
community drew its supply of drinking water., Hither, in the last hours
before sundown, came the maidens of various households, young
daughters-in-law, maybe, in charge of some elderly aunt or
mother-in-law, or with each other's company for chaperonage, each
bearing her shining metal vessels to be filled. And thence, their mutual
talk and task being ended, went the girls to their homes, with towering
loads some two or three pots high, and superb swaying walk. Sometimes,
it is said, for a trial of skill, they would run and skip, and even
dance, as they went along the road, and never a drop of water spilled
the while. The hour was held in great esteem. The way was avoided by
men, and the women proved, what all women know, that their real motive
in dressing well is to compete with each other, not to shine in the eyes
of the sterner sex. Showy silver anklets, the pearl-decorated pad or
ring on which the water-pots rested on the head, saris draped as
severely as in

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greek statues--all
these beauties wire arranged for the discriminating envy or sympathy of
sister eyes, not for the enjoyment of a being who may be trusted to
think his own wife and sisters beautiful, yet cannot do them the honour
to remember what jewels and clothes they wear.

For a vanity not less than that which chooses a gown in Paris, can go to
so simple a matter as the fitting of a dark-blue sari against a fair
complexion, that the wearer may look "like the full moon in the midnight
sky," the placing of opal or diamond on one nostril or the other, or the
selecting of a glass bangle of white or green, according to the tint of
the brown skin. The vanity may be no less, and the highest skill always
desires the eye of the keenest connoisseur.

This picture of the women drawing water has its pendant in the cluster
of men who gather for friendly smoke or chat at evening about the
smouldering log, lighted on the outskirts of the village by any
wandering sannyasin who may have taken up his abode for a few days
beneath the local banyan tree. But this suggests a wider, more
cosmopolitan relation. The men's talk is apt to be of other lands than
their own, and the strange customs and lapses of customs prevailing
there. Their interests are rather general, abstract, impersonal. For the
yellow-robed guest of the village is, it must be remembered, a traveller
of the ancient time. He has not journeyed in railway trains and lived in
hotels. Rather, tramping his way from village to village, he has shared,
at each halting-place, in its personal drama; has begged a meal daily
from door to door; has eaten, therefore, the characteristic food, cooked
and served according to the ways of each district. By such modes the
geographical sense of this old-time wayfarer is developed far beyond
that of a generation that lives on maps and learns from the schedules

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

of facts known as newspaper reports and the journals of other men's
travels. And it is his geographical knowledge that he shares with the
men of the 'tillage where he eats and sleeps for a few days. In the old
Sanskrit books, kings are represented as receiving such guests with the
question, "What have you seen elsewhere?" and asking before they depart,
"And what have you noted here?"

But amongst the women gathered about the well it was the civic life that
found expression, the civic life of the village or small township. Here
they could form a consolidated feminine opinion, of great weight in
local affairs, and exchange the news of the day with each other. The
better organisation of public convenience now deprives them of the
laborious necessity of meeting in the old way; but it is much to be
desired that, with the dying out of their ancient forms and
institutions, new occasions of assembly and new subjects of discussion
might spontaneously arise. At present Indian emotion spends itself more
and more within the home. Woman, always dominant in private life, by her
very affection is cooperating with the loss of public institutions to
restrict the activity of Man. Surely, then, Europe has no right to grow
contemptuous if rich men prove effeminate and poor men inefficient, or
taunt India with the fact that she has not yet seized the ethos of the
West, that her princes send out no expeditions to discover the South
Pole, and her youth grow up with no consuming curiosity about rocks and
stars; for the European organisation quietly defeats all through which
the people are accustomed to find expression and yet fails to call them
to new responsibilities, in which their mind and character could receive
adequate scope and stimulus in a different form.

It is quite evident that if the centre of social

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

gravity is some day to be shifted, if the intellectual atmosphere of
India is yet to be saturated with fresh ideals, not only must her
womanhood participate in the results of the implied revolution, but they
must contribute largely to bringing it about. For it is the home, not
the factory, that fills life with inspiration; and the school, in
British India, is no more than a mill or institution in which children
master the reading and writing necessary to future clerkships, as-they
might learn the technical processes of any other industry. A
census-taking, index-making age conceives that without literacy there is
no education, as if to read the *Strand Magazine* were greater than to
be the mother of Shakespeare. With such an age it is difficult to argue
regarding the existing education of a Hindu woman. Yet if a thorough
training in a national mode of living, and that extremely complicated,
be an education, she has something; for the ordinary wife can act in any
capacity, from that of cook or dairy-mistress to that of chief of
commissariat and general administrator for a hundred or more persons If
a knowledge of language, poetry, and folk-lore, with all thereby con-
noted of logical and imaginative development, form an education, she has
this, sometimes to the extent of understanding and reciting works in
Sanskrit. More: poor women who may not be able to read and write are
deeply, and even passionately, possessed of the spirit of the ancient
culture. The philosophy of Maya, not seldom bewildering to the Western
*savant*, has no difficulty for them. They understand to a hair the
meaning of the word *Nirvana*. It is no one special command to deny
oneself and take up a cross and follow, that has weight with them; but
the bearing of the great law of renunciation on the personal realisation
of freedom. Add to all this the inbred habit of life in community, and
it will appear that under the old

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

scheme women found not only a training and a discipline, but also a
career.

It was a preparation and an opportunity fitted only, it is true, to the
soil on which it grew. This limitation pervades the whole of the Indian
civilisation. The Indian mind is more contented with the architectural
and natural beauties of the home, more free from a desire for extraneous
decorative detail, than any other taste in the world, perhaps, and in
the same way it has devised a daily round of duty which belongs strictly
to its place. The good mother-in-law occupies the position of the lady
of the manor in English feudal days. But whereas the manorial household
could be transplanted to any age or clime almost intact--Japan,
Rajputana, Turkey, Scandinavia, and Spain furnishing parallels fairly
complete--the same is not true of the Indian type. Here the girls
gathered round its head are the wives of her sons, instead of her
husband's vassals. And it is the care of babies, the treatment of
animals, and all kinds of cooking and domestic offices, rather than deft
spinning and dainty embroidery, with which they are busied under her.
Caste equalises the dignity of beggar and king, and the form of work is
merely a question of wealth.

At the same time, while every detail of the Indian domestic system is
justified arid justifiable, we cannot refuse to admit that some great
educational readjustment is necessary at this moment, if only because
long habit blinds the eye to the forest that looks much upon the trees;
but when the trees grow too scanty it is the forest, as a whole, that
demands our care. To-day every Indian woman can cook, and that well. But
she cannot sew, and she has nothing but gossip and prayer when the
afternoon siesta is over wherewith to occupy her leisure. The
great-grandmothers of the present generation were as busy in spinning as
our own ancestresses, and one

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

of the chief domestic joys was to take the yarn to the weaver with the
measure of grain for which he would make it into a web. To-day, alas,
the weaver finds it difficult enough to maintain himself by the fine
work, for which there is always some market, shrunken though it be, and
the common sari of the women's daily wear is spun and woven by
machinery, far away in Manchester or Glasgow. Here also, then, the
modern revolution has narrowed her lot. A like destruction is being felt
in all directions. Higher standards of comfort are rapidly arising. The
days when the little boys in the village school wrote on the floor in
sand are long past. Even the palm-leaf manuscript is little more than a
memory. Steel pen, instead of wooden stylus, cheap paper, smooth writing
fluids are everywhere. Soap <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md) is
becoming a necessity. European utensils for cleaning, for cooking, and
even for eating, are coming into use. Certain kinds of furniture are
growing familiar. Kerosene and tin and modern glass are to be found in
every village. But this does not mean that the people are learning to
provide these things for themselves, much less does it imply that they
are mastering their use and incorporating their production under the old
caste-crafts, bringing their Indian taste and intelligence to bear upon
creating new modifications of Western forms. What it does mean is that
the country has already become a host to the parasite of European trade.
Absolutely and fatally obedient to laws of patent and copyright, the
people accept any new convenience as it stands, allow the village
craftsman to go by the door, cease

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

to use the old-fashioned utensil, whatever it may have been, and allow
the stereotyped ugliness of the new acquisition to corrupt taste and
standards as long as it lasts. Even the brass-smiths have quietly
accepted the fact that their metal is cheapest brought in sheets from
Europe, and housewives mourn in vain that their beautiful brass cooking
vessels are no longer fit to be heirlooms, as were those of their
grandmothers. In all this India is not more careless or easy of
corruption than European countries themselves. She has more to lose and
is more defenceless, that is all, and she has not learnt to think of
such questions on the national scale.

Orthodoxy does, of course, oppose some obstacle to this process of
decay. It would still be accounted an act of vulgarity if a man of means
gave a piece of English cotton as wearing apparel to a friend. Soap,
kerosene oil, and the substitution of chairs for mats, are still
regarded askance by the leaders of pious opinion. But this opposition
savours too much of mere prejudice. Therefore it can only retard, it
cannot overcome, the evil. What is wanted in this regard is a dynamic
orthodoxy, capable of enforcing a decision that only what Indian people
can make ought Indian persons to use. And such a canon, it is needless
to point out, would have to find its root and strength in the women, who
are buyers and consumers, reaching the craftsmen through constituted
social and religious channels. Once having obtained a grip of the
national conscience, no political or commercial cajolery would be of the
slightest avail against this principle; but then, if the people were
capable of understanding and carrying out such an idea--women, priests,
pundits, heads of castes, and labourers--the whole problem would already
have been solved, and there would be no disaster from which India must
be saved.

It is clear that as the objective of the old education

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

of Indian women lay in *character*, the new cannot aim lower. The
distinctive element, therefore, in their future training cannot be
reading and writing--though these will undoubtedly grow more common--but
the power to grasp clearly and with enthusiasm the ideas of nationality,
national interests, and the responsibility of the individual to race and
country. Even in Europe, habits and opinions tend to stereotype and
harden themselves quite as much as in the Orient. But at present there
is still a certain flexibility. This flexibility rather than any
definite change is what the East requires. It is a form of freedom and
mastery. European communities, in consequence of this mobility of
structure, enjoy a power of intelligent co-operation towards new but
agreed ends which is universally desirable. India has the power to act,
but the end must be familiar. A few women will organise themselves at a
moment's notice to cook for hundreds or even thousands of guests,
without the least waste of energy or temper such as Western women would
incur in organising a soup-kitchen. But if we call the guests "the
unemployed," and refer to them as "a social problem," the Oriental
becomes bewildered, as would we in like manner were it proposed to us to
regard them all as visitors. It is clear that the Western mode of
approaching such tasks can only be acquired by India, if it be
necessary, through an enlarged idea of the public Ife.

When the women see themselves in their true place, as related to the
soil on which they live, as related to the past out of which they have
sprung; when they become aware of the needs of their own people, on the
actual colossal scale of those needs; when the mother-heart has once
awakened in them to beat for land and people, instead of family,
village, and homestead alone, and when the mind is set to explore facts
in the service of that heart--then and

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

then alone shall the future of Indian womanhood dawn upon the race in
its actual greatness; then shall a worthy education be realised; and
then shall the true national ideal stand revealed.

Such a change, however, is only possible as a direct growth out of old
conceptions. The national idea cannot be imposed from without--it must
develop from within. And this will be in full congruity with the
national religions. Islam, in the days of its power, rejoiced to
establish itself as Indian on Indian soil. The architectural works of
the Mogul emperors are full of enthusiasm for the Indian past, for the
Indo-Saracenic style owes as much to Rajputana as to Mecca and
Constantinople. Asiatic among Asiatics--there was no wide gap between
Mussulman conquerors and Hindu conquered: no gap in taste, or morals, or
style of thought and education. The newcomer settled down as a child of
the land, in his own home. His children were first Indian, and only in
the second place members of the Mohammedan confraternity. Today, under
the necessity of a secular expression, there is nothing whatever to
prevent him from projecting himself upon the cause of his own people,
both Hindu and Mohammedan, and working for them with that same power
with which his fathers once made the deserts of Arabia ring. For the
Hindu, the point should be still more obvious. His avatars have lived
always for humanity. They have appeared in the hour of the national
need. They have been followed by waves of popular and political
rejuvenance. Neither Hinduism nor Mohammedanism has been weak in putting
forward the claims of soil. The sacred texts go so far as to say that he
who dies for his country at once attains the Beatific Vision. With
regard to their fundamental duties, both faiths stand like converging
artillery in the world of motive, ready to shoot forth individuals

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

upon the great common task of remaking the motherland.

But for all this again, there must be a re-reading of orthodoxy, a
re-discovery of essentials. Already the revolution has commenced that is
to bring this about. Already India has begun to realise that if poverty
is to be defeated, if national efficiency is to be achieved, she dare
not continue much longer to glorify the element of blind refusal. Vital
orthodoxy, however we define it, certainly cannot be the child of fear
alone, always on the defensive, never becoming aggressive, its best
courage that of endurance or resignation. He whose idea has ceased to
advance is already in retreat. There was a time when everything in India
was her own. In those days she went forward freely, welcoming the new as
an advance in power and knowledge, not meeting it with terror as a
defilement. Indian orthodoxy, then, must learn once more to struggle
forward. But we are met by a host of questions. Amongst many conflicting
paths, which is to be chosen? Towards what goal? By what methods? What
is to be included? What eliminated? Here are the actual difficulties.
Every one is agreed that certain things must be done, but no one can
distinctly picture how.

Yet the weakness is easy enough to probe. The West conquers the East, as
long as the East on the one hand shuns it as contamination, or, on the
other, accepts it as a bribe. The idea of assimilating just so much of
Western science as shall enable India to compete in the same market by
the same processes as the West is as delusive as it is mean. The idea of
refusing to participate in Western methods, and dying of starvation if
need be, martyrs to national purity, is manifestly impracticable for the
people at large, even if it had not long ago been carried out of reach
of all on the high tides of economic disaster. What then?

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

*Western Science must be recognised as holy. The idea of that Science
must be grasped and pursued for its own sake*. Modern astronomy must
claim its "star-intoxicated" prophets in the East as in the West.
Geology, physics, biology, and the sublime and growing sciences of man,
history and morals, must be felt in India as new modes of the
apprehension of truth, studied passionately without ulterior object, as
the religious experience is now followed, at the cost of all.

Such an attitude is, indeed, of the very essence of the Asiatic genius.
To it mathematics have never sunk to the position which they tend to
occupy in Europe--a convenient means for the measurement of secular
utilities--but have always been held as a sacred inviolable method of
expressing the fundamental unity of phenomena. The learned man will
mention this subject with the same throb in his voice that we may give
to a great picture or a moving poem. The Indian imagination regards all
knowledge of beatitude. Nor is any intellect in the world more keenly
logical and inquisitive, or at the same time more disinterested and
comprehensive in its grasp. A great Indian school of science is
therefore no absurdity, but, under necessary conditions, one of the most
attainable of all ambitions. The Hindu has but to realise that the world
waits for the hundred and eight Upanishads of modern knowledge; the
Mussulman needs only to understand that the time is again ripe for
Averrhoes and Avicenna; and both will make, not only their own
opportunity, but a new era in culture as well.

This is not merely an inspiration of defence. Oriental methods have had
an unparalleled success in producing a widely extended amelioration of
conduct and cultivation of mind. Any large country town in India may be
observed, and the number of its saints and scholars counted. Not even
the most

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

favoured of London suburbs can boast, of its commercial or scientific
order, so many men severely learned. But the old Indian learning is now
complete. The task is done. There is nothing left for the common mind to
add.

It is necessary, therefore, as a vindication of that great intellectual
vigour which it has actually bred, that new worlds of mental conquest
should be found, new subjects opened, and a new development initiated,
in which the common people shall measure their strength against the
modern world, and learn their power.

Out of such a revolution, but as an incident, not as its main goal, must
inevitably arise a development of mechanical skill which, in the East,
might steer clear of the demoralisation produced elsewhere by the
worship of usefulness and privilege. It is certain that if India throw
herself freely upon a mechanical era, she will restore to the factory
hand those human qualities and ethical prerogatives which in the West he
tends more and more to lose.

In order to make such changes possible, however, there would need to be
a spontaneous appearance, in various parts of the country, of persons
with the synthetic habit of mind and heart. India is actually a unity,
but few of her people realise the fact, and fewer still feel the
appropriate emotion. No parochial ambition can, at this juncture, save
the motherland. The Mahratta may not seek the good of Maharashtra, nor
the Sikh of the Punjab. There must be no revival of forgotten feuds. Not
in such things lies the thrill of nationality. Rather, all must unite in
a common glorification of India and the whole Indian past. Each must
recognise what the others have contributed. There must be thinkers able
to take advantage of every accident in local history, and to turn it to
the advantage of the one great cause. The passion of nationality

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

was so strong in the Punjab, in Rajputana, and under Sivaji, that it
broke even the power of the Mogul Empire. Yet the fact that she has
never had any definite and consolidated form of her own may be the
critical element in the history of Bengal, to make her the welder and
fuser of all the provinces to-day.

Such an inspiration as this is social as well as political. It is
religious in the highest sense. It has to fill home, school, and
market-place. There is no question therefore as to its requiring the
cooperation of woman with man. For her, also, there is a new and greater
orthodoxy. She must become of her own freedom that which custom now
makes her. Eastern piety is often good bacteriology. Sitola, the
Smallpox Goddess, is depicted as riding on the washerman's donkey, an
unclean beast. But requiring to be worshipped with water and broom, and
isolation of the patient. The myth is admirable. Europe can show nothing
of its kind so good. But the next step is, obviously, facts at first
hand. Woman must be enabled to know, think, and judge freely, on all
questions such as those of food and the public health. The severe
exigencies of modern labour make the old food and cooking entirely
insufficient. Dyspepsia has become a national curse; yet this is
certainly one of the difficulties that could be overcome. An extended
choice of food-stuffs, and the alternative of simple methods of
preparation, would be fully consonant with orthodoxy, which has always
aimed at making the body the servant of man, and not his master.

With increasing poverty, and the tendency to break up the family into
smaller groups, the career within the community-house is becoming
limited. This will have to be counterbalanced by some increase of the
power to consider national and communal responsibilities. The
Mahabharata, the Ramayana

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and the Puranas, represent the culture of nationality popularised. Every
ritual, every sacrament, is full of unwritten history. But the times
demand a direct and simple knowledge of the fact even more than of the
vehicle. To meet this demand, however, is not to attack orthodoxy, but
to fulfil it, to carry it to its highest power.

There is no question here of educating an intellect hitherto left in
barbarous ignorance. Only those can do vital service to the Indian woman
who, in a spirit of entire respect for her existing conventions and her
past, recognise that they are but offering new modes of expression to
qualities already developed and expressed in other ways under the old
training. Therefore the fundamental task of grasping and conveying the
inspiration of the West must be performed by Easterns for Easterns, and
not by foreigners.

Nor ought the result of such a process to be in any sense
denationalising. To assimilate an ideal and make our own persons a
demonstration of its power--this is not imitation. A merely imitative
apprehension of the West--like that of the clerk in his office, the
constitutional agitator in politics, the manufacturer who knows only
enough of mechanical industry for a cheek-by-jowl competition with
Manchester--is indeed the parent of death to the Orient. But to achieve
a living, forceful, heart-to-heart appropriation of the Western energy
and its immediate re-translation into Eastern terms, is not death but
life.

The East suffers, as has been said, from the very perfection of its
formulæ. "Tell the truth," says the commandment in the Occident; and
again, "Be courteous in thy speech." How often have we not seen crude
logic struggle blindly to co-ordinate these conflicting dicta, with how
many degrees of ill-success! But in the East, for more than two

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

thousand years, people have lived under the shadow of Manu's saying:
"Tell the truth, but not that which is unpleasant; tell the pleasant,
but not that which is untrue." Alas, its completeness leaves nothing to
be added! That unconquered space winch the mind needs to bring out its
fullest potentiality; that strip of wilderness to be empirically
observed and reclaimed, and finally annexed to the territory of
prescribed law; that sense of personal adventure on the great ocean of
truth, there to encounter tempests of doubt and negation and overcome by
slowly gathered knowledge only,--all these are now most attainable in
the view of the Universe which is presented by Western science.

Very little that deserves the name of Education has been attempted in
modern India. A machine has been created; an organisation stands ready.
But nothing in all this represents the work of the people themselves,
for ends which they spontaneously perceive to be good in themselves.
Moreover, liberal ideals of what Education means are wanting. It is
obvious that no system can be complete till secular culture exists in
all forms and grades as does religious culture now, from that of the
child playing with sense-impressions, up to the solitary student,
standing on mountain-peaks of knowledge where human foot before his has
never trodden, and yet finding abundance of sympathy and understanding
and new stimulus again, in the social matrix out of which he climbed,
when he returns to recount his vision and his wandering.

The process of creating a great nation out of the rich civilisations and
faiths of an Eastern land is by no means simple. Yet there is not a
single weapon that is not ready to hand. Long ages of peace (for the
trifling feuds of dynasties do not disturb the fundamental peace of
agricultural peoples) have somewhat puerilised the military factors in
the faiths.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yet still the
fencing is exhibited at the Mohurrum; still the weapons are carried in
procession at the feast of Durga; still the great Kayasth <span
id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6.md) families of Bengal and the Kshatriyas of
Rajputana practise the annual Worship and Tribute of the Sword. And
still the women throng to the temples with lighted candles on the eve of
the Birth-feast of the War Lord in December, to make it the most
imposing in the year. A still more extraordinary paradox lies in the
fact that it is India the peaceful, the patient, the entirely
submissive, which possesses the most militant and stirring of all the
world's Evangels--the Gospel of the Blessed One, uttered from a
war-chariot on the actual field of battle.

There is another feature necessary to the making of a great people--a
sense of community among all classes. Sharp distinction of races and
manners has made the pariahs of the South a byword among the nations,
and the very name of India a synonym for caste as opposed to
nationality. Yet even in the South, and amongst these same pariahs, the
effort has been made. The whole life of Ramanuja, the great religious
leader, was as passionate an offering to the despised and rejected as
that of the Teacher of Galilee is represented to have been. Even here,
then, the national consolidation sounds no new note in Hindu ears. Islam
is nothing if not a great mission of fraternity. Guru Nanak in the
North, <span id="fr_7"></span>[†](#fn_7.md) and Ramanuja in the
South, <span id="fr_8"></span>[‡](#fn_8.md) have preached the same doctrine
in words and lives made ever memorable. And if once the mother-heart of
India can

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

grasp the meaning and necessity of these incidents in its own history,
we shall see all barriers broken, all difficulties overcome, and a new
age inaugurated that shall be at once the flowering-point and blossom of
all the realisations of the past.

But how do we propose that Indian women shall grasp an idea of such
vastness as this of Nationality? How are they to acquire the knowledge
necessary to define it? And how are they to grow in clear and accurate
mastery of essential facts? Is it to be expected that the conventional
channels of their education--the Homeric singers who chant the epics
from door to door--is it to be expected that these shall transform
themselves at a stroke from pious rhapsodists into heroic bards,
chanting of nationality? No, it is clear enough that such a change could
only befall them as result, not cause, of some great upheaval, from
which the nation herself had emerged radiant, victorious, impressing
herself upon the imaginations of her own children for ages to come. But
the spring of such an upheaval, where is that to be found?

In answer to such questions we can only assure ourselves that when the
world is ripe for some epochal idea--as the Indian world is surely ripe
today--that idea pours itself in from all sides upon the waiting
consciousness. The very stones speak it, and the timbers out of the wall
cry out and answer them; some immense struggle for the common good
precipitates itself; idea and struggle act and react, each throwing the
other into greater distinctness, till the goal of both is finally
achieved.

This is the more true in these days of telegraphy and letter-writing, of
a common language and cheap print. A process which in Asoka's India
would have taken at least two hundred years, may now be accomplished in
a single decade. And wherever a word of English goes, the national idea
constitutes

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

for itself the necessity of an apostolate. No one can say exactly how it
will come to birth among the women. Some will catch it for themselves.
Some will gather it from the men Some are possessed of it already. But
it is certain that woman, with her determinately synthetic interests,
will refuse long to be baulked of her right to consider things as a
whole. The interest of the mother is ever with the future. Woman will
readily understand that a single generation of accomplished defeat is
sufficient to divorce a whole race from its patrimony; and she will
determine, and effectively determine, that the lot of her own sons shall
be victory, and not surrender.

And if once the Oriental woman seize the helm of the ship in this
fashion, solving the problems of her whole country, whom is it suggested
that she shall afterwards petition for the redress of her own
grievances?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[82:\*](wil08.htm#fr_5.md) Lest it should be thought
that India had ever been a land of the unclean, let me point out here
that the use of earths and oils for the bath has always been compulsory.
There is, perhaps, no people in the world from whom the culture of the
skin receives so much attention, or where it is so successful. But
manufactured soap, as producing a chemical change on the epidermis, is
theoretically disapproved.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[92:\*](wil08.htm#fr_6.md) Kayasth families.--The
Kayasths are the second caste of Bengal. They claim descent from the old
Kshatriya, or military caste, but the authenticity of this genealogy is
disputed.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[92:†](wil08.htm#fr_7.md) Guru Nanak in the
North.--Guru Nanak was the first of the ten leaders or Gurus who formed
the Sikh nation--the people of the Punjab. He was born 1469.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[92:‡](wil08.htm#fr_8.md) Ramanuja in the South.--A
saint and teacher of marvellous love and mercy. He lived in the twelfth
century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Indian Sagas](wil09.md)
