[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wil09)  [Next](wil11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

# CHAPTER VIII

### NOBLESSE OBLIGE: A STUDY OF INDIAN CASTE

A GRAVER intellectual confusion than that caused by the non-translation
of the word *Caste* <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_10) there has
seldom been. The assumed impossibility of finding an equivalent for the
idea in English has led to the belief that there is something mysterious
and unprecedented in the institution. People become bewildered as to
whether it is a religious or a social obligation. Every one demands of
the reformer a conflict with it. The whole question grows obscure and
irritating.

Yet all this time we have had an exact synonym for the word, and the
parallel is the closer since our word connotes the same debatable
borderland between morals and good taste. *Caste* ought to stand
translated as *honour*. With Oriental quaintness, it is true, India has
given a certain rigidity to this idea, but her analysis of the thing
itself is as profound as it is acute.

Our conduct is commonly governed far more by social habit than by
considerations of right and wrong. When the tide of the ethical struggle
has once set in over some matter, we may regard ourselves as already
half-lost. Why are my friend's open letters absolutely safe in my
presence, though I am longing for the information they convey? Why

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

can money given for one purpose not be used for another, when all the
canons of common sense and expediency urge that it should? Who will
confess to an effort in speaking the truth at any cost whatever? Why,
when I am annoyed, do I not express myself in the language of
Billingsgate? To each of which questions one would reply, somewhat
haughtily, that the point was one of honour, or, that such happened to
be the custom of one's class.

Yet if we examine into the sanction which honour can invoke there is
nothing beyond a rare exercise of the power of ostracism. The Church
excommunicates, the law imprisons, but society merely "cuts" the
offender in the street. Yet which of these three inflicts the deepest
wound? It is as true of London as of Benares that caste-law is the last
and finest that controls a man. For it comes into operation at that
precise point where tribunals fail. It takes cognisance of offences for
which no judge could inflict penalties. It raises standards and demands
virtues that every man will interpret according to the stringency of his
pride, and yet that no one can feel himself to have wholly fulfilled.
And it does all this without once permitting the sensation of merit.
Having done all, one remains an unprofitable servant. For no one would
count the punctual discharge of debts (all debts are debts of honour),
the hauteur that brooks no stain upon the name, the self-respect that
builds the whole ethical code upon itself, as religious observances.
These things were due, we say, to our birth or blood, or position before
men. It is true that their non-fulfilment would leave a stain upon the
conscience, and it is also true that the attempt to work out the
obligations of honour must be the immediate test of the sincerity of one
who proposes to lead a life of greater devotion and earnestness than
common.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Still, caste is
not the same thing as personal piety, and perhaps for this reason
complete renunciation of its claims and benefits is essential in India
to the monastic life.

There is another point about our Western conception of *noblesse
oblige*. Few as the persons may be who could formulate their sentiment,
the fact pervades the whole of the social area. Each class has its own
honour. If honourable employers feel compelled to think of the comfort
of their workers, honourable servants feel equally compelled to keep
their lips shut on their masters' affairs, and either responds to an
appeal in the name of his ideal. The priest may find the honour of his
profession in conflict with that of the detective, but all the world
will uphold the faithfulness of both. The efficient realisation of his
ideals by the schoolmaster will involve an occasional pardon, even of a
grave offence, if he conceives forgiveness to be the best formative
influence which at the moment he can command. The very same effort in
the merchant will require a distribution of punishment that is rigorous
and just, since order, integrity, and unfailing promptitude--not the
development of human character--are his ends. Thus every man, in every
critical act of his life, calls silently for the judgment of his peers
and refuses all other.

The weaknesses of caste everywhere are manifold. For society, like the
individual, is always apt to insist upon the tithing of mint and rue,
and to neglect the weightier matters of the law. But it is not usually
the martyr who marks its worst failure. He is the white dove cast forth
by crows, that is, a member of a higher tried by consensus of the lower
castes. We have here a case of government usurping the functions of
society, much as if the headmaster should exercise authority in a
dispute among boys. For it is essential to the very idea of honour

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

that every caste should be autonomous. The true failure of caste occurs
whenever it establishes such an ascendency of social opinion over the
individual's conscience that his power of advance is impeded and he
becomes less of a man, or less really beneficent socially, by remaining
more of a gentleman--a state of things which is not uncommon among
ourselves. For we may postulate that all ideals are helpful only in so
far as they subserve a man's manhood and freedom, and destructive the
instant they render him less able to express his own inmost will. It is
he, therefore, who ought to have been a martyr and chose ease who is the
true caste victim, not the hero of an *auto-da-fé*.

That this is a real danger we all know. What Protestant has never
exalted the creed of his sect over freedom of thought? What Catholic has
never put comfort above spirituality? What politician has not preferred
party above principle? What student of science has never been prejudiced
against new truth? And if we look without, where do we not see the mere
breaker of conventionality treated as outside brotherhood? Where do we
not find persons conforming to usages that displease them, merely
because they would be inconvenient to dispute?

A certain sweeping justification of such facts may be urged, inasmuch as
there are circumstances under which the cohesion of the group is well
worth the sacrifice of the liberty of a few individuals. And the
habitual outrage of custom without reason is perhaps rightly held to be
as anti-social as any felony. In the last resort, however, social
pressure must be held in bounds, for nothing should interfere with a
man's right to try himself, or sap the roots of his independence. And
society is a vague and irresponsible magistrate, with so little
illumination as to his own purposes and tendencies that he

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

frequently mistakes the pioneers of his march for deserters and orders
the stoning of prophets, whose sepulchres and monuments will be erected
by his children.

The question of the inner trend or intention of the social movement must
form the law in whose name all doubtful cases are tried. And, while it
is never easy to determine the point accurately for one's own people, in
the case of the Hindu race the supreme purpose of their past evolution
is quite apparent. Even a cursory reading of the Laws of Manu displays
Indian society as united in a great co-operation for the preservation of
the ancient race-treasure of Sanskrit literature.

The feeling must have grown up when the Vedas alone required conserving,
and the families entrusted with various portions were encouraged to
become in all ways dependent on the community, that every energy might
be devoted to the task in hand. This is the real meaning of prostration
at the feet of Brahmins, of the great merit acquired by feeding them,
and of the terror of the crime of killing one. It is not the man, it is
race-culture that is destroyed by such an act.

As ages went on and the Upanishads and other things were added to the
store, that which was hitherto memorised became entrusted to writing.
The *Vedas* became *Scriptures*--and now the method, of psychology, of
astronomy, of mathematics, made themselves felt as integral parts of the
Aryan treasure, in common with Sanskrit literature. This widened the
conception of culture without liberalising the social bearings of the
question, and the Brahmin caste continued to be recognised as the
natural guardians of all learning, the old religious compositions being
still regarded as the type.

If we ask how it happened that the Aryan folk became so early conscious
of their responsibility in

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

the matter of Sanskrit letters, there can be only one answer. They found
themselves in the presence of other and unlearned races. This point
brings us to the question of the origin of strongly differentiated
castes in general. In its nature caste is, as we have seen, honour; that
is to say, an ideal sentiment by whose means society spontaneously
protects itself from some danger against which it is otherwise
defenceless. For instance, life in Texas having been for many years
dependent on the possession of horses, and safeguards against the
horse-thief being few and difficult, he came to be the object of
unprecedented social abhorrence. Horse-stealing was the last crime a
lost soul would stoop to. In a similar way, as some think, may have
grown up the Indian feeling about cow-killing. If the cattle, in time of
stress, were killed for food, agriculture would be unable to take a new
start, and so a people accustomed to eat beef grasped the situation
perhaps, and renounced the practice. But since these two sentiments
pervade whole nations, they are not exactly what we are accustomed to
think of as caste, inasmuch as in the latter there is a distinct
gradation of rank connected with the sentiment. In the term "blackleg"
applied by trade unionists to competing forms of labour, we have an
instance of the kind we want. Here we have an occupational group giving
birth immediately to the ideal which is necessary to its safety.
Throughout the worlds of love, of war, and of work, indeed, honour is an
instinct of the very greatest potency. How few men, after all, desert to
an enemy as spies! How strong is the feeling of class-obligation amongst
servants and working men! This element is very evident in the Indian
industrial castes, which are often simply hereditary trade-unions. No
Englishman is so powerful, nor is any Hindu so hungry, that one man
could be bribed to take up the trade of another.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nothing would
induce the dairyman, for instance, to take charge of a horse, or a
laundryman to assist the household.

But the very strongest, and perhaps also ugliest, of all possible roots
of caste is the sense of race, the caste of blood. We have an instance
of this in the animosity that divides white men from negroes in the
United States, and we have other instances, less talked of, all up and
down our vast British possessions. There is probably no other emotion so
inhuman which receives such universal sympathy as this. For it is
fundamentally the physical instinct of a vigorous type to protect itself
from fusion. And both sides participate in the revulsion. Here we have
the secret of rigid caste, for the only rigid caste is hereditary, and
of hereditary caste the essential characteristic is the refusal of
intermarriage.

Granting, then, what could not well be denied, that the Aryan
forefathers found themselves in India face to face with inferior and
aboriginal races, what may we gather, from the nature of the caste
system to-day, to have been the elements of the problem, as they more or
less clearly perceived it?

Those elements we may infer to have been four in number.

1\. They desired above all things to preserve the honour of their
daughters from marriage with lower and savage peoples. Exclusion from
marriage with any but one's own caste became the rigorous rule, the
penalty fell on the father and the family that permitted a woman to go
unguarded on this head. To this day, if a son marry beneath caste he
degrades himself; but if a daughter be wrongly given, the whole family
becomes out-casted.

2\. They seem to have desired to preserve the aboriginal races, on the
one hand from extermination, and on the other from slavery of the
person.--

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

two solutions which seemed later the only alternatives to Aryan persons
in a similar position! Those aborigines, therefore, who became dependent
on the Aryan population, had their definite place assigned them in the
scale of labour, and their occupations were secured to them by the
contempt of the superior race.

We must not forget, in the apparent harshness of this convention, its
large factor of hygienic caution. The aborigines were often
carrion-eaters, and always uncleanly in comparison with their
neighbours. It was natural enough, therefore, that there should be a
refusal to drink the same water, and so on.

On the other hand, it is one of the mistakes of caste everywhere, that
it institutionalises and perpetuates an inequality which might have been
minimised. But we must not forget, in the case of the Indian system, the
two greater evils which were avoided altogether.

3\. The Aryans realised very clearly that it was not only their race but
also their civilisation that must be maintained in its purity. The word
*Aryan* implies one acquainted with the processes of agriculture, an
*earer* of the ground, to use an Elizabethan word--accustomed therefore
to a fixed and industrialised mode of living, evidently in contrast to
others who were not.

Fire and the processes of cooking and eating food are easily
distinguished as the core of the Personal life and establishment in a
climate where habits can at any time be made so simple as in India. It
is these that can never be dispensed with, though they may be arranged
for to-night in a palace, and to-morrow in the jungle under a tree.

In view, then, of the necessity of safeguarding the system of manners,
grew up the restrictions against

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

eating with those of lower caste, or allowing them to touch the food and
wants of their betters. The fact that the Aryan could eat food cooked by
Aryan hands alone, implied that the strictest preliminaries of bathing
had been complied with.

By a continuous crystallisation, all caste laws--from being the
enunciation of broad canons of refinement as between Aryan and
non-Aryan--came to be the regular caste-barriers between one class and
another of the same race. In this way they lost their invidious
character.

It is undeniable that this caste of the kitchen, so wittily named "don't
touchism" by a modern Hindu leader, lends itself to abuse and becomes an
instrument of petty persecution more readily than the intermarriage
laws. Some of the saddest instances of caste-failure have occurred here.
Nevertheless, the original intention remains clear and true, and is by
no means completely obscured, even with the lapse of ages.

4\. It was, however, in their perception of the fourth element of the
problem that the early Aryans triumphantly solved the riddle of
Humanity. They seem to have seen clearly that amongst the aborigines of
India themselves were many degrees of social development already
existent, and that these must be preserved and encouraged to progress.

From such a comprehension of the situation sprang the long and still
growing graduation of non-Aryan castes, some of which have established
themselves in the course of ages within the Aryan pale. Marriage, for
instance, is an elaborate and expensive social function in the highest
classes. But as we descend it becomes easier, till amongst the Baghdis,
Bauris, and other aboriginal castes, almost any connection is ratified
by the recognition of women and children. This is a point in which
Eastern scores over Western development; for in

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Europe the Church
has caused to be reckoned as immoral what might, with more philosophy,
have been treated as the lingering customs of sub-organised race-strata.

As is the nature of caste, mere social prestige constitutes a perpetual
stimulus and invitation to rise, which means in this case to increase
the number of daily baths and the cleanliness of cooking, and to
restrict to purer and finer kinds the materials used for food,
approximating continually toward the Brahmin standard. For is it not
true that *noblesse oblige?* This fact it is that makes Hinduism always
the vigorous living banyan, driving civilisation deeper and wider as it
grows, and not the fossilised antiquity superficial observers have
supposed.

Such, then, is the historic picture of the rise of caste. The society
thus originated fell into four main groups:

\(1\) Priests and learned men--the Brahmins;

\(2\) The royal and military caste;

\(3\) Professional men and merchants--the middle-class or *bourgeoisie*,
as we say in Europe; and

\(4\) The working people, or sudras, in all their divisions.

(Of the second group only the Rajput branch remains now stable. For the
military caste, finding itself leaderless under the Maurya dynasty, is
said to have become literary, and is certainly now absorbed in the
*bourgeoisie*.)

This functional grouping, however, is traversed in all directions
nowadays by the lines of caste. In the mountains it is no uncommon thing
to find the Brahmin acting as a labourer, impressed as a coolie, or
working as a farmer, and in the cities he belongs largely to the
professional ranks. Many of India's most learned and active sons, on the
other hand, belong to the third and even fourth

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

divisions. And the new castes, which are of constant growth, are less
easy than the old to classify.

Every new community means a new caste in India. Thus we have the
Mohammedan, the Christian, and the modern reform castes--of all of which
one peculiarity is non-belief in the caste principle!--as well as
others. And who shall determine, for instance, to which of the four main
grades Mohammedanism, with its inclusion of peasant, citizen, and
prince, belongs?

The fact is, if a man's mode of life be acceptable to his own
caste-fellows, the rest of Indian society has no quarrel with it. And
this autonomy of castes it is which is the real essential for social
flexibility and fundamental equality. As bearing on this point, few
utterances have ever been so misquoted as the great dictum of Buddha,
that "he who attains to God is the true Brahmin." For this is misquoted
whenever it is made to imply that the Brahmin holds in any sense a
monopoly in religion. No possible statement could be more foreign to the
genius of Hinduism. When we read that shortest and greatest of India's
gospels, the "Bhagavad Gita" (a poem composed by Brahmins, preserved by
Brahmins, and distributed through the length and breadth of the country,
always by Brahmins), we find ourselves in the presence of the most
comprehensive mind that ever contemplated Hindu life. The compassion of
Buddha, perhaps, looms greater across the centuries, but in dealing with
social problems his very tenderness and spiritual fire make him second
to Krishna, who was always calm, broad, and consistently national in his
outlook. We must accept the Gita as an authoritative pronouncement on
Hindu society. And the Gita rings with the constantly reiterated
implication that "he who attains to God is the true man," while it
interprets all life and responsibility as

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

a means to this end. Thus, "Better one's own duty, though imperfect,
than the duty of another well discharged. Better death in one's own
duty; the duty of another brings on danger." We have to remember, too,
that the Gita is made up of the very best of the Vedas and Upanishads,
and was specially written for the benefit of women and the working
classes, who, as destitute of classical learning, had little chance of
studying these great scriptures. But its contents were to depend upon
Brahmin effort for promulgation. Another witness to the fact that
spirituality has always been regarded in India as the common human
possession lies in the Hindu word for religion itself--*dharmma*, or
*the man-ness* of man. This is very striking. The whole weight, of the
conception is shifted away from creed, much more from caste or race, to
that which is universal and permanent in each and every human being.
And, last of all, we may remember that the greatest historical teachers
of Hinduism--Rama, Krishna, and Buddha, besides many of the Upanishadic
period--were men of the second, or military, caste.

No, the Brahmin was never in any sense the privileged monopolist of
religion: he was a common *channel* of religious lore, because his
actual function was Sanskrit culture, and Sanskrit happens to be the
vehicle of the most perfect religious thought that the world ever
produced, but "realisation" itself has always been recognised as a very
different matter from this, and, Brahmin or non-Brahmin, has been
accepted wherever it appeared. The advantage that the priestly caste did
undoubtedly enjoy, however, lay in the fact that in their case the
etiquette of rank led directly to the highest inspiration, as the
scholar's life, even in its routine, will be nearest to that of the
saint.

One peculiarity of the place of the religious life in the Indian system
is that it is an inclusive term for

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

all forms of higher individuation. Theoretically, to the Hindu mind, all
genius is inspiration, the perception of unity; and the mathematics of
Euclid or the sculpture of Michael Angelo would be as authentic an
expression of the religious consciousness as the sainthood of Francis.
Only the result of this method of interpretation is that sainthood takes
precedence of all others as the commonest form of greatness. Scientific
research, as in the astronomy of Bhashkar Acharya and the psychology of
Patanjali, has not had sufficient opportunity of securing defined and
independent scope. And literature has been yoked to the car of mythology
as much as the art of mediæval Italy.

Nevertheless, India is too well acquainted with genius to forget that
the caste of the spirit is beyond human limitation, often beyond
recognition. It is held that the best lower men can do for that
brotherhood which asserts itself in the consciousness of greatness is to
give it freedom. Hence a man can always be released from social
obligations if he desire to live the life of ideas, of the soul. Only,
it is held that if he will not fulfil the law, neither shall he add to
the burdens of the community. So he who claims to be one of the great
spiritual beyond-castes must renounce family and property, relying upon
the charity of men for his daily bread, and knowing well that for any
work of scholarship--such as the observatories at Benares and Jeypore--a
Hindu [government](errata.htm#0) at least would provide him ample means.
It is only as long as one avails oneself of the benefits of the social
structure that it is held not unreasonable to require conformity to its
usages.

This renunciation is *Sannyas*, the Indian form of monasticism, and
Sannyas, theories to the contrary notwithstanding, has always been open
to all castes. Indeed, it is held that when the responsibilities of

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

life are over, a man's duty is to leave the world and spend the
remainder of his days in that state; and in some parts of Northern India
one meets with "Tyagi Mehtars," or monastics who were by birth the
lowest of the low.

Theoretically, the monk is caste-fellow of the whole world, prepared to
eat with any one; and where, by sheer dint of spirituality and
self-discipline, such a feeling is realised, every Hindu in India
considers the broken bread of this lover of mankind as sacramental food.
It is usual, too, to eat from the hands of holy men without inquiry as
to their standing when in the world.

One of the most interesting points in all this to a Western mind is the
difference implied and established between the caste of priests or
chaplains on the one hand, and the fact of spiritual realisation,
outside all caste, on the other. Nothing in the Indian thought about
life can be more striking than this. The family chaplain in Bengal may
be the official teacher, but every man and woman discards his authority
silently the instant they find some soul (in the world or out of it; it
may be husband or child, or the holy man living in his garden; usually
it is an ascetic), with a quickening spiritual touch upon their own. He
or she then becomes the *guru*, or teacher, and this relationship is
made the central fact of life.

The appearance of this new teacher, when he is powerful enough to be an
important social phenomenon, is the historic origin of almost all new
castes. The Sikh nation was formed in this way by a succession of gurus.
Chaitanya welcomed all castes to Vaishnavism and made it possible for
them to rise thereby. The scavengers, too low to venture to claim either
Hinduism or Mohammedanism as their own, were raised in consideration and
self-respect by Guru Nanuk

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

and Lal Begi Mehtar--the last a saint of their own degree.

The preacher arises and proclaims the new idea. He gathers about him men
of all classes: the educated won to the service of his thought, the
ignorant swept in by the radiance of his personality. Amongst his
disciples distinctions of caste break down. The whole group is stamped
with his character and prestige. Eventually, if it contain a
preponderance of Brahmin elements, it may take rank with the best,
carrying certain individuals up with it. But if it be composed chiefly
of the scum of society, it will remain little considered; and yet, in
the strength of its religious and intellectual significance may
certainly claim to have progressed beyond its original point. Such is
likely to be the fate of the present Christian converts. Those who are
recruited from the lowest pariahs may acquire a certain prestige from
their new faith and take a better place in the social scale,
consequently, in centuries to come. At the same time we must not forget
that forty or fifty years ago, conversions were made that undoubtedly
involved great sacrifices, and the descendants of these Christians may
lose rather than gain in the long run.

Taking the history of Hinduism as a whole, we observe a great systole
and diastole of caste, the Buddhist and the present Christian periods
ranking as well-marked eras of fusion, while the intervening centuries
are characterised by progressive definition, broken every now and then
by a wave of reform which thought itself a movement towards caste
abolition, but ended simply in the formation of a new group. For this is
the fact in which all would-be reformations in India find at once their
opportunity and their limit. It may now be taken as proved that in order
to affect caste widely the agitator would need to aim deeper than

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the external phenomena, at underlying spiritual impulses.

 

If this theory of caste be valid, then, we find that the word signifies
not so much mere rank in society as the standard of honour which is
associated with rank. And as the private's conduct may be governed as
much as his officer's by enlightened self-respect, we have seen that
honour is something which applies to the whole of society equally. Even
Tennyson, it will be remembered, pictures the country youth as
outvaunting Lady Clara Vere de Vere in her pride of birth. The word
caste, therefore, is by no means that antithesis of *democracy* which
has been so commonly assumed.

Neither, amongst a people familiar with the process of
self-organisation, would it prove any barrier to efficient co-operation.
For the one essential to this power is an established habit of ignoring
all points of mutual difference not germane to the matter in hand. What
we call good-breeding, or what India calls *caste*, ought to make this
easier. For any group of men met together for a common purpose find
their individual rights secured to them in this way, and are free, by
age-long acceptance, from any suspicion of another's desire to interfere
with them. This is a basis of strength and not of weakness; so that it
seems, if Indian men and women are not at present capable of combined
action to any great degree, it is a matter of their own neglect of the
habit, and not a necessary consequence of their institutions. We need
not too readily accept the statement of such weakness, either, as
infallible. My own observation has been that the Hindu people are
capable enough of vigorous co-operation along the lines natural to them,
those of the undivided family, the village community, and others. That
inability which Europeans would show to face

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

these tests, they may be expected to display before ours

To be absolutely just, however, we must admit that the observance of
caste law has entailed many foolish and irritating losses upon society
during the last fifty years. We have seen that there are definite
reasons, not wanting in cogency, why a man of good birth should not eat
in all companies, or of food cooked by hands supposed less cleanly. Such
rules, however, cannot be kept by those who, for any reason, cross the
seas to Europe. This fact, more than any other detail, makes it a matter
of out-casting to take the journey, and persecutions have sometimes
ensued which are shocking to contemplate. A man may care little about
the loss of station for his own sake, but the shoe pinches when he finds
himself unable to make worthy marriages for his daughters; hence he will
often submit to a heavy fine in order to buy back his position. This
rouses the cupidity of ignorant and conventional persons who happen to
have authority with the stay-at-home community, and such are apt to be
unscrupulous in bringing about the ruin or recantation of any who resist
their power. This is a series of events which does occur occasionally;
but it need not be supposed that every Europe-returning Hindu who is
kept at arm's length is a martyr. There is an element of distrust for
the moral results of a visit to the West in the situation; and this is
not altogether unreasonable. It is chiefly with regard to possibilities
of political, practical, or technical education that caste deterrence is
to be regretted, and it is obvious that as communities progress in the
power of estimating modern conditions, they must recognise the suicidal
nature of such an attitude. Yet it is curious to note here how caste may
become thus a very real instrument of equality, for the power of the
individual to advance is by this means

kept strictly in ratio to the thinking of the society in which he lives.
This fact is characteristic. The good of caste, of race, of family
stands first, and only second that of the individual man or woman in
India. To take another plane. Let a man of the lower castes become
wealthy, and he is compelled to educate men of his own rank to marry his
daughters. Thus the group to which he owes birth, vigour, and
development receives from him again the benefits of his life's work.
This is the exact opposite of the European device, where the upper class
absorbs money, talent, and beauty from the lower, while that is
continually recruited by the failures from above.

The fact that every human force is polar in its moral activity needs
little demonstration in the case of social pride. Every day we see this
working on the one hand for the highest idealism, on the other for
revolting egotism. Social exclusiveness may be condoned, it may even
robbed of its sting but, especially when coupled with personal
exultation, it can never be made anything but vulgar-looking to the
disinterested outsider. It is not to be supposed that Indian caste forms
any exception to this rule of double effect. Nevertheless, it is well to
understand the conditions of the sentiment, perceiving how inevitably
this very thing repeats itself wherever two physically-distinguishable
races are found side by side.

And it cannot be denied that great benefits as well as great evils have
accrued from caste. It is an institution that makes Hindu society the
most eclectic with regard to ideas in the world. In India all religions
have taken refuge <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11)--the Parsi before

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the tide of Mussulman conquest; the Christians of Syria; the Jews. And
they have received more than shelter--they have had the hospitality of a
world that had nothing to fear from the foreigner who came in the name
of freedom of conscience. Caste made this possible, for in one sense it
is the social formulation of defence minus all elements of aggression.
Again, surely it is something that in a country conquered for a thousand
years the doorkeeper of a viceroy's palace would feel his race too good
to share a cup of water with the ruler of all India. We do not easily
measure the moral strength that is here involved, for the habit of
guarding the treasure of his birth for an unborn posterity feeds a deep,
undying faith in destiny in the Hindu heart. "To-day here, to-morrow
gone," says the most ignorant *sotto voce* as he looks at the foreigner,
and the unspoken refrain of his thought is, "I and mine abide for ever."
Caste is race-continuity; it is the historic sense; it is the dignity of
tradition and of purpose for the future. It is even more: it is the
familiarity of a whole people in all its grades with the one supreme
human motive--the notion of *noblesse oblige*. For though it is true
that all men are influenced by this principle, it is also probably true
that only the privileged are very conscious of the fact. Is caste, then,
simply a burden, to be thrown off lightly, as a thing irksome and of
little moment?

And yet, if India is ever to regain national efficiency, this old device
of the forefathers must be modified in the process,--exactly how, the
Indian people themselves can alone determine. For India to-day has lost
national efficiency. This fact there is no gainsaying. Her needs now are
not what they were yesterday. The Brahmins lose distinctiveness in these
days of cheap printing and widespread literacy. But this only means that
the country

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

requires multiplied methods of self-expression as the goal and summit of
her national endeavour. She wants a greater flexibility, perhaps, a
readier power of self-adjustment than she has ever had. But it ought to
come in an influx of consciousness of those great spiritual tides on
whose surface all questions of caste and non-caste can be lifted into
new and higher inter-relations. Chief among all her needs is that of a
passionate drawing together amongst her people themselves. The cry of
home, of country, of place is yet to be heard by the soul of every
Indian man and woman in Hindustan, and following hard upon it must sound
the overtones of labour and of race.

Then the question of whether to walk or not in the ways of the
forefathers will be lost in the knowledge of the abundant power to hew
out new roads, as those fathers did before them. Has India the
possibilities still left in her own nature which can bring to her such
an epoch?

There are some who believe that there is no task beyond the ultimate
power of the Hindu peoples to perform. The nation that has stood so
persistently for righteousness through untold ages, has conserved such
vast springs of vigour in itself, as must ultimately enable her to
command Destiny. The farseeing wisdom and gentleness of her old
constitution may unfit her for the modern world, but they are a sure
proof, nevertheless, of her possession of sufficient sense of affairs to
guide her to a full development once more.

For, after all, who were these old forefathers, with their marvellous
cunning? What inspired them so to construct the social framework that
every act of rebellion and invasion should end henceforth only in
contributing a new morsel of colour to fit into the old mosaic? Ah, who
were they indeed? We may well ask, for have we not all this time been
calling

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

by their name one far greater than they, one infinitely more deserving
of our reverence--the Communal Consciousness, namely, of a mighty
patient people, toiling on and on through the ages up the paths of
knowledge, destroying never, assimilating always, what they gain of
truth and science, and hesitating only a little before fresh
developments, because they are so preoccupied with the problems of the
past that they do not realise that that stage is done, and that the sun
is risen to-day on a new landscape, confronting them with fresh perils
and unthought-of difficulties?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[116:\*](wil10.htm#fr_10) The word *Caste* is of
Portuguese origin.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[132:\*](wil10.htm#fr_11) Parsi, Jew,
Christian.--The Parsis took refuge in India a thousand years ago,
fleeing before the Mohammedan conquest of Persia. There are ancient
communities of Jews and Christians also from Asia Minor and Syria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Synthesis of Indian Thought](wil11)
