[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wil10)  [Next](wil12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

# CHAPTER IX

### THE SYNTHESIS OF INDIAN THOUGHT

    When existence was not, nor non-existence,  
    When the world was not, nor the sky beyond,  
    What covered the mist? By whom was it contained?  
    What was in those thick depths of darkness?

    When death was not, nor immortality,  
    When night was not separate from day,  
    Then That vibrated motionless, one with Its own glory,  
    And beside That, nothing else existed.

    When darkness was hidden in darkness,  
    Undistinguished, like one mass of water,  
    Then did *That* which was covered with darkness  
    Manifest Its glory by heat.

    Now first arose Desire, the primal seed of mind,  
    \[The sages have seen all this in their hearts,  
    Separating existence from non-existence.\]  
    Its rays spread above, around, and below,  
    The glory became creative.  
    The Self, sustained as cause below,  
    Projected, as Effect, above.

    Who then understood? Who then declared  
    How came into being this Projected?  
    Lo, in its wake followed even the Gods,  
    Who can say, therefore, whence It came?  
Whence arose this projected, and whether sustained or not,  
He alone, O Beloved, who is its Ruler in the highest heaven knoweth,  
Nay, it may be that even he knoweth it not!  
                         Rig VEDA: Hymn of Creation.

I

LIKE the delicate charm that is common to honourable women; like the
distinctive greatness of saints and heroes; like the intellectual
breadth of a university

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

city; like all the finest things in the world in fact, Indian thought
had remained till the year 1893 without a definition, and without a
name. For the word *dharmma* can in no sense be taken as the name of a
religion. It is the essential quality, the permanent, unfluctuating
core, of substance,--the man-ness of man, *life-ness* of life, as it
were. But as such it may assume any form, according to the secret of the
individuality we are considering. To the artist his art, to the man of
science his science, to the monk his vow, to the soldier his sovereign's
name, to each believer his own particular belief--any of these, or all,
may be *dharmma*. There is indeed another, and collective
sense--somewhat akin to the English *commonwealth*, or, better still,
perhaps, translated as *the national righteousness*--but even this does
not connote a creed. It applies to that whole system of complex action
and interaction, on planes moral, intellectual, economic, industrial,
political, and domestic--which we know as India or the national habit.
It was for this *dharmma* that the Rani of Jhansi fought. By their
attitude to it Pathan, Mogul, and the Englishman, are judged, each in
his turn, by the Indian peasantry. As head of this system, Judisthira,
the Indian Charlemagne, received the name by which the people know him
to this day, of Dharmma-Raja. And what this *dharmma* was, in all its
bearings, is perhaps best laid down in the charge of the dying Bhishma
to the future sovereigns of India, in the eighteenth book of the
Mahabharata.

It is clear that such a conception is very inadequately rendered by the
English word "religion." It is clear also that to dissect out and set in
order the distinctively religious elements in an idea so definite at its
centre, and so nebulous at its edges--claiming thereby to have defined
the religion of the Indian peoples--would be a task of extreme
difficulty.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It must have been
in the face of just such problems that Max Müller exclaimed, "Ancient
words are round, and modern square!"

As the forest grows spontaneously, of many kinds, each like all the
others only in the common fact of the quest of light, and every plant
having n complete right to regard its own as the chosen seed, so amongst
the Hindu people, up to the twentieth century of this Christian era,
grew faiths and creeds. Islam itself was scarcely an exception to this
rule. For the spirit that makes a township, after learning English,
differentiate itself sharply into Hindu and Mohammedan social cliques,
is of modern growth. It appears to be a result of that false
interpretation which reads the history of India as an account of the
struggle between the two ideas. In the life of the villages there is no
such strong distinction. In Bengal and Behar, the sons of Hindu and
Mohammedan gentlemen grow up in the closest fraternity and fellowship.
In the North-West Provinces they mingle their names. In the Moslem
zenanas of the same districts the Hindu babies of the village are
privileged guests. Every Hindu guru accepts Mohammedan as well as Hindu
disciples. Every Mohammedan fakir is sought by Hindu as well as
Mohammedan devotees. In the South, narrowly orthodox as the South is
counted, the proudest feature of Trevandrum is the shrine dedicated to a
Mohammedan princess, who forsook courts and palaces for the worship of
Trevandrum's local god. Over and over again, in the political world,
have the armies of Delhi and the nawabs been led to victory by Hindu
generals; and in every Native State to this day will be found positions
of responsibility and power assigned to men whose creed is that which
the sovereign's is not. A more beautiful tribute was never surely paid
than that spoken of the Mahratta queen: "she was peculiarly kind and

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

considerate to such of her subjects as differed from her in faith." But
indeed the intolerance of Mohammedanism itself has been grossly
exaggerated by Christian observers, who seem curiously incompetent to
grasp the secret of an Eastern attitude. This intolerance could never,
for instance, be compared with that of the Roman Church. The necessity
of making a strong and competent nation out of a few warring tribes led
to the enunciation of a brief and simple religious thesis; but the
Prophet did not fail, in true Asiatic fashion, to remind his people that
"God is the God of all creatures, not of one section only," and to
exempt especially from condemnation all the alien religions definitely
known to him, namely, Christianity and Judaism, "the peoples of the
Book." Truly the quarrel of that stern spirit of righteousness was with
unfaithfulness, not with other faiths, however strongly, under
unforeseen military and political exigencies, it might seem to lend
itself to the contrary interpretation. The fact that Mohammedans have
sometimes held another opinion is no argument as to the teaching of
their religion in its purity, and it must be remembered that "dog of an
infidel" is an expression hurled as freely against Spaniard and
Crusader, as ever against what Christians called a Pagan. No. The feud
between Delhi and Ghazni was no more a battle between *Din* and
*Dharmma* than was that so long existing between France and England, the
combat of the Catholic against the Protestant Churches. Even Sikh and
Mahratta risings were only the psychological transfer of regional
power-centres. The famous jewelled shawl of the Hindu State of Baroda
was made quite naturally under the old *règime*, to be sent to the tomb
of Mohammed at Medina!

Some air of the deserts, some tradition of the pastoral habit, some
strong memory of Persia and Arabia. must indeed have come with the
successful

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

invader to make the stay-at-home invaded resenting and distrustful. But
the talk about cow-killing can hardly be taken as sincere, since in that
case the arms of chivalrous Hindus would to-day be turned against a
newer power. It must be understood as purely symbolic of the strained
relations naturally existing between industrialised agricultural
communities on the one hand, and on the other the militant sons of the
desert accustomed to live by keeping and killing flocks and herds. But
the same process that tamed the nomad into a member of a peasant
community, and converted boatmen and tillers of the soil into
Mussulmans, minimised in course of time even these differences of
association. The familiar sight of the Mohammedan *bhisti*, holding his
goatskin below the hydrant-mouth for water, and the Hindu water-carrier
with his earthen pot coming in his turn, is an instance of the contrast
as it now exists. Two different civilisations stand side by side, but
they are friendly castes, not rival nationalities.

In the religious consciousness of Islam there is nothing that is without
analogy amongst the faiths that have sprung up on Indian soil. Every one
is tolerant of the idea of "the one true church," for it is held by
Hindus to be a necessity of the early stages of religious development.
Allah is of course the Personal God: but then the worshipper of Vishnu
has always had to admit his brother's right to offer praise to Siva,
though the name left himself unstirred. Why not Allah, therefore,
equally? The Hindu uses images: to the Mussulman the image is abhorrent.
True, but every Hindu hopes to escape some day from the necessity of
using images. Who is not touched by the devotional custom of Hindu
women, bathing the reflection of the Holy Child in the mirror and
saying, "This which we bathe is not the image: neither is the

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

image He whom we worship!" Are not the saints for ever telling the
idolater that even to name the Infinite Unity is sacrilege? And what
Mohammedan saint has failed to say the same? The dispute about the
image, in the light of such facts, becomes a mere difference of opinion
as to the use of the concrete in the early stages of an education.
Indeed, Hinduism itself has shown its power in modern times to throw out
sects that decry the use of images as strongly as Islam.

Hence it would appear that the important points at issue between Hindus
and Mussulmans are rather details of purification and domestic practice,
than religious or doctrinal. This fact becomes increasingly evident as
the higher phases of the two faiths are reached. For the more completely
either is realised, the more perfectly is it fused in the other.
Sufi-ism <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md) leads the soul by love,
and the Vedanta leads it by knowledge, love, or emancipated motive, as
the case may be; but for both alike the theme is of a common goal, where
all sense of difference shall cease, and the small self be swallowed up
in the universal. Of each of the two faiths, then, it may be said, that
it has nothing to lose and everything to gain by the more complete
development of the other. Mohammed, Krishna, Buddha,
Sankaracharya, <span id="fr_13"></span>[†](#fn_13.md) are not so many
deplorable obstacles in each other's

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

paths, but rather widely separated examples of a common type--the
radiant Asiatic personage, whose conception of nationality lies in a
national righteousness, and whose right to be a leader of men rests on
the fact that he has seen God face to face. Such souls cannot fail to
recognise each other, and the Prophet was not slow to salute Moses and
the Christ, the only examples of his own order whose names he knew.

Thus it is easy to realise that as long as Hinduism remained nameless
and vague, the sense of difference between itself and Islam was also
obscure, subject to all the mitigating influences of a common
Orientalism, intensified here and there doubtless by political ideas,
but tempered again by manifold social and economic bonds. And if, with
definition, the Indian religions are to take on a more sectarian
character, is it not clear that this is only in order to be joined again
with the faith of Arabia, in a new and deeper consciousness of that
which is their actual ground of union--the Asiatic synthesis of life?

It is not difficult to understand the mental outlook that is expressed
in the namelessness of Hinduism. An immense people, filling a vast
territory, unconscious of the completeness of their boundaries, or of
any sharpness of contrast between themselves and neighbouring nations,
were necessarily incapable of summing up their thought, to give it a
name. A knowledge of limits and of difference there must be, before
there can be definition, and it is only when India sees herself
reflected as a whole in the glass of a foreign administration and a
foreign language that she can dream of limitation. Besides, in things
religious, what was there that was not included within the Hindu area?
If, crossing the Himalayas and reaching China and Mongolia, men came in
contact with unknown rites and superstitions, they

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

could always supply parallel or analogy from their home life and
association. Strange and powerful goddesses were adored in China. But
the worship of the Mother is so old in India that its origin is lost in
the very night of time. What an age of common faiths that must have been
that left us the Virgin Kanya (Kanya Kumari) as tutelary deity of Cape
Comorin, and Kwannyon the Mother as the giver of all blessings, in Japan
to this day! Who is to say which is older, *Kari*, the Mother-Queen of
Heaven, of Chinese mythology, or *Kali* of Bengal? Even these
conceptions, however, dating as they clearly must from the days of that
matriarchate when nations and races were not yet differentiated--even
these do not represent the earliest stratum of religious thought in
India or in Asia.

All through the Old Testament, and throughout the story of the rise of
Mohammedanism, we hear of "stones" as objects of worship. It is the
black and mystic Kaaba, that is to this day the symbol of their unity to
all the peoples of Islam. And through. out India still there are races
of working folk who ask no better symbol of divinity than rude stones,
selected with some care possibly, and then set up, singly or in a row,
perhaps in an enclosure, perhaps not, to be regarded henceforth as
objects of reverence. The people who use these emblems--for they cannot
be regarded as images--may be anything, from sudras, or peasants, as I
have seen them in the South, to Bhutias, or gipsy-like wanderers, as one
meets with them in the Himalayas.

Everywhere in common life the miraculous elements are fire and light.
And perhaps it is natural that oil, with its mystic power of leaping
into flame, should be the characteristic offering in the worship of
these stones. A Bhutia shrine will sometimes contain nothing but lamps.
These are small and made of iron, like round-bowled dessert

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

spoons at right angles to the handle, which is a spike stuck into the
ground, and I have seen as many as sixteen or seventeen in one tiny
temple. There was here neither image nor symbol other than the lamps
themselves, and the pilgrim on leaving would tear off a shred of his
garment, and tie it to a bush or a tree close by, there joining hundreds
of tokens like itself of the wayfaring congregation whose spirits bad
met unseen in a common act of adoration. But the place, as is always the
case with these peasant oratories, was where the view was finest, and
the cry of the soul to commune with Nature most intense. Sometimes the
sacred stones themselves are smeared with oil, for the very touch of the
wondrous fluid that nourishes light seems to be holy.

To richer races in India only clarified butter is good enough for use in
the service of the altar, and we of Europe require the great wax tapers.
But can we not trace through all these a single common process of the
sanctification of labour by the products of labour? "We worship the
Ganges with the water of the Ganges, but we *must* worship," said a
Hindu. Similarly does the peasant dream of the sacred oil, and the
pastoral Toda <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14.md) worship his cowbells.
Is it not true that if all could be blotted out in a moment from the
human memory, the Eucharist and the sanctuary-lamp from Christianity,
flickering light and fragrant flowers from the Mussulman grave, oils and
fruits and incense from the Eastern worshipper, it would only be to
spring forth fresh again to-morrow--corn, wine, and oil to the peasant,
scented gums to the lover of gardens, the Good Shepherd the ideal of the
herdsman, the ship of salvation the hope of fisher-folk? What are
mythologies after all but the jewel-casket of humanity,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

by means of which its wealth of dreams and loves and sighs in every
generation becomes the unperishing and imperishable treasure of the
after-comers? The mystery of the birth of faith is about us always.

All the great Asiatic faiths--that is to say, the world-religions--would
seem to have been born of the overflow of something that may be called
tentatively the Aryan thought-power, upon the social and religious
formations of earlier ages. Taoism in China, Zoroastrianism in Persia,
and Hinduism in India, are all as three different applications of a
single original fund of insight and speculation, and Islam itself has
incorporated Sufi-ism after reaching the Aryan region. Doubtless of all
these India developed her share of the inheritance with the greatest
freedom and perfection, but we recognise common elements in all alike.

II

As the basis of Indian thought rests deep in the very foundation of
human evolution, so it has not, failed, at each new point in the
historic development, to add something to the great superstructure. The
whole story of India may be read in a philosophic idea. The
constitutional ceremonies of the kingdom of Travancore contain clear
indications of the transition from the matriarchate which was probably
characteristic of the old Dravidian <span id="fr_15"></span>[\*](#fn_15.md)
civilisation, to the patriarchate, which was Aryan. In the yearly

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

village-worship of the heroic figures of the "Mahabharata" which is
common throughout the South, we have what may be the effort of distant
peoples to include themselves in the "Great India" of Bhishma,
Judisthira, and the national Epics. <span id="fr_16"></span>[\*](#fn_16.md)
The charge of country gunpowder which is fired off in the temples of the
Southern Dekkan on festival days is sufficient evidence that orthodoxy
was once aggressive, eager, absorbent of things new, fearful of nothing,
and friendly to advance. It is a popular superstition that the East
stands still. Children observe no motion of the stars. But the fact is
that one generation is no more like another at Benares than in Paris.
Every saint, every poet, adds something to the mighty pile which is
unlike all that went before. And this is quite as true of the thought
expressed in the vernaculars, as of the all-dominating culture contained
in the classic Sanskrit. Chaitanya in Bengal, the Ten Gurus of the
Sikhs, Ram Das and Tokuram in Maharashtra, and Ramanuja in the
South--each of these was to his own time as the very personification of
the national philosophy, relating it again in its wholeness to the
common life. Each such great saint appears to the people as the
incarnation, the revelation, of themselves and their own powers, and the
church founded by him becomes a nation. Thus arose the Mahratta
Confederacy. Thus arose the kingdom of Lahore. And far away in Arabia,
Islam formed itself in the same fashion. For the law that we are
considering is not peculiar to India; it is common to the whole of
Asiatic life.

The Hindu world in its entirety, then, is one with

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

the highest philosophy of Hinduism. The much-talked of Vedanta is only
the theoretic aspect of that synthesis whose elements make up the common
life. The most unlettered, idolatrous-seeming peasant will talk, if
questioned, of the immanence of God. He recognises that Christianity is
fundamentally true, because the missionaries are clear that there is but
one Supreme. The question, What would happen could the nation be
divorced for a single generation from the knowledge of Sanskrit? is only
another way of asking, What is the actual dynamic force existing at a
given moment in the Hindu people? What are the characteristic ideas that
are now an inbred habit, past the reach of authority to substantiate, or
disaster to shake? It is given only to great events and to the
imagination of genius to find the answer to such questions. Yet some
indications there are, of what that answer might be.

Buddhism was the name given to the Hinduism of the first few centuries
of the Christian era, when precipitated in a foreign consciousness. What
authority did it claim? What explanations did it give of the existence
of the physical universe? Of the soul? Of evil? What did it offer to
humanity as the goal of the ethical struggle? The answer to these
questions will certainly have to be given in terms of ideas, or variants
of ideas, derived from the pre-existent stock of Hinduism. And so,
though the particular formulation may be regarded as heresy, the
significance of its testimony on the point we are considering cannot be
disputed. It must be remembered that there never was, in India, a
religion known as Buddhism, with temples and priests of its own order.
There was a tendency towards popularising truths that had previously
been regarded as fit only for the learned, and there was an immense
unofficial enthusiasm for a towering

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

personality, doubtless, and for the interpretations which were
identified with him, even as there is in Bengal to-day for Chaitanya.
There came also to be a vast imperial organisation, highly centralised,
coherent in all its parts, full of the geographical consciousness,
uttering itself in similar architectural forms in the East and West of
India, passionately eager to unify and elevate the people and to adorn
the land. This Indian Empire was in full and living communication with
China, Japan, Syria, and Egypt. It had traffic and commerce by land and
sea. It sent abroad ambassadors, merchants and missionaries. And within
its own territories it made roads, planted trees and orchards, dug
wells, established hospitals, and insisted on the cessation of violence
even towards dumb creatures. <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17.md)

Just as the Protestant Reformation, releasing the mental energy of the
people from thraldom to authoritative commentaries, has been the power
within the rise of modern Europe, so the kernel and spring of the Asokan
and succeeding empires was a similar assertion--not of the right of
private judgment: this never required vindication in India: but--of the
equal right of every section of society to enter the super-social, or
monastic life. For we must not forget that in the East enfranchisement
is always primarily religious and moral, not political. Power civic and
national is there amongst the direct effects of the higher
consciousness, never its cause. It is a man's right to renounce the
world, and not manhood suffrage, which constitutes his equality with the
highest. This sudden realisation of the spiritual life in all parts of
society at once conferred on every man under Buddhism, whatever his
birth or position, the right to make his opinion felt, the strength to
exercise his full weight of moral influence.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The result was an
immense consolidation and blossoming of nationality. Men felt that they
walked on air. They were born to receive and pass on the great message
of human brotherhood. They were to go out into *all* the world and
preach the Gospel to every creature. What must not have been the faith
and enthusiasm of the common people, when merchants, traders, and
caravan-servants could suffice to make a permanent contribution to the
religion of the powerful Empire of China? It was a great age, and only
those who have seen the colossal fragments which remain of it to this
day can form any idea of its wealth and vigour.

And yet Asoka's conversion had not been to a new religion, but only into
the piety of his time. "I, King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, obtained
true intelligence ten years after my anointing." Hence the thing that we
call Buddhism ends its career in India very gradually. He who has first
visited Ellora <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18.md) is surprised, on
entering Elephanta, <span id="fr_19"></span>[†](#fn_19.md) to find the
Buddha-like figure on his left to be Siva, and the Triumph of Durga on
his right. At Ellora itself there must be a gap of centuries between the
cathedral-like caves of the Thin Thal <span
id="fr_20"></span>[‡](#fn_20.md) and of Kailash. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[§](#fn_21.md) Yet even there we see the solitary figure
of the teaching or the meditating Buddha give place by degrees to a rich
pantheon of devas and guardian kings. But the hope and delight that are
expressed

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

so freely in the architecture and sculpture, and in the cosmopolitan
intercourse of the Buddhist period die away imperceptibly into the rich
imagery of the Puranic age, <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22.md) and the
manifold social and political problems of Sankaracharya and the age of
chivalry.

The common tendency of Brahmins and yogis had been to hold out the
emancipation of the whole nature through self-discipline as the goal of
endeavour. This doctrine came to be regarded in a loose way as
characteristically Hindu. The Buddhist conviction was, on the other
hand, that the same goal was to be reached, not so much by a gradual
ripening of the self, as by ceasing from the illusion of egoism.
Nirvana, not Mukti, became the watchword. The fact that these two ideas
are related to each other as the obverse and reverse of a coin, cannot
have escaped the contemporary mind. But its own generation must have
given a more antipodal value to the divergence than is obvious to
Western thought at the present day. It would seem to them to include all
possible theological differences, and it is not unlikely that this fact
contributed largely to the belief so explicitly stated in the Gita, and
so markedly Indian, that all religions express a single truth.

 

In the period of the Upanishads, the conception of Brahman--the one real
appearing as many--had been reached. This implies the doctrine of Maya,
or the illusion of things, as popularised under Buddhism. It is clear
that in this theory the whole question of the origin of evil is put
aside. Evil and good are

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

alike shadows on the wall, cast by our sense of personal convenience in
magnified and distorted form. The saints recognise neither pain, insult,
nor self-interest, being swallowed up in the joy of God.

 

The cyclic manifestation of the Cosmos--never created, but eternally
self-existent, self-destroying, self-repeating--was another idea sown
broadcast by Buddhist teachers. Here we have an interpretation that is
significant of the immense scientific energy that has always gone hand
in hand with Hindu religious speculation, making the spirit of research
inherent in the spirit of devotion. Perhaps had orthodoxy offered the
same resistance to science in the East that it did in the West, Indian
investigation would have appeared more imposing to-day in the eyes of
foreigners. But the only thing that the Indian priesthood has conceived
itself set to guard has been the social system. It has opposed nothing
save social aberrations. Knowledge has gone unhindered. And it will not
be difficult to show that the much vaunted science of Moorish Spain was
neither more nor less than the tapping of Indian culture for the modern
world.

 

But perhaps the most significant of all points in the Buddhist
propaganda is its assumption that the word of the Blessed One Himself is
all-sufficient authority. Hinduism recognises only one proof, and that
is direct perception. Even the sacred writings give as their sanction
the direct perception of saints and sages, and the Vedas themselves
declare that man must reach beyond the Vedas. That is to say, the books
allege as their authority that realisation out of which they were
written. The Jains refuse the authority of the Vedic texts. But there is
less divergence between them and other sects of

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hinduism than
would appear on the surface. Common language and the historic acceptance
of the race alike, lead up to the last great pronouncement on the
subject--"By the Vedas no books are meant. They mean the accumulated
treasury of spiritual laws discovered by different persons in different
times."

"It is Veda," we say in India of a statement which we perceive to be
profoundly true. It is held in a general way that there are two classes
of Scripture, one Vedas, the other Puranas. Vedas are eternal truth.
Puranas are characterised by containing stories of the creation and
destruction of the world, tales of the life and death of holy persons
and avatars, accounts of their miracles, and so on. These elements are
commonly mixed up, but can easily be disentangled. Thus, when the
Christian Gospel says, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul," it speaks Veda; but when it says, "Jesus
was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king" it is only
a Puran, and may contain some elements of error.

And so, if the word be rightly defined, it may he said that the Vedas
themselves are the sanction of Buddhism, of Mohammedanism, of
Christianity, and of Confucianism; but it may at the same time be
claimed on behalf of India that there, and not in the West, has this
fact been understood.

Some of the greatest of French and English thinkers hold that the
history of the West is made into a unity by the evolution of science and
its progressive application to life, from the sixth century before
Christ to the present day. These thinkers maintain that Greece, Imperial
Rome, and the Catholic Church have been the three integral formative
influences of what we call the European mind. To the student of Oriental
history it appears

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

equally clear that the history of Asia is that of a single living
organism, of which India may be taken as the heart and focus. Regarded
thus, in relation to its surroundings, the culture to which we give the
name of Indian thought becomes likewise a unity, as clear, as
continuous, as consistent in its development as is the evolution of the
scientific idea in the West. Considered as an appanage of Europe, India
is meaningless; taken in and for herself, and for that to which she
rightly belongs, it need not surprise us if we find her the essential
factor of human advance in the future as in the past.

III

India is the heart of Asia. Hinduism is a convenient name for the nexus
of Indian thought. It would appear that it takes some thousand to
fifteen hundred years to work out a single rhythm of its great
pulsation. For this is about the period that divides the war of the
Mahabharata from Buddha, Buddha from Sankaracharya, and Sankaracharya
from Ramakrishna, in whom the immense pile reaches the crowning
self-consciousness. Of the long prehistoric evolution that went to the
building up of Mahabharata, Great India, the heroic age, we can say
little, for nothing is left to us, save the legend of Sita and Rama, out
of the night of time. Yet we [know](errata.htm#1.md) that this period must
have been long. Three thousand years seems not too much, if enough, to
allow. Behind this again loom up the millenniums spent on the tableland
of Central Asia, that headwater of world-civilisation where Aryan man
entered the patriarchate, and closed the account of his first combat
with Nature, having tamed the beasts, learned the use of tools,
domesticated corn and fire,

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

produced the fruit-trees, and divided the week. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_23.md) Of the sublime dreams, the poetry and
song with which he consoled himself during those ages of herculean
struggle, the fragments known as the "Rig Veda" still remain. And we
learn therein how broad was his outlook upon Nature, even as that of the
mind that declared "and the evening and the morning were the first day."
How long did it last? Was it ten thousand years? Were there another five
thousand before the war of Mahabharata . . . . However this be, the
enthusiasm of succeeding periods strikes us as extraordinary.

There is no question that the characteristic product of the civilisation
that succeeded the Great War was the forest-universities, notes of whose
sessions have become the Sutras and Upanishads. But we must not forget
also that during the same period the Vedas was written down, and the
searching scrutiny of society initiated which was later to result in
those accumulations of reverent and sympathetic interpretations now
known to us as the Laws of Manu.

It is only with difficulty that we realise the sense of vastness to
which the thinkers of this period strove to give expression. The Celt,
it has been said, strives ever towards the infinite of emotion. The
Hindu, in the same way, cannot rest content, short of the infinite of
thought. We see this, even W so early as the hymns of the Rig Veda.
"When darkness was hidden in darkness, undistinguished, like one mass of
Water," opens the great Anthem of Creation. Still larger is the sweep of
the Upanishads--"they that see the Real in the midst of this Unreal,
they that behold life in the midst of this

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

death, they that know the One in all the changing manifoldness of this
universe, unto *them* belongs eternal peace--unto none else, unto none
else." The Vedas were the capital with which Aryan culture began its
occupation of India, and these immense and subtle generalisations of the
Upanishads represent the first achievement of the national mind in its
new place. Surely this is the secret of the striking fact in Indian
history that all great eras of rejuvenescence, such as Sankaracharya's,
and even minor movements of reconstruction like Guru Nanuk's, and
Ramanuja's, have had to go back to the forest sutras and place
themselves in structural continuity with them. In this light we begin to
suspect that the war of the Mahabharata itself represents the apparent
exhaustion of Vedic inspiration at the end of the first period, and the
restoration of pristine vigour by force of Krishna's personality.

The twilight of Indian forests in the pre-Buddhistic age is resonant, to
the historic ear, with chants and prayers. But the succeeding epoch
leads us into the busy life of villages and cities. For the ballads and
songs of the people are crystallising now into the great Epics. Their
religious activity--stirred by the sublime spectacle of a life that
represents the whole of Upanishadic culture, the national dream in its
completeness--occupies itself with gathering together, and weaving into
a whole, all the religious ideas innate amongst the masses, and those
peculiar to the Indian environment. There is a sudden accession of force
given to such practices as pilgrimage and relic-worship, and Brahmin
intelligence is more or less unconsciously preoccupied with the
interpretation of images, symbols, and rituals, in relation to those
truths which had been the first realisation of the race. The distinction
and larger scope of this Buddhist period lay to a great

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

extent in its political, commercial, and sub-religious elements, in
letters, arts, and sciences.

Certain evils must have come in the train of the ideas then elaborated,
essential as they were to prove themselves in the long run to the
completed fabric of Hinduism. We can understand that monastic notions
may have attracted too much of the national energy out of the safe paths
of domestic virtue, with a tendency to bring about not only the
depletion of family life, but the disintegration of morality itself. No
doubt it was at this time, and to meet this error, that the song of the
ideal sang itself so clearly, first through the lips of Kalidas, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[\*](#fn_24.md) in his "Birth of the War-Lord," and
again, in the final recension of the Ramayana, as the love of Sita for
Rama, that glorified wifehood, before which the renunciation and faith
of the cloister grow pale.

From the point of view of purity of doctrine, we can believe, too, that
the very breadth of the welcome extended to religious ideas of all
kinds, especially in the closing centuries of this age, had led to the
undue emphasising of the popular notions, to the inclusion of an
unnecessary multiplicity of symbols, and possibly to the interpretation
of symbols already existing in rude or gross ways.

But agitation against abuses has never been the method of Hinduism.
Rather has the faith progressed by lifting repeatedly in moments of
crisis the banner of the highest ideal. Already, in the era we are
considering, this organic law of the national genius, the law of the
avatars, was well known. "Whenever the dharmma decays, and when that
which is not dharmma prevails, <span id="fr_25"></span>[†](#fn_25.md) then
I manifest

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

myself. For the protection of the good, for the destruction of the evil
*for the firm establishment of the national righteousness*, I am born
again and again." So says the Bhagavad Gita--and never was any prophecy
more conclusively vindicated than this, by the appearance of
Sankaracharya, early in the ninth century after Christ.

This wonderful boy--for he died at the age of thirty-two--was born at
the end of the eighth century, and had already completed a great mission
when most men are still dreaming of the future. The characteristic
product of Oriental culture is always a commentary. By this form of
literature the future is knit firmly to the past, and though the dynamic
power of the connecting idea may be obscure to the foreigner, it is
clearly and accurately conveyed to the Eastern mind itself. The whole of
Confucianism is contained in a commentary on the Eking, or Book of
Change, and European Protestantism might almost be described as a
special kind of commentary on the Christian sacred literature. The
Sanskrit *sutras* lend themselves to critical writing, and even demand
it, in a special degree: for the word *sutra* means *thread*, and is
applied to works which are only the main line of a given argument, and
require expansion at the end of every sentence. This literary convention
obtains in all Oriental countries, and must date from the period When
the main function of writing was to assist memorising. Obviously, by
writing a new commentary on a given sutra, the man of genius has it in
his power to readjust the relationship between a given question and the
whole of current opinion. Hence it is not surprising to find that the
masterpiece of Sankaracharya's life was a commentary on the
Vedanta-Sutra.

The problems which faced the Indian mind during his lifetime, with the
single exception that the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

country was then rich and prosperous, must have been curiously like
those of the present day, and it is difficult to avoid the conclusion
that in his eyes they assumed national dimensions. Religious practices
had lost their primitive simplicity, and also perhaps their compelling
power. Ideas as to national and unnational (for the word "orthodox" was
but the Asiatic word for "national") were conflicting and confused. Men
lived much in the thought of the recent sectarian developments of the
faith, and tended to lose sight of its austere imperative, pointing to
the highest realisation, of its antiquity, and its close-knit
continuity. [Lakshmi](errata.htm#2.md), Goddess of Fortune, was one of the
chief objects of worship. Sects and kingdoms alike had lost their sense
of mutual solidarity. Never perhaps was an Asiatic people nearer
precipitating itself on a purely secular development.

At this moment the whole of the national genius awoke once more in
Sankaracharya. Amidst all the brilliance and luxury of the age, in spite
of the rich and florid taste of the Puranic period, his soul caught the
mystic whisper of the ancient rhythm of the Vedic chants, and the
dynamic power of the faith to lead the soul to super-consciousness,
became for him the secret of every phase of Hinduism. He was on fire
with the love of the Vedas. His own poems have something of their
classical beauty and vigour, and his books may almost be described as
chains of quotations from the most piercing and comprehensive sentences
of the Upanishads, to which he has contributed links and rivets.

Sankaracharya wandered, during his short life, from his birthplace in
the South as far as the Himalayas, and everything that he came across in
his travels related itself to the one focus and centre, in his mind. He
accepted each worship, even that from which he was at first adverse, but
always

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

because he found that the great mood of One-without-a-second was not
only the Vedic, but also the Puranic goal. This is the doctrine that he
expresses in his twelve epoch-making commentaries, especially in his
crowning work, the commentary on the Vedanta Sutra. And this idea, known
as the Adwaita Philosophy, constitutes, for the rest of the Hindu
period, the actual unity of India.

Western people can hardly imagine a personality such as that of
Sankaracharya. In the course of so few years to have nominated the
founders of no less than ten great religious orders, of which four have
fully retained their prestige to the present day; to have acquired such
a mass of Sanskrit learning as to create a distinct philosophy, and
impress himself on the scholarly imagination of India in a preeminence
that twelve hundred years have not sufficed to shake; to have written
poems whose grandeur makes them unmistakable, even to the foreign and
unlearned ear; and at the same time to have lived with his disciples in
all the radiant joy and simple pathos of the saints--this is greatness
that we may appreciate, but cannot understand. We contemplate with
wonder and delight the devotion of Francis of Assisi, the intellect of
Abelard, the force and freedom of Martin Luther, and the political
efficiency of Ignatius Loyola; but who could imagine all these united in
one person?

Subsequent critics have painted Sankaracharya as the persecutor of
Buddhists. Inasmuch as he asserted a co-ordination of mythologies and
doctrines, instead of preaching a single exclusive method of salvation;
inasmuch as to him the goal was a positive, and not a negative
affirmation, and in so far also as he insisted upon the worthlessness of
ritual apart from philosophy, of worship without illumination, he may be
taken as the enemy of one school or another. It is almost unnecessary to
add that this

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

enmity was purely controversial in its character, and to Buddhists of
the Northern School, a clearer historic knowledge will reveal him as the
very opposite of a persecutor, as, rather, another example of the race
of inspired religious teachers to which their own apostle, Nagarjuna,
belonged. <span id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_26.md)

Buddhism as a whole, with the succeeding Puranism, had been the creation
of the lay mind, the creation of the people. The work of Sankaracharya
was the relinking of popular practice to the theory of Brahman, the
stern infusion of mythological fancies with the doctrine of the
Upanishads. He took up and defined the current catchwords--maya, karma,
reincarnation, and others--and left the terminology of Hinduism what it
is to-day. At the same time, we must not neglect to remind ourselves
that in all this, if he had been other than the expression of that which
it was the actual tendency of the race to formulate, he would not have
found the scope he did. The recognition of a great man is as essential a
factor in his history as his own power and character. His complete
appropriation by his nation only shows that he is in perfect unison with
its thought and aspiration.

The two or three centuries immediately succeeding Sankaracharya are
commonly known as the dark ages of Indian history. The application of
the term is obscure. In what sense were these ages dark? They were
centuries of chivalric dominance, and in many a Rajput line the bardic
annals are still preserved that will one day enable a generation of
Indian historians to read their record. Even the wars of such a period
were never destructive; for, apart from their specially chivalrous
character, Oriental

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

military usage has always secured the safety of non-combatants. The
lives of water-carriers and commissariat servants were scrupulously
respected in Asiatic warfare. It is said, indeed, that the European
gipsy is an example of this. These poor people were originally a tribe
of petty merchants who used to accompany the march of armies. Wherever
the camp was pitched, they could run up a bazaar in half an hour, and
their caste-honour lay in telling neither side the secrets of the other.
When Genghis Khan invaded Hungary, these particular clans were carried
there, never to return. <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27.md)

But it was not only camp-followers who were protected by a law such as
that which now defends the Red Cross Sisterhoods of Europe. A like
consideration prevailed, with regard to the peasant working in the
fields, and the craftsman toiling at his anvil. The young crops were
honoured in ancient combat, as would be Cologne Cathedral or Notre Dame
de Paris in modern. Under these circumstances a battle became only a
deadly form of tournament, involving in its peril none but fighting men.

But if such contests could not become destructive, neither could they
succeed in educating the masses of the people to the common duty of
military defence. 'This result could only be achieved when a religious
idea should become the war-cry of whole regions, conferring on all men
the right of struggle without distinction of caste. This right, so
necessary to the completion of nationality, the Mohammedan invasion
gave, and it is difficult to imagine any other way in which the lesson
could have been widely learnt.

The great tide of vigour that emanated from Sankaracharya swept round
India by south, west, and north, in a spiral curve. Ramanuja,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Madhavacharya, <span id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_28.md) Ram Das and
Tukaram, <span id="fr_29"></span>[†](#fn_29.md) the Sikh Gurus <span
id="fr_30"></span>[‡](#fn_30.md) and Gauranga, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[§](#fn_31.md) were all in turn its products. Wherever it
touched the Mussulman consciousness, it created, chiefly by means of
contest, a well-centred nation. Where it did not come in contact with
Mohammedanism, as in the extreme south, this spiritual energy did not
succeed in evoking a nationality. And where it did not lead to definite
fighting, as in Bengal under Chaitanya, the sense of national existence
remained more or less potential. Thus the advent of Islam into India
during the post-Sankaracharyan period cannot be regarded as a
revolutionary invasion, inasmuch as under the new power there was no
loss of Asiatic modes. New arts of luxury were introduced, but the
general economic system remained undisturbed. India received a more
centralised government than had been possible since the Asokan Empire,
but no new forces came into operation, tending to reduce her own
children to the position of agricultural serfs or tenants. And we have
seen that even the wars which arose between contiguous populations of
Hindus and Mohammedans must be regarded rather as those athletic
contests between brothers and cousins which confer individuality, than
as conquests on the one side or the other. The victor after victory
attempts neither to exclude his rival's creed from

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

office, nor to create invidious distinctions. "The great bankers and
nobles of Bengal remained Hindu under the rule of the Nawabs, as
naturally as the Mussulman maintained his face in the shadow of a Hindu
throne." <span id="fr_32"></span>[\*](#fn_32.md)

Nor have the clearness and self-consciousness that its definition has
added to Hinduism in any way tended to impair its inclusiveness. For the
personality that the nineteenth century has revealed as the
turning-point of the national development is that of Ramakrishna
Paramahamsa, <span id="fr_33"></span>[†](#fn_33.md) whose name stands as
another word for the synthesis of all possible ideals and all possible
shades of thought. In this great life, Hinduism finds the philosophy of
Sankaracharya clothed upon with flesh, and is made finally aware of the
entire sufficiency of any single creed or conception to lead the soul to
God as its true goal. Henceforth, it is not true that each form of life
or worship is tolerated or understood by the Hindu mind: each form is
justified, welcomed, set up for its passionate loving, for evermore.
Henceforth, the supreme crime for the follower of any Indian sect,
whether orthodox or modern, philosophic or popular, shall be the
criticism of any other, as if it were without the bounds of "the Eternal
Faith" "Man proceeds from truth to truth, and not from error to truth,"
becomes in future the formula that constitutes belief.

At this point we could almost have prophesied, had it not already
happened, that some great disciple of this master would declare, on
behalf of the whole nation, that the final differentia of Hinduism lay
in the acceptance of the doctrine of the *Istha Devata*, *i.e.*, the
right of every man to choose his own

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

creed, and of none to force the same choice on any other. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34.md)

At last, then, Indian thought stands revealed in its entirety--no sect,
but a synthesis; no church, but a university of spiritual culture--as an
idea of individual freedom, amongst the most complete that the world
knows. Certain conceptions, such as maya, karma, and reincarnation,
popularised by Buddhism, and mukhti or the beatific vision, sown
broadcast alike by Sankaracharya and the Sufis, are characteristic of
large areas. But they are nowhere and in no sense regarded as essential.
For it is as foreign to the genius of Hinduism to require an oath of
conformity to any given religious tenet whatever, as it would be to the
habits of an Oxford don to require adherence to the doctrines of Plato
as against those of Aristotle. It would thus appear that the reforming
sects of the Mohammedan period and of the nineteenth century itself,
have to the full as good a right to call themselves Hindu as the most
orthodox priest of Siva, or the most learned Sanskrit pundit.

We have seen then, that it is certainly a mistake to read the history of
India at any time as the account of a struggle between Hindu and
Mohammedan thought, though it is a mistake which is perhaps inseparable
from the European conception of the influence of faith on politics. But
it cannot, on the other hand, be too clearly understood that the problem
which the Indian idea has had to face, during the period between
Sankaracharya and the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

nineteenth century, was the inclusion of the Mohammedan element in a
completed nationality. From the nineteenth century onwards, it becomes
the *realisation* of that single united nationality, amidst the vast
complexity which has been the growth of ages.

It is said that nations and systems of culture fulfil special functions,
as organs of humanity just as individuals fulfil special uses in the
community. If this be so, it would almost appear that within the bounds
of India lies one of the focal or polar points of the race. The great
task of the reconciliation of opposites would seem to devolve on the
peoples within this pale. It is not enough that the Mussulman should
inhabit the pastoral belt, the Mongolian rest secure behind the Thian
Shan, and the Aryan and Dravidian dwell peacefully side by side in the
Southern peninsula. It was decreed from the beginning, it lay
unavoidably in the very nature of things, that sooner or later all these
should meet in the land of the Indus, and learn their mutual
significance and responsibilities. Buddhism may be regarded in one
aspect as simply the synthesis of Eastern Asia. Neo-Hinduism (to borrow
a term which has been coined in no friendly spirit) is equally
indicative of a place found in Aryan thought for Semitic formulæ, and
who shall say what is yet to be born of that conjunction between all
these, in which Asia shall find herself to be--not, as she has so long
been told, "merely a congeries of geographical fragments," still less a
concert of rival political units, held in mechanical combination by a
due admixture of mutual hopes and recriminations, but a single immense
organism, filled with the tide of one strong pulsating life from end to
end, firm-rooted in the soil of common origins and common modes? The
value which we may attach to the prospect of this future will depend on
the idea that

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

we have already been able to form, of the place of Asia in the evolution
of humanity, but to those who foresee a future moralisation of
international relations it may well appear that this question is among
the most important in the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[142:\*](wil11.htm#fr_12.md) Sufi-ism.--A mystic
set of Mohammedans. It rose in Persia, and at first suffered
persecution, because the doctrine of the one-ness of the soul with the
Divine sounded to the orthodox Mohammedan like a suggestion that a
creature could be "partner with God." The Sufis now maintain secrecy as
to their experiences and convictions. Their doctrines and those of Hindu
Vedantism are practically identical.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[142:†](wil11.htm#fr_13.md) Sankaracharya.--"The
father of modern Hinduism," often foolishly referred to as "a persecutor
of Buddhism." A great saint and scholar. Born in Malabar, Southern
India, 788 A.D. Wrote several famous commentaries, notably that on the
Vedanta-Sutra, in which he formulated what is known as the philosophic
doctrine of "Adwaita." He is said to have died at the age of thirty-two.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[145:\*](wil11.htm#fr_14.md) Toda.--An aboriginal
tribe in the Neilgherris.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[146:\*](wil11.htm#fr_15.md) Dravidian
civilisation.--The country of Dravida is that in the south of the Indian
Peninsula, and includes Malabar. The languages of this region are
non-Sanskritic, and the architecture peculiar and imposing. Some
scholars are inclined to suppose a common origin for the Dravidian,
Babylonian, and ancient Egyptian civilisations.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[147:\*](wil11.htm#fr_16.md) In Southern India,
rude figures of men and horses, of heroic size, are made of clay,
hard-baked, and kept in enclosures outside the villages for annual
worship. The illiterate worshipper explains these figures as likenesses
of the characters in the Mahabharata.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[149:\*](wil11.htm#fr_17.md) Asoka's inscriptions
on the Dhauli rock, Orissa, and a Girnar in Gujrat.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[150:\*](wil11.htm#fr_18.md) Ellora.--Buddhist
cave-temples close to the north-western frontier of the Nizam's
dominions. The town of Rosa, containing the tomb of Aurungzeeb, is close
by; and the whole is a few miles from Daulatabad, the ancient Deogiri.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[150:†](wil11.htm#fr_19.md) Elephanta.--A series of
cave-temples on an island in the Bay of Bombay, between the second and
the seventh century.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[150:‡](wil11.htm#fr_20.md) The Thin Thal.--A
cave-temple at Ellora which consists of three tiers or storeys. Hence
its name. The most perfect of the non-Brahmanical structures.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[150:§](wil11.htm#fr_21.md) Kailash.--The most
ornate and modern of all the cave-temples at Ellora. Cut with marvellous
elaboration out of solid rock.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[151:\*](wil11.htm#fr_22.md) The Puranic age.--The
Puranas are the third class of Hindu sacred literature, the first being
the Vedas and Upanishads, and the second the national Epics. They
consist of a series of books of very mixed character, of which the
representative specimens were written between the sixth and twelfth
centuries. Hence this period is spoken of as "the Puranic Age."

<span id="fn_23"></span>[155:\*](wil11.htm#fr_23.md) That learned and
fascinating book, "The Arctic Home in the Vedas," is destined to work a
revolution in our ideas on this subject. If the author's theory be
correct, it would appear that Aryan culture was not acquired in Central
Asia.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[157:\*](wil11.htm#fr_24.md) Kalidas--the
poet.--One of the famous "nine gems" of the Court of Vikramaditya, of
Ujjain. Kalidas may have lived in the sixth century A.D. or earlier. He
wrote the play of "Sakuntala," which so deeply touched the poet Goethe.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[157:†](wil11.htm#fr_25.md) Literally, the
a-dharma--non-dharma. The prefix is privative. See [p. 138](#page_138.md).

<span id="fn_26"></span>[161:\*](wil11.htm#fr_26.md) Nagarjuna.--An Indian
monk, whose name is well known in China and Japan. He followed in the
wake of previous teachers, in the second century of the Christian era.
He gave ultimate theological form to the first school of Buddhism.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[162:\*](wil11.htm#fr_27.md) In the year 1200 A.D.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[163:\*](wil11.htm#fr_28.md) Ramanuja and
Madhavacharya.--Flourished in the South of India in the twelfth and
fourteenth centuries.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[163:†](wil11.htm#fr_29.md) Ram Das and
Tukaram.--Two Mahratta saints to whose inspiration Sivaji's passionate
defence of his own people was due. Tukaram was born about 1605.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[163:‡](wil11.htm#fr_30.md)The Sikh Gurus.--These
were ten in number, Guru Nanuk born 1469, was the first, and Guru Govind
Singh, who died 1708, was the last. By the lives and teachings of these
ten leaders was formed the Hindu nation of the Punjab, the Sikhs.
Amritsar is still the sacred city of this sect of Hinduism.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[163:§](wil11.htm#fr_31.md) Gauranga.--Another name
for Chaitanya, born 1486, the saint in whom Bengal first begins to
realise herself as a united consciousness.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[164:\*](wil11.htm#fr_32.md) Torrens’ "Empire in
Asia."

<span id="fn_33"></span>[164:†](wil11.htm#fr_33.md) Ramakrishna Paramahamsa
lived in a temple-garden outside Calcutta from 1853 to 1886. His
teachings have already become a great intellectual force.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[165:\*](wil11.htm#fr_34.md) I desire to say that
in thus referring to my own gurus, Sri Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and the
Swami Vivekananda, I do not intend to imply that every one will or ought
to be willing to assign them the same place in the evolution of Hinduism
that seems to myself to belong to them. Whether their names be accepted
or not, however, I believe that all Hindus will agree regarding the
ideas which are here stated as constituting Hinduism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Oriental Experience](wil12.md)
