[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45000)  [Next](cc45002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>THE Dedication to King Edward the Sixth is
remarkably interesting, as it refers to the character of Popery at that
day, and to its manoeuvres with regard to a General Council. The
language is strong, and perhaps rougher than what would be at present
used, but still true according to all we gather from history as to the
state of things in those days. The main principles of Popery are still
the same, and similar are its proceedings, though they may be more
disguised, and its spirit is equally intolerant and persecuting. Like
Mahomedanism, it is exclusive, and ever injurious to the harmony and
peace of society.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The order in which the Epistles are arranged is
not the same as in our version. There has not been a uniformity in this
respect among the ancients. The reason for the arrangement here adopted
was probably this, that the First Epistle of Peter, and the First of
John, had, from the beginning, been universally acknowledged as genuine,
while the Epistle of James, the Second of Peter, and that of Jude, had
not from the first been universally received as canonical, though they
were eventually so received. The Second and the Third Epistle of John
were evidently not deemed by Calvin as “catholic;” and for this reason,
as it seems, he omitted them.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The word “Catholic,” or General, as applied to
the Epistles here explained, has been differently understood. Some have
thought that they have been thus called, because they contain catholic
truths; but other Epistles might, for this reason, be also called
catholic. Others have supposed that catholic is synonymous with
canonical; but in this case also there is no more reason for applying
the word to these Epistles than to any other Epistles. But the more
probable opinion is, that they were called Catholic, or General, because
they were not written to any particular Church, but to Jewish or to
Gentile Christians generally. Moreover, the term was not given them at
first, but in subsequent ages.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>The most probable *dates* of the *five* Epistles
here explained are the following: —

<span id="ii-p6"></span>BOOK

<span id="ii-p7"></span>DATE

<span id="ii-p8"></span>The Epistle of James,

<span id="ii-p9"></span>A.D. 61

<span id="ii-p10"></span>The First Epistle of Peter,

<span id="ii-p11"></span>A.D. 65

<span id="ii-p12"></span>The Second Epistle of Peter,

<span id="ii-p13"></span>A.D. 65

<span id="ii-p14"></span>The Epistle of Jude,

<span id="ii-p15"></span>A.D. 66

<span id="ii-p16"></span>The First, Epistle of John

<span id="ii-p17"></span>A.D. 68

<span id="ii-p18"></span> 

<span id="ii-p19"></span>This is the order according to the dates most
approved by the learned. There is, for the most part, a unanimity as to
the dates of the three first Epistles; but with regard to the Epistle of
Jude, and the First Epistle of John, there is not the same agreement.
There are many who fix later dates: to Jude, 90, and to John, 91 or 92.
But this is a matter of no great consequence.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>No doubt can be justly entertained but that
James, called the Less, was the author of the Epistle. He was the son of
Alphaeus or Cleopas, and of Mary, probably a cousin, not a sister, of
Mary the mother of our Lord. Hence he is called our Lord’s brother,
(<span id="ii-p20.1"></span>[Ga
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)<span id="ii-p20.1"></span>;) that
is, a near relative, as the Word brother is often taken in Scripture. He
took a leading part in the council held at Jerusalem, mentioned in <span
id="ii-p20.2"></span>[Ac 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000)<span
id="ii-p20.2"></span>; and, according to *Jerome,* he resided there
thirty years, and presided over the Church. He was put to death, as
Hegesippus relates, who flourished in the second century, by a
tumultuous mob, excited by Jewish zealots, in the year 62.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>The canonicity of James’s Epistle has been a
subject of dispute, though almost universally allowed in the present
day. The facts respecting it, according to *Basnage,* are these, —
During the three first centuries it was not extensively known; in the
fourth century its authenticity was by *some* disputed; but in the fifth
century it was universally acknowledged as genuine; and it has ever
since been so acknowledged, with a very few exceptions. What seems to be
a sufficient evidence in its favor is the fact, that it is found as a
part of Holy Scripture in the first Syriac Version, which was made early
in the second century.

<span id="ii-p22"></span>The occasion of writing the Epistle appears to
have been the abuse made of the doctrine of free grace by professing
Christians, — a subject referred to also by Paul in <span
id="ii-p22.1"></span>[Ro 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#000)<span
id="ii-p22.1"></span>, and in his other Epistles. Abounding grace is at
one time despised and rejected; at another time it is turned into
licentiousness: these are evils which have ever prevailed in the Church.
The Pharisee is too proud to receive grace; the Antinomian pretends to
receive and magnify grace, that he may gratify the inclinations of his
sinful nature. It was against the Antinomian that James wrote his
Epistle.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>According to *Lardner* and *Macknight,* the
Epistle was addressed to the whole Jewish nation, at home and abroad,
believers and unbelievers; according to *Grotius* and *Wall,* to the
Jews dispersed abroad indiscriminately, believing and unbelieving;
according to *Michaelis,* to the believing Jews, while the unbelieving
were not overlooked; but according to *Beza* and *Scott,* to the
scattered Jews who professed the Christian faith. And this last opinion
has the strongest reasons and evidence in its favor.  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

<span id="ii-p25"></span>With regard to the *First* Epistle of Peter,
there has never been a doubt respecting its genuineness. This Apostle
took a prominent part at first in the cause of Christianity, but of his
labors after the council at Jerusalem, in the year 49, recorded in <span
id="ii-p25.1"></span>[Ac 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#000)<span
id="ii-p25.1"></span>, we have no account in Scripture. Mention is
indeed made, in <span id="ii-p25.2"></span>[Ga
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)<span id="ii-p25.2"></span>, of
his being afterwards at Antioch. It has been justly concluded from the
superscription of this Epistle that he exercised his ministry in those
parts which are here mentioned.

<span id="ii-p26"></span>It was thought by *Beza* and *Grotius* that the
Epistle was addressed to converted Jews; but by *Doddridge, Macknight,*
and *Scott,* to Christians in general, both Jews and Gentiles. The
latter opinion is the most probable. The arguments assigned by *Horne,*
in his Introduction, in favor of the former opinion, are by no means
satisfactory.

<span id="ii-p27"></span>With regard to the *Second* Epistle of Peter,
doubts have been entertained by some as to its authenticity. It appears
that it was not at first so widely known as his First Epistle; and this
was probably the reason why there were some during the first three
centuries who did not regard it as genuine. But it has been quoted as a
part of Scripture by some of the earliest Fathers, and fully
acknowledged as authentic by those of the fourth and succeeding
centuries.

<span id="ii-p28"></span>The *First* Epistle of John has from the
beginning been uniformly received as a portion of Divine Revelation.
Some difference has existed as to the persons for whom it was especially
intended, — a matter of no great importance. Some have supposed it to
have been written for the Jewish Christians in Judea; but others, with
more probability, for Christians generally, both Jewish and Gentile.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>Though there is no name attached to it, yet
there has been universal consent from the beginning that John was its
author; and indeed the style of it throughout is sufficient to shew that
he was the writer of it; for his Gospel and the Book of Revelation are
in this respect exactly alike; and it is a style peculiarly his own.

<span id="ii-p30"></span>Jude, or Judas, was, as he says, the brother of
James, and therefore the son of Alphaeus or Cleopas. Though he does not
call himself an apostle, yet he proved himself to be so by saying that
he was the brother of James. He is called, as James was, the brother of
our Lord, <span id="ii-p30.1"></span>[Mt
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055)<span id="ii-p30.1"></span>. We
have in Scripture no account of his ministry after the day of Pentecost.

<span id="ii-p31"></span>His Epistle was not at first universally
received as canonical. This is acknowledged by *Origen, Eusebius,* and
*Jerome;* at the same time, they themselves so regarded it; and Jerome
says that in his day it was by most received as genuine; and it has been
quoted as a part of Scripture by *Clement* of Alexandria, *Tertullian,
Cyril* of Jerusalem, *Athanasius, Ambrose,* and *Augustine.*  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="ii-p33"></span>That some of the Epistles were not universally
received as authentic at first is no matter of wonder, when we consider
the scattered condition of the Church, and the scanty means of
communication. The fact, that *some* had doubts respecting them does not
in the least degree invalidate their genuineness; on the contrary, it
has conduced to strengthen the evidence in their favor; for the doubts
of some must have occasioned a more minute inquiry as to their
authenticity. And it was not long before all the Epistles, about which
there had been some doubts, had attained the universal approbation of
the Church; and what *Lardner* states is worthy of special attention, —
That no writings, received by the primitive Church as genuine, have been
since proved to be spurious; and that no writings, regarded by it as
spurious, have been since proved to be genuine.

<span id="ii-p34"></span>The Editor must mention here, what perhaps he
ought to have mentioned before, — that in his translations he has not
always retained what is called the historical present tense, which is
often used by *Calvin,* according to the practice of Latin and Greek
writers, and also of the Prophets and the Evangelists. This mode of
writing does not accord with the usage of the present day.

<span id="ii-p35"></span>Our translators have not been uniform in this
respect either in the New or the Old Testament; for they sometimes
departed from the original as to this tense, though, for the most part,
they retained it. As, for instance, in <span id="ii-p35.1"></span>[Joh
11:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span id="ii-p35.1"></span>,
the historical present is *not* retained in the 39th, while it is
retained in the 40th verse. The anomalies as to the tenses often met
with, especially in the Psalms, have arisen from overlooking this
peculiarity. The future in Hebrew is very often used for the present;
and this is the historical present, and ought to be rendered in our
language in the past tense.

<span id="ii-p36"></span>J.O.  
ThrussIngton, Sept. 29, 1855.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc45001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p24"></span> See *Horne’s* Introduction, vol. 4, part 2,
chap. 4, sect. 3.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc45001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p32"></span> See *Wolfius’* Prolegomena to this Epistle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calvin's Dedication](cc45002)
