[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45008)  [Next](cc45010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001)<span id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** The elders which are among you I
exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ,
and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed:

<span id="iv.vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Presbyteros qui inter vos sunt,
hortor ego qui simul sum presbyter, et testis passionum Christi, et
gloriae qum revelabitur particeps:

<span id="iv.vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Feed the flock of God which is among
you, taking the oversight *thereof*, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind;

<span id="iv.vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Pascite, quantum in vobis est,
gregem Dei (*vel, Christi, vel, Domini,*) episcopatu fungentes, non
coactè, sed voluntariè; neque turpis lucri causâ, sed liberaliter;

<span id="iv.vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** Neither as being lords over *God’s*
heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Nec tanquam dominium exercentes
adversus cleros, sed ut sitis exemplaria gregis.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** And when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et quum apparuerit Princeps
pastorum, reportabitis immarcescibilem gloriae coronam.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.i-p11"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p12"></span>In exhorting pastors to their duty, he
points out especially three vices which are found to prevail much, even
sloth, desire of gain, and lust for power. In opposition to the first
vice he sets alacrity or a willing attention; to the second, liberality;
to the third, moderation and meekness, by which they are to keep
themselves in their own rank or station.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p13"></span>He then says that pastors ought not to
exercise care over the flock of the Lord, as far only as they are
constrained; for they who seek to do no more than what constraint
compels them, do their work formally and negligently. Hence he would
have them to do willingly what they do, as those who are really devoted
to their work. To correct avarice, he bids them to perform their office
with a ready mind; for whosoever has not this end in view, to spend
himself and his labor disinterestedly and gladly in behalf of the
Church, is not a minister of Christ, but a slave to his own stomach and
his purse. The third vice which he condemns is a lust for exercising
power or dominion. But it may be asked, what kind of power does he mean?
This, as it seems to me, may be gathered from the opposite clause, in
which he bids them to be examples to the flock. It is the same as though
he had said that they are to preside for this end, to be eminent in
holiness, which cannot be, except they humbly subject themselves and
their life to the same common rule. What stands opposed to this virtue
is tyrannical pride, when the pastor exempts himself from all
subjection, and tyrannizes over the Church. It was for this that Ezekiel
condemned the false prophets, that is, that *they ruled cruelly and
tyrannically*. (<span id="iv.vi.i-p13.1"></span>[Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span id="iv.vi.i-p13.1"></span>.)
Christ also condemned the Pharisees, because they laid intolerable
burdens on the shoulders of the people which they would not touch, *no,
not with a finger*. (<span id="iv.vi.i-p13.2"></span>[Mt
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004)<span id="iv.vi.i-p13.2"></span>.)
This imperious rigour, then, which ungodly pastors exercise over the
Church, cannot be corrected, except their authority be restrained, so
that they may rule in such a way as to afford an example of a godly
life.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p14"></span>**1** *The elders* By this name he
designates pastors and all those who are appointed for the government of
the Church. But they called them *presbyters* or *elders* for honor’s
sake, not because they were all old in age, but because they were
principally chosen from the aged, for old age for the most part has more
prudence, gravity, and experience. But as sometimes hoariness is not
wisdom, according to a Greek proverb, and as young men are found more
fit, such as Timothy, these were also usually called presbyters, after
having been chosen into that order. Since Peter calls himself in like
manner a *presbyter,* it appears that it was a common name, which is
still more evident from many other passages. Moreover, by this title he
secured for himself more authority, as though he had said that he had a
right to admonish pastors, because he was one of themselves, for there
ought to be mutual liberty between colleagues. But if he had the right
of primacy he would have claimed it; and this would have been most
suitable on the present occasion. But though he was an Apostle, he yet
knew that authority was by no means delegated to him over his
colleagues, but that on the contrary he was joined with the rest in the
participation of the same office.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p15"></span>*A witness of the sufferings of Christ*
This may be explained of doctrine, yet I prefer to regard it as
referring to his own life. At the same time both may be admitted; but I
am more disposed to embrace the latter view, because these two clauses
will be more in harmony, — that Peter speaks of the sufferings of Christ
in his own flesh, and that he would be also a partaker of his glory. For
the passage agrees with that of Paul, “If we suffer together, we shall
also reign together.” Besides, it avails much to make us believe his
words, that he gave a proof of his faith by enduring the cross. For it
hence appears evident that he spoke in earnest; and the Lord, by thus
proving his people, seals as it were their ministry, that it might have
more honor and reverence among men. Peter, then, had probably this in
view, so that he might be heard as the faithful minister of Christ, a
proof of which he gave in the persecutions he had suffered, and in the
hope which he had of future life.  <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52)

<span id="iv.vi.i-p17"></span>But we must observe that Peter confidently
declares that he would be a partaker of that glory which was not yet
revealed; for it is the character of faith to acquiesce in hidden
blessings.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p18"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p19"></span>**2** *Feed the flock of God* We hence
learn what the word *presbyter* imports, even that it includes the
office of feeding. It is for a far different end that the Pope makes
presbyters, even that they may daily slay Christ, there being no mention
made of feeding in their ordination. Let us then remember to distinguish
between the institution of Christ and the confusion of the Pope, it
being as different as light is from darkness. Let us also bear in mind
the definition given of the word; for the flock of Christ cannot be fed
except with pure doctrine, which is alone our spiritual food.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p20"></span>Hence pastors are not mute hypocrites, nor
those who spread their own figments, which, like deadly poison, destroy
the souls of men.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p21"></span>The words, *as much as it is in you,* mean
the same as though he had said, “Apply all your strength to this very
thing, and whatever power God has conferred on you.” The old interpreter
has given this rendering, “Which is among you;” and this may be the
sense of the words: more correct, however, is the rendering of Erasmus,
which I have followed, though I do not reject nor disapprove of the
other.  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53)

<span id="iv.vi.i-p23"></span>*The flock of God,* or, *of the Lord*, or,
*of Christ*: it matters little which you take, for the three readings
are found in different copies.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)

<span id="iv.vi.i-p25"></span>*Taking the oversight,* or, *discharging
the office of a bishop*. Erasmus renders the words, “Taking care of it,”
(<span id="iv.vi.i-p25.1"></span>*curam illius agentes;*) but as the
Greek word is <span id="iv.vi.i-p25.2"></span>ἐπισκοποῦντες I doubt not
but that Peter meant to set forth the office and title of the
episcopate. We may learn also from other parts of Scripture that these
two names, bishop and presbyter, are synonymous. He then shews how they
were rightly to perform the pastoral office, though the word <span
id="iv.vi.i-p25.3"></span>ἐπισκοπεῖν generally means to preside or to
oversee. What I have rendered “not constraintally,” is literally, “not
necessarily;” for when we act according to what necessity prescribes, we
proceed in our work slowly and frigidly, as it were by constraint.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p26"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p27"></span>**3** *Neither as being lords,* or, *as
exercising dominion*. The preposition <span
id="iv.vi.i-p27.1"></span>κατὰ in Greek is taken, for the most part, in
a bad sense: then Peter here condemns unreasonable exercise of power, as
the case is with those who consider not themselves to be the ministers
of Christ and his Church, but seek something higher. And he calls
particular churches “lots,” (<span id="iv.vi.i-p27.2"></span>*cleros;*)
for as the whole body of the Church is the Lord’s heritage, so the
churches, scattered through towns and villages, were as so many farms,
the culture of which he assigns to each presbyter. Some very ignorantly
think that those called clergy are meant here. It was, indeed, an
ancient way of speaking, to call the whole order of ministers, clergy;
but I wish that it had never occurred to the Fathers to speak thus; for
what Scripture ascribes in common to the whole Church, it was by no
means right to confine to a few men. And this way of speaking was
spurious, at least it was a departure from apostolic usage.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p28"></span>Peter, indeed, expressly gives the
churches this title, in order that we may know that whatever men ascribe
to themselves is taken away from the Lord, as in many places he calls
the Church his peculiar treasure, and the rod of his heritage, when he
intends to claim his entire dominion over it; for he never delivers to
pastors the government, but only the care, so that his own right remains
still complete.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p29"></span><span id="iv.vi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p30"></span>**4** *When the chief Shepherd shall
appear* Except pastors retain this end in view, it can by no means be
that they will in good earnest proceed in the course of their calling,
but will, on the contrary, become often faint; for there are innumerable
hindrances which are sufficient to discourage the most prudent. They
have often to do with ungrateful men, from whom they receive an unworthy
reward; long and great labors are often in vain; Satan sometimes
prevails in his wicked devices. Lest, then, the faithful servant of
Christ should be broken down, there is for him one and only one remedy,
— to turn his eyes to the coming of Christ. Thus it will be, that he,
who seems to derive no encouragement from men, will assiduously go on in
his labors, knowing that a great reward is prepared for him by the Lord.
And further, lest a protracted expectation should produce languor, he at
the same time sets forth the greatness of the reward, which is
sufficient to compensate for all delay: *An unfading crown of glory,* he
says, awaits you.

<span id="iv.vi.i-p31"></span>It ought also to be observed, that he
calls Christ the *chief Pastor;* for we are to rule the Church under him
and in his name, in no other way but that he should be still really the
Pastor. So the word *chief* here does not only mean the principal, but
him whose power all others ought to submit to, as they do not represent
him except according to his command and authority.

<span id="iv.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
5:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p2"></span>**5.** Likewise, ye younger, submit
yourselves unto the elder. Yea, all *of you* be subject one to another,
and be clothed with humility: for God resisteth the proud, and giveth
grace to the humble.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Similiter juniores, subjecti estote
senioribus; sic et omnes, alii allis subjiciamini; humilitatem animi
induite; propterea quod Deus superbis resistit, humilibus vero dat
gratiam.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p4"></span>**6.** Humble yourselves therefore under
the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time:

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Humiliamini ergo sub potenti manu
Dei, ut vos extollat quum erit opportunum;

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p6"></span>**7.** Casting all your care upon him; for
he careth for you.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Omni cura vestra in eum conjecta;
quoniam illi cura est vestri.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p9"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p10"></span>**5** *Likewise, ye younger* The word
*elder* is put here in a sense different from what it had before; for it
is necessary, when a contrast is made between them and the younger, that
the two clauses should correspond. Then he refers to the elders in age,
having before spoken of the office; and thus he comes from the
particular to the general. And in short, he bids every one that is
inferior in age to obey the counsels of the elders, and to be teachable
and humble; for the age of youth is inconstant, and requires a bridle.
Besides, pastors could not have performed their duty, except this
reverential feeling prevailed and was cultivated, so that the younger
suffered themselves to be ruled; for if there be no subjection,
government is overturned. When they have no authority who ought by right
or order of nature to rule, all will immediately become insolently
wanton.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p11"></span>*Yea, all* He shews the reason why the
younger ought to submit to the elder, even that there might be an
equable state of things and due order among them. For, when authority is
granted to the elders, there is not given them the right or the liberty
of throwing off the bridle, but they are also themselves to be under due
restraint, so that there may be a mutual subjection. So the husband is
the head of the wife, and yet he in his turn is to be in some things
subject to her. So the father has authority over his children, and still
he is not exempt from all subjection, but something is due to them. The
same thing, also, is to be thought of others. In short, all ranks in
society have to defend the whole body, which cannot be done, except all
the members are joined together by the bond of mutual subjection.
Nothing is more adverse to the disposition of man than subjection. For
it was formerly very truly said, that every one has within him the soul
of a king. Until, then, the high spirits, with which the nature of men
swells, are subdued, no man will give way to another; but, on the
contrary, each one, despising others, will claim all things for himself.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p12"></span>Hence the Apostle, in order that humility
may dwell among us, wisely reproves this haughtiness and pride. And the
metaphor he uses is very appropriate, as though he had said, “Surround
yourselves with humility on every side, as with a garment which covers
the whole body.” He yet intimates that no ornament is more beautiful or
more becoming, than when we submit one to another.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p13"></span>*For,* or, *because*. It is a most
grievous threatening, when he says, that all who seek to elevate
themselves, shall have God as their enemy, who will lay them low. But,
on the contrary, he says of the humble, that God will be propitious and
favorable to them. We are to imagine that; God has two hands; the one,
which like a hammer beats down and breaks in pieces those who raise up
themselves; and the other, which raises up the humble who willingly let
down themselves, and is like a firm prop to sustain them. Were we really
convinced of this, and had it deeply fixed in our minds, who of us would
dare by pride to urge war with God? But the hope of impunity now makes
us fearlessly to raise up our horn to heaven. Let, then, this
declaration of Peter be as a celestial thunderbolt to make men humble.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p14"></span>But he calls those *humble,* who being
emptied of every confidence in their own power, wisdom, and
righteousness, seek every good from God alone. Since there is no coming
to God except in this way, who, having lost his own glory, ought not
willingly to humble himself?

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p16"></span>**6** *Humble yourselves therefore.* We
must ever bear in mind for what end he bids us to be humble before God,
even that we may be more courteous and kind to our brethren, and not
refuse to submit to them as far as love demands. Then they who are
haughty and refractory towards men, are, he says, acting insolently
towards God. He therefore exhorts all the godly to submit to God’s
authority; and he calls God’s power his *hand,* that he might make them
to fear the more. For though hand is often applied to God, yet it is to
be understood here according to the circumstances of the passage. But as
we are wont commonly to fear, lest our humility should be a disadvantage
to us, and others might for this reason grow more insolent, Peter meets
this objection, and promises eminency to all who humble themselves.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p17"></span>But he adds, *in due time,* that he might
at the same time obviate too much haste. He then intimates that it is
necessary for us to learn humility now, but that the Lord well knows
when it is expedient for us to be elevated. Thus it behoves us to yield
to his counsel.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p18"></span><span id="iv.vi.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p19"></span>**7** *Casting all our care* He more
fully sets forth here the providence of God. For whence are these
proverbial sayings, “We shall have to howl among wolves,” and, “They are
foolish who are like sheep, exposing themselves to wolves to be
devoured,” except that we think that by our humility we set loose the
reins to the audacity of the ungodly, so that they insult us more
wantonly? But this fear arises from our ignorance of divine providence.
Now, on the other hand, as soon as we are convinced that God cares for
us, our minds are easily led to patience and humility. Lest, then, the
wickedness of men should tempt us to a fierceness of mind, the Apostle
prescribes to us a remedy, and also David does in <span
id="iv.vi.ii-p19.1"></span>[Ps
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005)<span id="iv.vi.ii-p19.1"></span>,
so that having cast our care on God, we may calmly rest. For all those
who recumb not on God’s providence must necessarily be in constant
turmoil and violently assail others. We ought the more to dwell on this
thought, that God cares for us, in order, first, that we may have peace
within; and, secondly, that we may be humble and meek towards men.

<span id="iv.vi.ii-p20"></span>But we are not thus bidden to cast all
our care on God, as though God wished us to have strong hearts, and to
be void of all feeling; but lest fear or anxiety should drive us to
impatience. In like manner, the knowledge of divine providence does not
free men from every care, that they may securely indulge themselves; for
it ought not to encourage the torpidity of the flesh, but to bring rest
to faith.

<span id="iv.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
5:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p2"></span>**8.** Be sober, be vigilant; because
your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom
he may devour:

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p3"></span>**8.** Sobrii estote, vigilate, quia
adversarius vester diabolus, tanquam leo rugiens, circuit, quaerens quem
devoret (*vel, quempiam devorare;*)

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p4"></span>**9.** Whom resist stedfast in the faith,
knowing that the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that
are in the world.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p5"></span>**9.** Cui resistite firmi fide, scientes
easdem passiones, vestrae quae in mundo fraternitati adimpleri.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p6"></span>**10**. But the God of all grace, who
hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye
have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle
*you:*

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p7"></span>**10**. Deus autera omnis gratiae, qui
nos vocavit in aeternam suam gloriam per Christum Jesum, paulisper
afflictos ipse vos perficiat, confirmet, corroboret, stabiliat:

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p8"></span>**11**. To him *be* glory and dominion
for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p9"></span>**11**. Ei gloria et imperium in secula
seculorum. Amen.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p11"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p12"></span>**8** *Be sober* This explanation
extends wider, that as we have war with a most fierce and most powerful
enemy, we are to be strenuous in resisting him. But he uses a twofold
metaphor, that they were to be sober, and that they were to exercise
watchfulness. Surfeiting produces sloth and sleep; even so they who
indulge in earthly cares and pleasures, think of nothing else, being
under the power of spiritual lethargy.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p13"></span>We now perceive what the meaning of the
Apostle is. We must, he says, carry on a warfare in this world; and he
reminds us that we have to do with no common enemy, but one who, like a
lion, runs here and there, ready to devour. He hence concludes that we
ought carefully to watch. Paul stimulates us with the same argument in
<span id="iv.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>[Eph
6:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p13.1"></span>, where he says that we have *a contest not
with flesh and blood, but with spiritual wickedness, etc.* But we too
often turn peace into sloth, and hence it comes that the enemy then
circumvents and overwhelms us; for, as though placed beyond the reach of
danger, we indulge ourselves according to the will of the flesh.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p14"></span>He compares the devil to a lion, as
though he had said, that he is a savage wild beast. He says that he
*goes round* to devour, in order to rouse us to wariness. He calls him
the *adversary* of the godly, that they might know that they worship God
and profess faith in Christ on this condition, that they are to have
continual war with the devil, for he does not spare the members who
fights with the head.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p15"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p16"></span>**9** *Whom resist* As the power of an
enemy ought to stimulate us and make us more careful, so there would be
danger lest our hearts failed through immoderate fear, except the hope
of victory were given us. This then is what the Apostle speaks of; he
shows that the issue of the war will be prosperous, if we indeed fight
under the banner of Christ; for whosoever comes to this contest, endued
with faith, he declares that he will certainly be a conqueror.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p17"></span>*Resist,* he says; but some one may ask,
how? To this he answers, there is sufficient strength in faith. Paul, in
the passage which I have already quoted, enumerates the various parts of
our armor, but the meaning is the same, (<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>[Eph
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p17.1"></span>,) for John testifies that faith alone is
our victory over the world.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p18"></span>*Knowing that the same afflictions,* or
*sufferings*. It is another consolation, that we have a contest in
common with all the children of God; for Satan dangerously tries us,
when he separates us from the body of Christ. We have heard how he
attempted to storm the courage of Job,

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p19"></span>“Look to the saints, has any one of them
suffered such a thing?”  
— <span id="iv.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>[Job
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)<span id="iv.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p20"></span>The Apostle on the other hand, reminds
us here that nothing happens to us but what we see does happen to other
members of the Church. Moreover a fellowship, or a similar condition,
with all the saints, ought by no means to be refused by us.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p21"></span>By saying that the same sufferings are
*accomplished,* he means what Paul declares in <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>[Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>, that what remains of the sufferings of
Christ is daily fulfilled in the faithful.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p22"></span>The words, *that are in the world,* may
be explained in two ways, either that God proves his faithful people
indiscriminately everywhere in the world, or that the necessity of
fighting awaits us as long as we are in the world. But we must observe
that having said before that we are assailed by Satan, he then
immediately refers to every kind of afflictions. We hence gather that we
have always to do with our spiritual enemy, however adversities may
come, or whatever they may be, whether diseases oppress us, or the
barrenness of the land threatens us with famine, or men persecute us.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p23"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p24"></span>**10** *But the God of all grace* After
having sufficiently dwelt on admonitions, he now turns to prayer; for
doctrine is in vain poured forth into the air, unless God works by his
Spirit. And this example ought to be followed by all the ministers of
God, that is, to pray that he may give success to their labors; for
otherwise they effect nothing either by planting or by watering.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p25"></span>Some copies have the future tense, as
though a promise is made; but the other reading is more commonly
received. At the same time, the Apostle, by praying God, confirms those
to whom he was writing, for when he calls God the author of *all grace,*
and reminds them that they were called to eternal glory, his purpose no
doubt was, to confirm them in the conviction, that the work of their
salvation, which he had begun, would be completed.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p26"></span>He is called the *God of all grace* from
the effect, from the gifts he bestows, according to the Hebrew manner.
 <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) And he mentions expressly *all
grace,* first that they might learn that every blessing is to be
ascribed to God; and secondly, that one grace is connected with another,
so that they might hope in future for the addition of those graces in
which they were hitherto wanting.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p28"></span>*Who hath called us* This, as I have
said, serves to increase confidence, because God is led not only by his
goodness, but also by his gracious benevolence, to aid us more and more.
He does not simply mention calling, but he shews wherefore they were
called, even that they might obtain eternal glory. He further fixes the
foundation of calling in Christ. Both these things serve to give
perpetual confidence, for if our calling is founded on Christ, and
refers to the celestial kingdom of God and a blessed immortality, it
follows that it is not transient nor fading.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p29"></span>It may also be right, by the way, to
observe that when he says that we are called *in Christ,* first, our
calling is established, because it is rightly founded; and secondly,
that all respect to our worthiness and merit is excluded; for that God,
by the preaching of the gospel, invites us to himself, it is altogether
gratuitous; and it is still a greater grace that he efficaciously
touches our hearts so as to lead us to obey his voice. Now Peter
especially addresses the faithful; he therefore connects the efficacious
power of the Spirit with the outward doctrine.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p30"></span>As to the three words which follow, some
copies have them in the ablative case, which may be rendered in Latin by
gerunds (<span id="iv.vi.iii-p30.1"></span>*fulciendo, roborando,
stabiliendo*) by supporting, by strengthening, by establishing.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) But in this there is not much importance
with regard to the meaning. Besides, Peter intends the same thing by all
these words, even to confirm the faithful; and he uses these several
words for this purpose, that we may know that to follow our course is a
matter of no common difficulty, and that therefore we need the special
grace of God. The words *suffered a while,* inserted here, shew that the
time of suffering is but short, and this is no small consolation.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p33"></span><span id="iv.vi.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p34"></span>**11** *To him be glory* That he might
add more confidence to the godly, he breaks out into thanksgiving.
Though this be read in the indicative as well as in the optative mood,
still the meaning is nearly the same.

<span id="iv.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#012)<span
id="iv.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p2"></span>**12**. By Silvanus, a faithful brother
unto you, as I suppose, I have written briefly, exhorting, and
testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye stand.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p3"></span>**12**. Per Silvanum vobis fidum fratrem
(ut arbitror) paucis scripsi, exhortans et testificans hanc esse veram
gratiam in qua statis.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p4"></span>**13**. The *church that is* at Babylon,
elected together with *you,* saluteth you; and *so doth* Marcus my son.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p5"></span>**13**. Salutat vos quae in Babylone est
Ecclesia, simul vobiscum electa, et Marcus filius meus.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p6"></span>**14**. Greet ye one another with a kiss
of charity. Peace *be* with you all that are in Christ Jesus. Amen.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p7"></span>**14**. Salutate vos invicem in osculo
charitatis. Gratia vobis omnibus qui estis in Christo Jesu.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p10"></span>**12** *By Silvanus* He exhorts them at
the conclusion of the Epistle to constancy in the faith: yea, he
declares that his design in writing, was to retain them in obedience to
the doctrine which they had embraced. But he first commends the brevity
of his Epistle, lest the reading of it should be tedious to them; and,
secondly, he adds a short commendation of his messenger, that the living
voice might be added to what was written; for this was the design of the
testimony he bears to his fidelity. But the exception, *as I suppose,*
or *think*, was added, either as token of modesty or to let them surely
know, that he spoke according to the conviction of his own mind; and it
was unreasonable for them not to assent to the judgment of so great an
apostle.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p11"></span>*Exhorting and testifying* How difficult
it is to continue in the faith! evidences of this are the daily
defections of many: nor, indeed, is such a thing to be wondered at, when
we consider how great is the levity and inconsistency of men, and how
great is their inclination to vanity. But as no doctrine can strike firm
and perpetual roots in men’s hearts, if it be accompanied with any
doubt, he testifies that God’s truth, in which they had been taught, was
certain. And, doubtless, except its certainty appears to our minds, we
must at all times necessarily vacillate, and be ready to turn at every
wind of new doctrine. By the *grace of God,* he means faith with all its
effects and fruits.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p12"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p13"></span>**13** *That is at Babylon* Many of the
ancients thought that Rome is here enigmatically denoted. This comment
the Papists gladly lay hold on, that Peter may appear to have presided
over the Church of Rome: nor does the infamy of the name deter them,
provided they can pretend to the title of an apostolic seat; nor do they
care for Christ, provided Peter be left to them. Moreover, let them only
retain the name of Peter’s chair, and they will not refuse to set Rome
in the infernal regions. But this old comment has no color of truth in
its favor; nor do I see why it was approved by Eusebius and others,
except that they were already led astray by that error, that Peter had
been at Rome. Besides, they are inconsistent with themselves. They say
that Mark died at Alexandria, in the eighth year of Nero; but they
imagine that Peter, six years after this, was put to death at Rome by
Nero. If Mark formed, as they say, the Alexandrian Church, and had been
long a bishop there, he could never have been at Rome with Peter. For
Eusebius and Jerome extend the time of Peter’s presidency at Rome to
twenty-five years; but this may be easily disproved by what is said in
<span id="iv.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>[Ga
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#000)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p13.1"></span> and
<span id="iv.vi.iv-p13.2"></span>[Ga
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span id="iv.vi.iv-p13.2"></span>
chapter of the Epistle to the Galatians.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p14"></span>Since, then, Peter had Mark as his
companion when he wrote this Epistle, it is very probable that he was at
Babylon: and this was in accordance with his calling; for we know that
he was appointed an apostle especially to the Jews. He therefore visited
chiefly those parts where there was the greatest number of that nation.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p15"></span>In saying that the Church there was a
partaker of the same election, his object was to confirm others more and
more in the faith; for it was a great matter that the Jews were gathered
into the Church, in so remote a part of the world.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p16"></span>*My son* So he calls Mark for honor’s
sake; the reason, however, is, because he had begotten him in the faith,
as Paul did Timothy.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p17"></span><span id="iv.vi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p18"></span>Of the *kiss of love* we have spoken
elsewhere. Now he bids this to be the kiss of love,  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) so that the sincerity of the heart might
correspond with the external act.

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p20"></span>END OF THE FIRST EPISTLE OF PETER

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc45009.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p16"></span> The most obvious meaning is, that Peter
had been an *eye-witness* of Christ’s sufferings. So the word “witness”
is taken by *Grotius, Macknight, Doddridge,* and *Scott.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc45009.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p22"></span> The *Vulgate,* called here and elsewhere,
“the old interpreter,” seems to be the most correct, as viewed by most
critics. The same form of words is found in the first verse, “The elders
*who are among you*.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc45009.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p24"></span> By far the most approved reading is “of
God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc45009.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p27"></span> We read in <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p27.1"></span>[1Pe
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.vi.iii-p27.1"></span>, of “the manifold grace of God,” which may
be viewed as explanatory of “the God of all grace.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc45009.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p31"></span> It seems that the preponderance as to
readings is in favor of this construction, for *Griesbach* has
introduced into his text these three words as nouns, <span
id="iv.vi.iii-p31.1"></span>στηρίξει, σθενώσει, θεμελιώσει, but it is a
harsh construction. The probability is, that this reading has been
introduced because of the sense, as it was not seen how these words
could come after “make perfect.” But the order is according to the usual
style of the prophets, examples of which are also found in the New
Testament: the ultimate object is mentioned first, and then what leads
to it. The writer, as it were, retrogrades instead of going forward. See
on this subject the preface to the third volume of *Calvin’s*
Commentaries on Jeremiah.

<span id="iv.vi.iii-p32"></span>Divested of this peculiarity, the words
would run thus: “may he establish, strengthen, confirm, perfect you;”
that is, to give the words more literally, “may he put you on a solid
foundation, render you strong, render you firm, make you perfect.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc45009.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iv.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.iv-p19"></span> See a Note in the Epistle to the Romans,
p. 547. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on First John](cc45010)
