[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45035)  [Next](cc45037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span>A Translation Of

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>Calvin’s Version OF

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>THE SECOND EPISTLE OF PETER.

<span id="ix.iv.i"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="ix.iv.i-p3"></span>**1** Simeon Peter, a servant and an
apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained an equally precious
faith with us, through the righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus
Christ;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p4"></span>**2** Grace to you and peace be multiplied,
through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p5"></span>**3** As his divine power has given us all
things which *pertain* to life and godliness, through the knowledge of
him who hath called us by his own glory and power;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p6"></span>**4** By which also very great and precious
promises have been freely given us, that through these ye might become
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in
the world through lust.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p7"></span>**5** And for this purpose using all
diligence, add to your faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p8"></span>**6** And to knowledge, temperance; and to
temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p9"></span>**7** And to godliness, brotherly
affection; and to brotherly affection, love:

<span id="ix.iv.i-p10"></span>**8** For if these be in you, and be
abounding, they make you to be neither idle nor unfruitful in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p11"></span>**9** But he in whom these things are
wanting is blind, and cannot see afar off, having forgotten the
cleansing of his old sins.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p12"></span>**10** Therefore, brethren, strive the
more to make your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things,
ye shall never fall:

<span id="ix.iv.i-p13"></span>**11** For thus shall abundantly be
supplied to you an entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p14"></span>**12** I will not, therefore, neglect
always to remind you of these things, though ye know them, and have been
confirmed in the present truth.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p15"></span>**13** Yea, I think it right, as long as I
am in this tabernacle, to stir you up by reminding you;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p16"></span>**14** Since I know that I am shortly to
put away this tabernacle, as also our Lord Jesus Christ hath made
manifest to me.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p17"></span>**15** I will, however, endeavor, that ye
may also be able to have these things always in remembrance after my
departure.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p18"></span>**16** For it was not cunningly-devised
fables that we followed, when we made known to you the power and the
corning of our Lord Jesus Christ; but we were eye-witnesses of his
majesty:

<span id="ix.iv.i-p19"></span>**17** For he received from God the Father
honor and glory, when such a voice as this came to him from the
magnificent glory, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have been well
pleased."

<span id="ix.iv.i-p20"></span>**18** And this voice we heard, when we
were with him on the holy mount.

<span id="ix.iv.i-p21"></span>**19** And we have the more sure word of
prophecy, to which ye do well in attending, as to a light shining in a
dark place, until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts;

<span id="ix.iv.i-p22"></span>**20** Knowing this first, that no
prophecy of the Scripture is of a private suggestion:

<span id="ix.iv.i-p23"></span>**21** For prophecy came not formerly by
the will of man; but holy men of God spoke, being moved by the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="ix.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p3"></span>**1** There were, however, false prophets
also among the people; as there will also be false teachers among you,
who will stealthily bring in opinions of perdition, denying even the
Lord who has redeemed them, bringing on themselves swift destruction.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p4"></span>**2** And many shall follow their ruinous
courses, through whom the way of truth shall be blasphemed.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p5"></span>**3** And through avarice they shall make
a trade of you by feigned words; whose judgment a long ago ceases not,
and whose perdition does not slumber.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p6"></span>**4** For if God spared not the angels who
had sinned, but having cast them into hell in chains of darkness,
delivered them to be kept for judgment;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p7"></span>**5** And if he spared not the old world,
but saved Noah, the eighth *person,* a preacher of righteousness, having
brought in the flood on the world of the ungodly;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p8"></span>**6** And if having turned into ashes the
cities of the Sodomites and of Gomorrah, he condemned *them* with an
overthrew, having made them an example to those who would live ungodly,

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p9"></span>**7** And delivered the righteous Lot, who
was vexed by the wicked through their lascivious conduct;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p10"></span>**8** For that righteous man, while
dwelling among them, had by seeing and hearing his righteous soul daily
tormented by their iniquitous deeds;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p11"></span>**9** The Lord. knoweth how to deliver
the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust for the day of
judgment to be punished;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p12"></span>**10** And especially those who walk
after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise government:
audacious *and* refractory, they fear not to blaspheme dignities,

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p13"></span>**11** When angels, who are greater in
strength and power, bring no railing judgment against them before the
Lord.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p14"></span>**12** But these, as brute animals,
naturally made to be taken and destroyed, blaspheming those things which
they understand not, shall perish in their own corruption, receiving the
reward of unrighteousness;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p15"></span>**13** Deeming riot in the day-time a
pleasure, *they are* blots and stains, rioting in their own errors,
while feasting with you;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p16"></span>**14** Having eyes full of adultery,
which cease not from sin, ensnaring unstable souls, having a heart
exercised in lusts, accursed children;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p17"></span>**15** Who having left the right way,
have gone astray, following the way of Balaam, the son of Bosor, who
loved the reward of unrighteousness;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p18"></span>**16** But was reproved for his iniquity;
a mute beast of burden, speaking with the human voice, restrained the
madness of the prophet.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p19"></span>**17** These are fountains without,
water, clouds driven by a tempest, for whom has been prepared thick
darkness for ever.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p20"></span>**18** For when they speak most haughty
words of vanity, they ensnare through the lusts of the flesh, by
lasciviousness, those who had really escaped from such as live in error;

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p21"></span>**19** While they promise them liberty,
they themselves are the slaves of corruption; for by whom any one is
overcome, to him is he brought into bondage.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p22"></span>**20** For if they who had escaped from
the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, become again entangled with these, and are
overcome, the last *pollutions* become worse to them than the former:

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p23"></span>**21** For it would have been better for
them not to have known the way of righteousness, than to have known
*it,* and to turn away from the holy commandment delivered to them.

<span id="ix.iv.ii-p24"></span>**22** But what is said in the true
proverb has happened to them, "The dog has returned to his own vomit,
and the washen sow to *her* wallowing in the mire."

<span id="ix.iv.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p3"></span>**1** This second Epistle, beloved, I now
write to you; in both which I stir up your pure mind by admonition,

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p4"></span>**2** That ye may remember the words
which have been foretold by the holy Prophets and the commandment of us
who are the apostles of the Lord and Savior;

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p5"></span>**3** Knowing this first, that scoffers
will come in the last days, walking according to their own lusts,

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p6"></span>**4** And saying, "Where is the promise
of his coming? for since the fathers have slept, all things remain as
from the beginning of the creation."

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p7"></span>**5** For of this they are wilfully
ignorant, that by the word of God the heavens were formerly, and the
earth, subsisting by water and through water;

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p8"></span>**6** Through which the world, which then
was, perished, being overflowed with water.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p9"></span>**7** But the heavens and the earth,
which are now, are reserved by the word of the same, and are kept for
fire against the day of judgment and of the perdition of the ungodly.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p10"></span>**8** But of this one thing, beloved, be
ye not ignorant, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and
a thousand years as one day.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p11"></span>**9** The Lord does not delay as to his
promise, as some count delay, but is patient towards us, not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p12"></span>**10** But the day of the Lord will come
as a thief in the night, in which the heavens with a tempest shall pass
away, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth and all its
works shall be burnt up.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p13"></span>**11** Since then all these things shall
be dissolved, what ought we to be in all holy conduct and all godliness;

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p14"></span>**12** Waiting in haste for the coming
of the day of God; on account of which the heavens being on fire, shall
be dissolved, and the elements shall be consumed with heat.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p15"></span>**13** But according to his promise we
look for new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p16"></span>**14** Therefore, beloved, since ye look
for these things, labor to be found by him in peace, unpolluted and
blameless;

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p17"></span>**15** And regard the patience of our
Lord as salvation, as also our beloved brother Paul has written to you
according to the wisdom given to him; as also in all his Epistles,
speaking of these things; in which there are some things hard to be
understood, which the unlearned and the unstable pervert,

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p18"></span>**16** As also other scriptures, to
their own ruin.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p19"></span>**17** Do ye then, beloved, being
forewarned, take heed, lest ye, being led away by the error of the
wicked, should fall from your own steadfastness.

<span id="ix.iv.iii-p20"></span>**18** But grow in the grace and
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to him be glory both now
and for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jude](cc45037)
