[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45007)  [Next](cc45009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v"></span>

<span id="iv.v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p2"></span>**1.** Forasmuch then as Christ hath
suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves likewise with the same
mind: for he that hath suffered in the flesh hath ceased from sin;

<span id="iv.v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Christo igitur passo pro nobis carne,
vos quoque eadem cogitatione armamini; quod scilicet qui passus est in
carne, destitit à peccato;

<span id="iv.v.i-p4"></span>**2.** That he no longer should live the
rest of *his* time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of
God.

<span id="iv.v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ne amplius hominum concupiscentiis,
sed voluntati Dei, quod residuum est temporis in carne, vivat.

<span id="iv.v.i-p6"></span>**3.** For the time past of *our* life may
suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and
abominable idolatries:

<span id="iv.v.i-p7"></span>**3.** Satis enim nobis est quod anteacto
vitae tempore voluntatem gentium patraverimus, quum ambularemus in
lasciviis, concupiscentiis, comessationibus, potationibus et nefariis
idololatriis:

<span id="iv.v.i-p8"></span>**4.** Wherein they think it strange that ye
run not with *them* to the same excess of riot, speaking evil of *you*:

<span id="iv.v.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quod illis videtur insolens, quòd non
concurratis in eandem luxus profusionem, ideoque malè loquuntur;

<span id="iv.v.i-p10"></span>**5.** Who shall give account to him that
is ready to judge the quick and the dead.

<span id="iv.v.i-p11"></span>**5.** Qui reddituri sunt rationem ei qui
paratus est judicare vivos et mortuos.

<span id="iv.v.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.i-p13"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p14"></span>**1** *Forasmuch then as Christ* When he
had before set forth Christ before us, he only spoke of the suffering of
the cross; for sometimes the cross means mortification, because the
outward man is wasted by afflictions, and our flesh is also subdued. But
he now ascends higher; for he speaks of the reformation of the whole
man. The Scripture recommends to us a twofold likeness to the death of
Christ, that we are to be conformed to him in reproaches and troubles,
and also that the old man being dead and extinct in us, we are to be
renewed to a spiritual life. (<span id="iv.v.i-p14.1"></span>[Php
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010)<span id="iv.v.i-p14.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.v.i-p14.2"></span>[Ro
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="iv.v.i-p14.2"></span>.)
Yet Christ is not simply to be viewed as our example, when we speak of
the mortificaion of the flesh; but it is by his Spirit that we are
really made conformable to his death, so that it becomes effectual to
the crucifying of our flesh. In short, as Peter at the end of the last
chapter exhorted us to patience after the example of Christ, because
death was to him a passage to life; so now from the same death he
deduces a higher doctrine, that we ought to die to the flesh and to the
world, as Paul teaches us more at large in <span
id="iv.v.i-p14.3"></span>[Ro
6:1-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.i-p14.3"></span>.
He therefore says, *arm yourselves,* or *be ye armed,* intimating that
we are really and effectually supplied with invincible weapons to subdue
the flesh, if we partake as we ought of the efficacy of Christ’s death.

<span id="iv.v.i-p15"></span>*For he that hath suffered* The particle
<span id="iv.v.i-p15.1"></span>ὅτι does not, I think, denote here the
cause, but is to be taken as explanatory; for Peter sets forth what that
thought or mind is with which Christ’s death arms us, even that the
dominion of sin ought to be abolished in us, so that God may reign in
our life. Erasmus has incorrectly, as I think, rendered the word “he who
did suffer,” (<span id="iv.v.i-p15.2"></span>*patiebatur*) applying it
to Christ. For it is an indefinite sentence, which generally extends to
all the godly, and has the same meaning with the words of Paul in <span
id="iv.v.i-p15.3"></span>[Ro 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span
id="iv.v.i-p15.3"></span>,

<span id="iv.v.i-p16"></span>“He who is dead is justified or freed from
sin;”

<span id="iv.v.i-p17"></span>for both the Apostles intimate, that when
we become dead to the flesh, we have no more to do with sin, that it
should reign in us, and exercise its power in our life.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43)

<span id="iv.v.i-p22"></span>It may, however, be objected, that Peter
here speaks unsuitably in making us to be conformable to Christ in this
respect, that we suffer in the flesh; for it is certain that there was
nothing sinful in Christ which required to be corrected. But the answer
is obvious, that it is not necessary that a comparison should correspond
in all its parts. It is then enough that we should in a measure be made
conformable to the death of Christ. In the same way is also explained,
not unfitly, what Paul says, that we are planted in the likeness of his
death, (<span id="iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>[Ro
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span id="iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>;)
for the manner is not altogether the same, but that his death is become
in a manner the type and pattern of our mortification.

<span id="iv.v.i-p23"></span>We must also notice that the word *flesh*
is put here twice, but in a different sense; for when he says that
Christ suffered in the flesh, he means that the human nature which
Christ had taken from us was made subject to death, that is, that Christ
as a man naturally died. In the second clause, which refers to us,
*flesh* means the corruption, and the sinfulness of our nature; and thus
suffering in the flesh signifies the denying of ourselves. We now see
what is the likeness between Christ and us, and what is the difference;
that as he suffered in the flesh taken from us, so the whole of our
flesh ought to be crucified.

<span id="iv.v.i-p24"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p25"></span>**2** *That he no longer* Here he sets
forth the way of ceasing from sin, that renouncing the covetings of men
we should study to form our life according to the will of God. And thus
he includes here the two things in which renovation consists, the
destruction of the flesh and the vivification of the spirit. The course
of good living is thus to begin with the former, but we are to advance
to the latter.

<span id="iv.v.i-p26"></span>Moreover, Peter defines here what is the
rule of right living, even when man depends on the will of God. It hence
follows, that nothing is right and well ordered in man’s life as soon as
he wanders from this rule. We ought further to notice the contrast
between *God’s will* and the *covetings* or *lusts of men* We hence
understand how great is our depravity, and how we ought to strive to
become obedient to God. When he says, *the rest of time in the flesh,*
the word *flesh* means the present life, as in <span
id="iv.v.i-p26.1"></span>[Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.v.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p27"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p28"></span>**3** *For the time past of our life may
suffice* Peter does not mean that we ought to be wearied with pleasures,
as those are wont to be who are filled with them to satiety; but that on
the contrary the memory of our past life ought to stimulate us to
repentance. And doubtless it ought to be the sharpest goad to make us
run on well, when we recollect that we have been wandering from the
right way the greatest part of our life. And Peter reminds us, that it
would be most unreasonable were we not to change the course of our life
after having been enlightened by Christ. For he makes a distinction here
between the time of ignorance and the time of faith, as though he had
said that it was but right that they should become new and different men
from the time that Christ had called them. But instead of the *lusts* or
covetings of men, he now mentions *the will of the Gentiles,* by which
he reproves the Jews for having mixed with the Gentiles in all their
pollutions, though the Lord had separated them from the Gentiles.

<span id="iv.v.i-p29"></span>In what follows he shews that those vices
ought to be put off which prove men to be blind and ignorant of God. And
there is a peculiar emphasis in the words, *the time past of our life,*
for he intimates that we ought to persevere to the end, as when Paul
says, that Christ was raised from the dead, to die no more. (<span
id="iv.v.i-p29.1"></span>[Ro 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span
id="iv.v.i-p29.1"></span>.) For we have been redeemed by the Lord for
this end, that we may serve him all the days of our life.

<span id="iv.v.i-p30"></span>*In lasciviousness* He does not give the
whole catalogue of sins, but only mentions some of them, by which we may
briefly learn what those things are which men, not renewed by God’s
Spirit, desire and seek, and to which they are inclined. And he names
the grosser vices, as it is usually done when examples are adduced. I
shall not stop to explain the words, for there is no difficulty in them.

<span id="iv.v.i-p31"></span>But here a question arises, that Peter
seems to have done wrong to many, in making all men guilty of
lasciviousness, dissipation, lusts, drunkenness, and revellings; for it
is certain that all were not involved in these vices; nay, we know that
some among the Gentiles lived honourably and without a spot of infamy.
To this I reply, that Peter does not so ascribe these vices to the
Gentiles, as though he charged every individual with all these, but that
we are by nature inclined to all these evils, and not only so, but that
we are so much under the power of depravity, that these fruits which he
mentions necessarily proceed from it as from an evil root. There is
indeed no one who has not within him the seed of all vices, but all do
not germinate and grow up in every individual. Yet the contagion is so
spread and diffused through the whole human race, that the whole
community appears infected with innumerable evils, and that no member is
free or pure from the common corruption.

<span id="iv.v.i-p32"></span>The last clause may also suggest another
question, for Peter addressed the Jews, and yet he says that they had
been immersed in abominable idolatries; but the Jews then living in
every part of the world carefully abstained from idols. A twofold answer
may be adduced here, either that by mentioning the whole for a part, he
declares of all what belonged to a few, (for there is no doubt but the
Churches to which he wrote were made up of Gentiles as well as of Jews,)
or that he calls those superstitions in which the Jews were then
involved, idolatries; for though they professed to worship the God of
Israel, yet we know that no part of divine worship was genuine among
them. And how great must have been the confusion in barbarous countries
and among a scattered people, when Jerusalem itself, from whose rays
they borrowed their light, had fallen into extreme impiety! for we know
that dotages of every kind prevailed with impunity, so that the
high-priesthood, and the whole government of the Church, were in the
power of the Sadducees.

<span id="iv.v.i-p33"></span><span id="iv.v.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p34"></span>**4** *Wherein they think it strange* The
words of Peter literally are these, “In which they are strangers, you
not running with them into the same excess of riot, blaspheming.” But
the word, *to be strangers*, means to stop at a thing as new and
unusual. This is a way of speaking which the Latins also sometimes use,
as when Cicero says that he was a stranger in the city, because he knew
not what was carried on there. But in this place, Peter fortifies the
faithful, lest they should suffer themselves to be disturbed or
corrupted by the perverse judgments or words of the ungodly. For it is
no light temptation, when they among whom we live, charge us that our
life is different from that of mankind in general. “These,” they say,
“must form for themselves a new world, for they differ from all
mankind.” Thus they accuse the children of God, as though they attempted
a separation from the whole world.

<span id="iv.v.i-p35"></span>Then the Apostle anticipated this, and
forbade the faithful to be discouraged by such reproaches and calumnies;
and he proposed to them, as a support, the judgment of God: for this it
is that can sustain us against all assaults, that is, when we patiently
wait for that day, in which Christ will punish all those who now
presumptuously condemn us, and will shew that we and our cause are
approved by Him. And he expressly mentions *the living and the dead,*
lest we should think that we shall suffer any loss, if they remain alive
when we are dead; for they shall not, for this reason, escape the hand
of God. And in what sense he calls them the living and the dead, we may
learn from <span id="iv.v.i-p35.1"></span>[1Co
15:12-34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)<span
id="iv.v.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
4:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#006)<span id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span>**6.** For for this cause was the gospel
preached also to them that are dead, that they might be judged according
to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span>**6.** In hoc enim et mortuis evangelizatus
fuit (*vel, praedicatum fuit evangelium,*) ut judicentur quidem secundum
homines carne, vivant autem secundum Deum spiritu.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p4"></span>**7.** But the end of all things is at
hand: be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Porro omnium finis propinquus est:
sobrii itaque estote, et vigilantes ad precandum.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p6"></span>**8.** And above all things have fervent
charity among yourselves: for charity shall cover the multitude of sins.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Ante omnia vero charitatem inter vos
intentam habentes; quia charitas operiet multitudinem peccatorum.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p8"></span>**9.** Use hospitality one to another
without grudging.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Invicem hospitales sine
murmurationibus.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p10"></span>**10**. As every man hath received the
gift, *even so* minister the same one to another, as good stewards of
the manifold grace of God.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p11"></span>**10**. Ut quisque aecepit donum,
ministrantes illud inter vos, tanquam boni dispensatores multiplicis
gratiae Dei.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p12"></span>**11**. If any speak, *let him speak* as
the oracles of God; if any man minister, *let him do it* as of the
ability which God giveth: that God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p13"></span>**11**. Siquis loquitur, loquatur tanquam
eloquia Dei; siquis ministrat, tanquam ex virtute quam suppeditat Deus;
ut in omnibus glorificetur Deus per Jesum Christum; cui est gloria et
imperium in secula seculorum. Amen.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.ii-p15"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p16"></span>**6** *For this cause was the gospel
preached also to them that are dead,* or, *He has been evangelized to
the dead*. We see in what sense he takes the former passage in the third
chapter, even that death does not hinder Christ from being always our
defender. It is then a remarkable consolation to the godly, that death
itself brings no loss to their salvation. Though Christ, then, may not
appear a deliverer in this life, yet his redemption is not void, or
without effect; for his power extends to the dead. But as the Greek word
is doubtful, it may be rendered in the masculine, or in the neuter
gender; but the meaning is almost the same, that is, that Christ had
been made known as a redeemer to the dead, or that salvation had been
made known to them by the gospel. But if the grace of Christ once
penetrated to the dead, there is no doubt but that we shall partake of
it when dead. We then set for it limits much too narrow, if we confine
it to the present life.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p17"></span>*That they might be judged* I omit the
explanations of others, for they seem to me to be very remote from the
Apostle’s meaning. This has been said, as I think, by way of
anticipation, for it might have been objected, that the gospel is of no
benefit to the dead, as it does not restore them to life. Peter concedes
a part of this objection, and yet in such a way, that they are not
deprived of the salvation obtained by Christ. Therefore, in the first
clause, when he says, “that they might be judged in the flesh, according
to men,” it is a concession; and “judged” means here, as often
elsewhere, condemned; and *flesh* is the outward man. So that the
meaning is, that though according to the estimation of the world the
dead suffer destruction in their flesh, and are deemed condemned as to
the outward man, yet they cease not to live with God, and that in their
spirit, because Christ quickens them by his Spirit.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p18"></span>But we ought to add what Paul teaches us
in <span id="iv.v.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)<span id="iv.v.ii-p18.1"></span>,
that the Spirit is life; and hence it will be, that he will at length
absorb the relics of death which still cleave to us. The sum of what he
says is, that though the condition of the dead in the flesh is worse,
according to man, yet it is enough that the Spirit of Christ revives
them, and will eventually lead them to the perfection of life.  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p23"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p24"></span>**7** *But,* or, *moreover*, *the end of
all things is at hand* Though the faithful hear that their felicity is
elsewhere than in the world, yet, as they think that they should live
long, this false thought renders them careless, and even slothful, so
that they direct not their thoughts to the kingdom of God. Hence the
Apostle, that he might rouse them from the drowsiness of the flesh,
reminds them that the end of all things was nigh; by which he intimates
that we ought not to sit still in the world, from which we must soon
remove. He does not, at the same time, speak only of the end of
individuals, but of the universal renovation of the world; as though he
had said, “Christ will shortly come, who will put an end to all things.”

<span id="iv.v.ii-p25"></span>It is, then, no wonder that the cares of
this world overwhelm us, and make us drowsy, if the view of present
things dazzles our eyes: for we promise, almost all of us, an eternity
to ourselves in this world; at least, the end never comes to our mind.
But were the trumpet of Christ to sound in our ears, it would powerfully
rouse us and not suffer us to lie torpid.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p26"></span>But it may be objected and said, that a
long series of ages has passed away since Peter wrote this, and yet that
the end is not come. My reply to this is, that the time seems long to
us, because we measure its length by the spaces of this fleeting life;
but if we could understand the perpetuity of future life, many ages
would appear to us like a moment, as Peter will also tell us in his
second epistle. Besides, we must remember this principle, that from the
time when Christ once appeared, there is nothing left for the faithful,
but with suspended minds ever to look forward to his second coming.
 <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p28"></span>The *watchfulness* and the *sobriety* to
which he exhorted them, belong, as I think, to the mind rather than to
the body. The words are similar to those of Christ:

<span id="iv.v.ii-p29"></span>“Watch ye, for ye know neither the day nor
the hour wherein the Son of Man cometh.” (<span
id="iv.v.ii-p29.1"></span>[Mt
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#013)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p30"></span>For as an indulgence in surfeiting and
sleep renders the body unfit for its duties, so the vain cares and
pleasures of the world inebriate the mind and render it drowsy.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p31"></span>By adding *prayer,* he points out an
exercise especially necessary, in which the faithful ought to be
particularly occupied, since their whole strength depends on the Lord;
as though he had said, *“Since* ye are in yourselves extremely weak,
seek of the Lord to strengthen you.” He yet reminds them that they were
to pray earnestly, not formally.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p32"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p33"></span>**8** *And above all things* He commends
charity or love as the first thing, for it is the bond of perfection.
And he bids it to be *fervent,* or intense, or vehement, which is the
same thing; for whosoever is immoderately fervent in self-love, loves
others coldly. And he commends it on account of its fruit, because it
buries innumerable sins, than which nothing is more desirable. But the
sentence is taken from Solomon, whose words are found in <span
id="iv.v.ii-p33.1"></span>[Pr
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)<span id="iv.v.ii-p33.1"></span>,

<span id="iv.v.ii-p34"></span>“Hatred discovers reproaches, but love
covers a multitude of sins.”

<span id="iv.v.ii-p35"></span>What Solomon meant is sufficiently clear,
for the two clauses contain things which are set in contrast the one
with the other. As then he says in the first clause that hatred is the
cause why men traduce and defame one another, and spread whatever is
reproachful and dishonorable; so it follows that a contrary effect is
ascribed to love, that is, that men who love one another, kindly and
courteously forgive one another; hence it comes that, willingly burying
each other’s vices, one seeks to preserve the honor of another.  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) Thus Peter confirms his exhortation, that
nothing is more necessary than to cherish mutual love. For who is there
that has not many faults? Therefore all stand in need of forgiveness,
and there is no one who does not wish to be forgiven.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p37"></span>This singular benefit love brings to us
when it exists among us, so that innumerable evils are covered in
oblivion. On the other hand, where loose reins are given to hatred, men
by mutual biting and tearing must necessarily consume one another, as
Paul says (<span id="iv.v.ii-p37.1"></span>[Ga
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span id="iv.v.ii-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.v.ii-p38"></span>And it ought to be noticed that Solomon
does not say that only a few sins are covered, but a multitude of sins,
according to what Christ declares, when he bids us to forgive our
brethren seventy times seven, (<span id="iv.v.ii-p38.1"></span>[Mt
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#022)<span
id="iv.v.ii-p38.1"></span>.) But the more sins love covers, the more
evident appears its usefulness for the wellbeing of mankind.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p39"></span>This is the plain meaning of the words. It
hence appears how absurd are the Papists, who seek to elicit from this
passage their own satisfactions, as though almsgiving and other duties
of charity were a sort of a compensation to God for blotting out their
sins.  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) It is enough to point out by
the way their gross ignorance, for in a matter so clear it would be
superfluous to add many words.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p41"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p42"></span>**9** *Use hospitality,* or, *Be
hospitable*. After having generally exhorted them to love one another,
he specially mentions one of the duties of love. At that time
hospitality was commonly used, and it was deemed in a manner a sacred
kind of humanity, as we have stated elsewhere. He then bids them
mutually to exercise it, so that no one might require more from others
than what he himself was prepared to render. He adds, *without
murmurings,* for it is a rare example that one spends himself and his
own on his neighbor without any disparaging reflection. Then the Apostle
would have us to show kindness willingly and with a cheerful mind.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p43"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p44"></span>**10** *As every one hath received* He
reminds us what we ought to bear in mind when we do good to our
neighbors; for nothing is more fitted to correct our murmurings than to
remember that we do not give our own, but only dispense what God has
committed to us. When therefore he says, “Minister the gift which every
one has received,” he intimates that to each had been distributed what
they had, on this condition, that in helping their brethren they might
be the ministers of God. And thus the second clause is an explanation of
the first, for instead of ministry he mentions stewardship; and for what
he had said, “as every one hath received the gift,” he mentions the
manifold graces which God variously distributes to us, so that each
might confer in common his own portion. If then we excel others in any
gift, let us remember that we are as to this the stewards of God, in
order that we may kindly impart it to our neighbors as their necessity
or benefit may require. Thus we ought to be disposed and ready to
communicate.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p45"></span>But this consideration is also very
important, that the Lord hath so divided his manifold graces, that no
one is to be content with one thing and with his own gifts, but every
one has need of the help and aid of his brother. This, I say, is a bond
which God hath appointed for retaining friendship among men, for they
cannot live without mutual assistance. Thus it happens, that he who in
many things seeks the aid of his brethren, ought to communicate to them
more freely what he has received. This bond of unity has been observed
and noticed by heathens. But Peter teaches us here that God had
designedly done this, that he might bind men one to another.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p46"></span><span id="iv.v.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p47"></span>**11** *If any man speak* As he had spoken
of the right and faithful use of gifts, he specifies two things as
examples, and he has chosen those which are the most *excellent* or the
most renowned. The office of teaching in the Church is a remarkable
instance of God’s favor. He then expressly commands those called to this
office to act faithfully; though he does not speak here only of what we
owe to men, but also of what we owe to God, so that we may not deprive
him of his glory.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p48"></span>He who speaks, then, that is, who is
rightly appointed by public authority, *let him speak as the oracles of
God;* that is, let him reverently in God’s fear and in sincerity perform
the charge committed to him, regarding himself as engaged in God’s work,
and as ministering God’s word and not his own. For he still refers to
the doctrine, that when we confer any thing on the brethren, we minister
to them by God’s command what he has bestowed on us for that purpose.
And truly, were all those who profess to be teachers in the Church duly
to consider this one thing, there would be in them much more fidelity
and devotedness. For how great a thing is this, that in teaching the
oracles of God, they are representatives of Christ! Hence then comes so
much carelessness and rashness, because the sacred majesty of God’s word
is not borne in mind but by a few; and so they indulge themselves as in
a worldly stewardship.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p49"></span>In the meantime, we learn from these words
of Peter, that it is not lawful for those who are engaged in teaching to
do anything else, but faithfully to deliver to others, as from hand to
hand, the doctrine received from God; for he forbids any one to go
forth, except he who is instructed in God’s word, and who proclaims
infallible oracles as it were from his mouth. He, therefore, leaves no
room for human inventions; for he briefly defines the doctrine which
ought to be taught in the Church. Nor is the particle of similitude
introduced here for the purpose of modifying the sentence, as though it
were sufficient to profess that it is God’s word that is taught. This
was, indeed, commonly the case formerly with false prophets; and we see
at this day how arrogantly the Pope and his followers cover with this
pretense all their impious traditions. But Peter did not intend to teach
pastors such hypocrisy as this, to pretend that they had from God
whatever doctrine it pleased them to announce, but, he took an argument
from the subject itself, that he might exhort them to sobriety and
meekness, to a reverence for God, and to an earnest attention to their
work.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p50"></span>*If any man minister* This second clause
extends wider, it includes the office of teaching. But as it would have
been too long to enumerate each of the ministerial works, he preferred
summarily to speak of them all together, as though he had said,
“Whatever part of the burden thou bearest in the Church, know that thou
canst do nothing but what has been given time by the Lord, and that thou
art nothing else but an instrument of God: take heed, then, not to abuse
the grace of God by exalting thyself; take heed not to suppress the
power of God, which puts forth and manifests itself in the ministry for
the salvation of the brethren.” Let him then minister *as by God’s
power,* that is, let him regard nothing as his own, but let him humbly
render service to God and his Church.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p51"></span>*That God in all things may be glorified*
When he says, *In all,* the word may be in the masculine or in the
neuter gender; and thus men or gifts may be meant, and both meanings are
equally suitable. The sense is, that God does not adorn us with his
gifts, that he may rob himself and make himself as it were an empty idol
by transferring to us his own glory, but that, on the contrary, his own
glory may everywhere shine forth; and that it is therefore a
sacrilegious profanation of God’s gifts when men propose to themselves
any other object than to glorify God. He says *through Jesus Christ,*
because whatever power we have to minister, he alone bestows it on us;
for he is the head, with which the whole body is connected by joints and
bindings, and maketh increase in the Lord, according as he supplieth
strength to every member.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p52"></span>*To whom be praise,* or *glory*. Some
refer this to Christ; but the context requires that it should be rather
applied to God; for he confirms the last exhortation, because God justly
claims all the glory; and, therefore, men wickedly take away from him
what is his own, when they obscure in anything, or in any part, his
glory.

<span id="iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
4:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p2"></span>**12**. Beloved, think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange
thing happened unto you:

<span id="iv.v.iii-p3"></span>**12**. Dilecti, ne miramini quum
exploramini per ignem ad probationem vestri, perinde ac si novum aliquid
vobis obtingat:

<span id="iv.v.iii-p4"></span>**13**. But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are
partakers of Christ’s sufferings; that, when his glory shall be
revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p5"></span>**13**. Sed quatenus consortes estis
passionum Christi gaudere; ut in revelatione quoque glorie ejus
gaudeatis exultantes.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p6"></span>**14**. If ye be reproached for the name
of Christ, happy *are ye*; for the spirit of glory and of God resteth
upon you: on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is
glorified.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p7"></span>**14**. Si probris afficimini in nomine
Christi, beati estis, quoniam Spiritus glorite et Dei super vos
requiescit; secundum ipsos quidem contumelia afficitur, secundun vos aut
em glorificatur.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p8"></span>**15**. But let none of you suffer as a
murderer, or *as* a thief, or *as* an evildoer, or as a busybody in
other men’s matters.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p9"></span>**15**. Ne quis enim vestrum patiatur, ut
homicida, aut fur, aut maleficus, aut cupidè rebus alienis inhians.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p10"></span>**16**. Yet if *any man suffer* as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this
behalf.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p11"></span>**16**. Si autem ut Christianus, ne
pudefiat, imo glorificet Deum in hac parte.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p12"></span>**17**. For the time *is come* that
judgment must begin at the house of God: —

<span id="iv.v.iii-p13"></span>**17**. Quandoquidem et tempus est, ut
judicium incipiat a domo Dei:—

<span id="iv.v.iii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.iii-p15"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p16"></span>**12** *Beloved, think it not strange,*
or, *wonder not*. There is a frequent mention made in this Epistle of
afflictions; the cause of which we have elsewhere explained. But this
difference is to be observed, that when he exhorts the faithful to
patience, he sometimes speaks generally of troubles common to man’s
life; but here he speaks of wrongs done to the faithful for the name of
Christ. And first, indeed, he reminded them that they ought not to have
deemed it strange as for a thing sudden and unexpected; by which he
intimates, that they ought by a long mediation to have been previously
prepared to bear the cross. For whosoever has resolved to fight under
Christ’s banner, will not be dismayed when persecution happens, but, as
one accustomed to it, will patiently bear it. That we may then be in a
prepared state of mind when the waves of persecutions roll over us, we
ought in due time to habituate ourselves to such an event by meditating
continually on the cross.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p17"></span>Moreover, he proves that the cross is
useful to us by two arguments, — that God thus tries our faith, — and
that we become thus partakers with Christ. Then, in the first place, let
us remember that the trial of our faith is most necessary, and that we
ought thus willingly to obey God who provides for our salvation.
However, the chief consolation is to be derived from a fellowship with
Christ. Hence Peter not only forbids us to think it strange, when he
sets this before us, but also bids us to rejoice. It is, indeed, a cause
of joy, when God tries our faith by persecution; but the other joy far
surpasses it, that is, when the Son of God allots to us the same course
of life with himself, that he might lead us with himself to a blessed
participation of heavenly glory. For we must bear in mind this truth,
that we have the dying of Christ in our flesh, that his life may be
manifested in us. The wicked also do indeed bear many afflictions; but
as they are separated from Christ, they apprehend nothing but God’s
wrath and curse: thus it comes that sorrow and dread overwhelm them.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p18"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p19"></span>Hence, then, is the whole consolation of
the godly, that they are associates with Christ, that hereafter they may
be partakers of his glory; for we are always to bear in mind this
transition from the cross to the resurrection. But as this world is like
a labyrinth, in which no end of evils appears, Peter refers to the
future revelation of Christ’s glory, as though he had said, that the day
of its revelation is not to be overlooked, but ought to be expected. But
he mentions a twofold joy, one which we now enjoy in hope, and the other
the full fruition of which the coming of Christ shall bring to us; for
the first is mingled with grief and sorrow, the second is connected with
exultation. For it is not suitable in the midst of afflictions to think
of joy, which can free us from all trouble; but the consolations of God
moderate evils, so that we can rejoice at the same time.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p20"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p21"></span>**14** *If ye be reproached* He mentions
reproaches, because there is often more bitterness in them than in the
loss of goods, or in the torments or agonies of the body; there is
therefore nothing which is more grievous to ingenuous minds. For we see
that many who are strong to bear want, courageous in torments, nay, bold
to meet death, do yet succumb under reproach. To obviate this evil,
Peter pronounces those blessed, according to what Christ says, (<span
id="iv.v.iii-p21.1"></span>[Mr
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#035)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p21.1"></span>,) who are reproached for the sake of the
Gospel. This is very contrary to what men commonly think and feel; but
he gives a reason, *Because the Spirit of God, called also the* *Spirit
of glory, rests on them*. Some read the words separately, “that which
belongs to glory,” as though the words were, *“glory* and the Spirit of
God.” But the former reading is more suitable as to the sense, and, as
to language, more simple. Then Peter shews, that it is no hindrance to
the happiness of the godly, that they sustain reproach for the name of
Christ, because they nevertheless retain a complete glory in the sight
of God, while the Spirit, who has glory ever connected with him, dwells
in them. So, what seems to the flesh a paradox, the Spirit of God makes
consistent by a sure perception in their minds.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p22"></span>*On their part* This is a confirmation of
the last sentence; for he intimates that it is enough for the godly,
that the Spirit of God testifies that the reproaches endured for the
sake of the Gospel, are blessed and full of glory. The wicked, however,
attempted to effect a far different object; as though he had said, “Ye
can boldly despise the insolence of the ungodly, because the testimony
respecting your glory, which God’s Spirit gives you, remains fixed
within.” And he says that the *Spirit* of God was reproached, because
the unbelieving expose to ridicule whatever he suggests and dictates for
our consolation. But this is by anticipation; for however the world in
its blindness may see nothing but what is disgraceful in the reproaches
of Christ, he would not have the eyes of the godly to be dazzled with
this false opinion; but on the contrary they ought to look up to God.
Thus he does not conceal what men commonly think; but he sets the hidden
perception of faith, which God’s children possess in their own hearts,
in opposition to their presumption and insolence. Thus Paul boasted that
he had the marks of Christ, and he gloried in his bonds. (<span
id="iv.v.iii-p22.1"></span>[Ga
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#017)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p22.1"></span>.) He had at the same time sufficiently found
out what was the judgment formed of them by the world; and yet he
intimates that it thought foolishly, and that those are blind together
with the world, who esteem the slanders of the flesh glorious.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p23"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p24"></span>**15.** *But* (or, *For*) *let one of
you* Here also he anticipates an objection. He had exhorted the faithful
to patience, if it happened to them to be persecuted for the cause of
Christ; he now adds the reason why he had only spoken of that kind of
trouble, even because they ought to have abstained from all evil-doing.
Here, then, is contained another exhortation, lest they should do
anything for which they might seem to be justly punished. Therefore the
causal particle is not, here superfluous, since the Apostle wished to
give a reason why he so much exhorted the faithful to a fellowship with
the sufferings of Christ, and at the same time to remind them by the way
to live justly and harmlessly, lest they should bring on themselves a
just punishment through their own faults; as though he had said, that it
behoved Christians to deserve well of all, even when they were badly and
cruelly treated by the world.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p25"></span>Were any one to object and say, that no
one can be found to be so innocent but that he deserves for many faults
to be chastised by God; to this I reply, that Peter here speaks of sins
from which we ought to be entirely freed, such as thefts and murders;
and I give further this reply, that the Apostle commands Christians to
be such as they ought to be. It, is, then, no wonder, that he points out
a difference between us and the children of this world, who being
without God’s Spirit, abandon themselves to every kind of wickedness. He
would not have God’s children to be in the same condition, so as to draw
on themselves by a wicked life the punishment allotted by the laws. But
we have already said elsewhere, that though there are always many sins
in the elect, which God might justly punish, yet according to his
paternal indulgence he spares his own children, so that he does not
inflict the punishment they deserve, and that in the meantime, for
honour’s sake, he adorns them with his own tokens and those of his
Christ, when he suffers them to be afflicted for the testimony of the
Gospel.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p26"></span>The word <span
id="iv.v.iii-p26.1"></span>ἀλλοτριοεπίσκοπος seems to me to designate
one who covets what belongs to another. For they who gape after plunder
or fraud, inquire into affairs of others with tortuous or crooked eyes,
as Horace says;  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) but the despiser
of money, as the same says elsewhere, looks on vast heaps of gold with a
straight eye.  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)

<span id="iv.v.iii-p30"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p31"></span>**16** *Yet if any man suffer as a
Christian* After having forbidden the Christians to do any hurt or harm,
lest for their evil deeds, like the unbelieving, they should become
hateful to the world, he now bids them to give thanks to God, if they
suffered persecutions for the name of Christ. And truly it is no common
kindness from God, that he calls us, freed and exempted from the common
punishment of our sins, to so honorable a warfare as to undergo for the
testimony of his Gospel either exiles, or prisons, or reproaches, or
even death itself. Then he intimates that those are ungrateful to God,
who clamor or murmur on account of persecutions, as though they were
unworthily dealt with, since on the contrary they ought to regard it as
gain and to acknowledge God’s favor.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p32"></span>But when he says, *as a Christian,* he
regards not so much the name as the cause. It is certain that the
adversaries of Christ omitted nothing in order to degrade the Gospel.
Therefore, whatever reproachful words they made use of, it was enough
for the faithful, that they suffered for nothing else but for the
defense of the Gospel.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p33"></span>*On this behalf,* or, *In this respect*.
For since all afflictions derive their origin from sin, this thought
ought to occur to the godly, “I am indeed worthy to be visited by the
Lord with this and even with greater punishment for my sins; but now he
would have me to suffer for righteousness, as though I were innocent.”
For how much soever the saints may acknowledge their own faults, yet as
in persecutions they regard a different end, such as the Lord sets
before them, they feel that their guilt is blotted out and abolished
before God. *On this behalf*, then, they have reason to glorify God.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p34"></span><span id="iv.v.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p35"></span>**17** *For the time is come,* or, *Since
also the time is come*. He amplifies the consolation, which the goodness
of the cause for which we suffer brings to us, while we are afflicted
for the name of Christ. For this necessity, he says, awaits the whole
Church of God, not only to be subject to the common miseries of men, but
especially and mainly to be chastised by the hand of God. Then, with
more submission, ought persecutions for Christ to be endured. For except
we desire to be blotted out from the number of the faithful, we must
submit our backs to the scourges of God. Now, it is a sweet consolation,
that God does not execute his judgments on us as on others, but that he
makes us the representatives of his own Son, when we do not suffer
except for his cause and for his name.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p36"></span>Moreover, Peter took this sentence from
the common and constant teaching of Scripture; and this seems more
probable to me than that a certain passage, as some think, is referred
to. It was formerly usual with the Lord, as all the prophets witness, to
exhibit the first examples of his chastisements in his own people, as
the head of a family corrects his own children rather than those of
strangers. (<span id="iv.v.iii-p36.1"></span>[Isa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p36.1"></span>.) For though God is the judge of the whole
world, yet he would have his providence to be especially acknowledged in
the government of his own Church. Hence, when he declares that he would
rise up to be the judge of the whole world, he adds that this would be
after he had completed his work on Mount Sion. He indeed puts forth his
hand indifferently against his own people and against strangers; for we
see that both are in common subjected to adversities; and if a
comparison be made, he seems in a manner to spare the reprobate, and to
be severe towards the elect. Hence the complaints of the godly, that the
wicked pass their life in continual pleasures, and delight themselves
with wine and the harp, and at length descend without pains in an
instant into the grave — that fatness covers their eyes — that they are
exempt from troubles — that they securely and joyfully spend their life,
looking down with contempt on others, so that they dare to set their
mouth against heaven. (<span id="iv.v.iii-p36.2"></span>[Job
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p36.2"></span>; <span id="iv.v.iii-p36.3"></span>[Ps
73:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p36.3"></span>.) In short, God so regulates his judgments
in this world, that he fattens the wicked for the day of slaughter. He
therefore passes by their many sins, and, as it were, connives at them.
In the meantime, he restores by corrections his own children, for whom
he has a *care,* to the right way, whenever they depart from it.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p37"></span>In this sense it is that Peter says that
judgment begins at the house of God; for judgment includes all those
punishments which the Lord inflicts on men for their sins, and whatever
refers to the reformation of the world.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p38"></span>But why does he say that it was *now the
time?* He means, as I think, what the prophets declare concerning his
own time, that it especially belonged to Christ’s kingdom, that the
beginning of the reformation should be in the Church. Hence Paul says
that Christians, without the hope of a resurrection, would of all men be
the most miserable, (<span id="iv.v.iii-p38.2"></span>[1Co
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#019)<span
id="iv.v.iii-p38.2"></span>;) and justly so, because, while others
indulge themselves without fear, the faithful continually sigh and
groan; while God connives at the sins of others, and suffers them to
continue torpid, he deals rigidly with his own people, and subjects them
to the discipline of the cross.

<span id="iv.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 Peter
4:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="iv.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p2"></span>**17**. — And if *it* first *begin* at us,
what shall the end *be* of them that obey not the gospel of God?

<span id="iv.v.iv-p3"></span>**17**. — Si autem primum a nobis, quis
finis eorum qui non obediunt evangelio Dei?

<span id="iv.v.iv-p4"></span>**18**. And if the righteous scarcely be
saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?

<span id="iv.v.iv-p5"></span>**18**. Et si justus vix servatur, impius
et peccator ubi apparebunt?

<span id="iv.v.iv-p6"></span>**19**. Wherefore let them that suffer
according to the will of God commit the keeping of their souls *to him*
in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p7"></span>**19**. Itaque qui patiuntur secundum Dei
voluntatem, tanquam fideli possessori commendent animas suas
benefaciendo.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.v.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p10"></span>When the faithful see that it is well with
the wicked, they are necessarily tempted to be envious; and this is a
very dangerous trial; for present happiness is what all desire. Hence
the Spirit of God carefully dwells on this, in many places, as well as
in the thirty-seventh Psalm, lest the faithful should envy the
prosperity of the ungodly. The same is what Peter speaks of, for he
shews that afflictions ought to be calmly borne by the children of God,
when they compare the lot of others with their own. But he takes it as
granted that God is the judge of the world, and that, therefore, no one
can escape his hand with impunity. He hence infers, that a dreadful
vengeance will soon overtake those whose condition seems now favorable.
The design of what he says, as I have already stated, is to shew that
the children of God should not faint under the bitterness of present
evils, but that they ought, on the contrary, calmly to bear their
afflictions for a short time, as the issue will be salvation, while the
ungodly will have to exchange a fading and fleeting prosperity for
eternal perdition.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p11"></span>But the argument is from the less to the
greater; for if God spares not his own children whom he loves and who
obey him, how dreadful will be his severity against enemies and such as
are rebellious! There is, then, nothing better than to obey the Gospel,
so that God may kindly correct us by his paternal hand for our
salvation.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p12"></span>**18** *And if the righteous* It has been
thought that this sentence is taken from <span
id="iv.v.iv-p12.1"></span>[Pr
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#031)<span id="iv.v.iv-p12.1"></span>;
for the Greek translators have thus rendered what Solomon says,

<span id="iv.v.iv-p13"></span>“Behold, the just shall on the earth be
recompensed; how much more the ungodly and the sinner?”

<span id="iv.v.iv-p14"></span>Now, whether Peter intended to quote this
passage, or repeated a common and a proverbial saying, (which seems to
me more probable,)  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) the meaning is,
that God’s judgment would be dreadful against the ungodly, since the way
to salvation was so thorny and difficult to the elect. And this is said,
lest we should securely indulge ourselves, but carefully proceed in our
course, and lest we should also seek the smooth and easy road, the end
of which is a terrible precipice.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p16"></span>But when he says, that a *righteous man is
scarcely saved,* he refers to the difficulties of the present life, for
our course in the world is like a dangerous sailing between many rocks,
and exposed to many storms and tempests; and thus no one arrives at the
port, except he who has escaped from \[a\] thousand deaths. It is in the
meantime certain that we are guided by God’s hand, and that we are in no
danger of shipwreck as long as we have him as our pilot.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p17"></span>Absurd, then, are those interpreters who
think that we shall be hardly and with difficulty saved, when we shall
come before God in judgment; for it is the present and not the future
time that Peter refers to; nor does he speak of God’s strictness or
rigour, but shews how many and what arduous difficulties must be
surmounted by the Christian before he reaches the goal. *Sinner* here
means a *wicked* man  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) and the
righteous are not those who are altogether perfect in righteousness, but
who strive to live righteously.

<span id="iv.v.iv-p19"></span><span id="iv.v.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p20"></span>**19** *Wherefore let them that suffer* He
draws this conclusion, that persecutions ought to be submissively
endured, for the condition of the godly in them is much happier than
that of the unbelieving, who enjoy prosperity to their utmost wishes.
He, however, reminds us that we suffer nothing except according to the
permission of God, which tends much to comfort us; when he says, *Let
them commit themselves to God,* it is the same as though he had said,
“Let them deliver themselves and their life to the safe keeping of God.”
And he calls him a *faithful possessor,* because he faithfully keeps and
defends whatever is under his protection or power. Some render the word
“Creator;” and the term <span id="iv.v.iv-p20.1"></span>κτίστης means
both; but the former meaning I prefer, for by bidding us to deposit our
life with God, he makes him its safe keeper. He adds, *in well-doing,*
lest the faithful should retaliate the wrongs done to them, but that
they might on the contrary contend with the ungodly, who injured them,
by well-doing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc45008.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.i-p18"></span> The subject of this passage, from <span
id="iv.v.i-p18.1"></span>[1Pe
3:14-4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.v.i-p18.1"></span>, is suffering unjustly, or for righteousness’
sake, and Christ is brought as an example, he being just, suffered for
the unjust. After a digression at the 19th verse of the third chapter,
the Apostle returns here to his former subject, the example of Christ
suffering in the flesh or in his body and in order to retain still the
idea that he was just when he suffered, this clause seems to have been
put in parenthetically, “For he who suffered ceased from sin,” that is,
had no sin, but was just. And hence in the following verses he exhorts
them to lead a holy life whatever might be the opposition from the
world, so that they might be like their Savior, suffering unjustly, they
themselves being innocent.

<span id="iv.v.i-p19"></span>**1.** “Christ then having suffered for us
in the flesh, arm ye also yourselves with the same mind, (for he who
suffered in the flesh ceased from sin;)

<span id="iv.v.i-p20"></span>**2.** so as to live no longer the
remaining time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of
God.”

<span id="iv.v.i-p21"></span>They were exhorted to resolve to follow the
example of Christ, but in such a way as not to suffer for their sins,
but for righteousness’ sake. It is implied that they had been
evil-doers, but they were no longer to be so, otherwise their suffering
in the flesh would not be like that of Christ. To suffer as well-doers,
and not as evil-doers, was to suffer as Christ did. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc45008.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p19"></span> Whitby*, Doddridge,* and *Mackight,*
regard *the dead* here as the dead in sins, according to <span
id="iv.v.ii-p19.1"></span>[Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.ii-p19.1"></span>.
The first thus paraphrases what follows, “That they might condemn their
former life, and live a better;” the second, “That they might be brought
to such a state of life as their carnal neighbors will look upon it as a
kind of condemnation and death;” and the third, “That *although* they
might be condemned, indeed, by men in the flesh, yet they might live
*eternally* by God in the Spirit.”

<span id="iv.v.ii-p20"></span>*Beza, Hammond,* and *Scott,* consider
that *the dead* were those already dead, that is, when the Apostle
wrote, and even before the coming of Christ, taking the *dead* in the
same sense as in the former verse: but they differ as to the clause
which follows. The two first interpret it as signifying the same as
dying to sin and living to God, a meaning which the former part of the
clause can hardly bear: but the view of *Scott* is, that the gospel had
been preached to those at that time dead, that they might be condemned
by carnal men, or in the flesh, as evildoers, but live to God through
the Holy Spirit. The only fault, perhaps, with this rendering is as to
the word *flesh,* which seems to mean here the same as *flesh* in <span
id="iv.v.ii-p20.1"></span>[1Pe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#018)<span id="iv.v.ii-p20.1"></span>,
that is, the body; and the word *spirit* is also in the same form, for
*Griesbach* in that verse regards the article <span
id="iv.v.ii-p20.2"></span>τῷ as spurious. Then the rendering would be,
“That they might be condemned in the flesh by men, but live as to God
through the Spirit.” There are two previous instances of the word
*spirit,* when denoting the Holy Spirit, being without the article, that
is, in <span id="iv.v.ii-p20.3"></span>[1 Pet.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022)<span id="iv.v.ii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p21"></span>It seems an objection, that the gospel had
been preached to them for *this end,* that they might be condemned to
die by wicked men; but this had been expressly stated before, in <span
id="iv.v.ii-p21.1"></span>[1Pe
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="iv.v.ii-p21.1"></span>:
“For even hereunto, (that is, suffering, mentioned in the former verse)
were ye called;” or, “For to this end ye have been called.” Then Christ
in his suffering is mentioned as one whom they ought to follow.

<span id="iv.v.ii-p22"></span>There is no other view so consistent with
the whole tenor of the Apostle’s argument. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc45008.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p27"></span> There is no ground to suppose, as
*Hammond, Macknight,* and some others have supposed, that “the end of
all things” was the end of the Jews as a nation, the destruction of the
temple and its worship. And it is strange that such a notion should be
entertained, especially when we consider that the Apostle refers to the
same subject in his Second Epistle, where the end of the world is
plainly spoken of. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc45008.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p36"></span> The quotation is from the Hebrew, and the
sentence in the *Sept.* is evidently different. The same words are found
also in <span id="iv.v.ii-p36.1"></span>[Jas
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020)<span id="iv.v.ii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc45008.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p40"></span> ”Though charity, or benevolence, hides
the faults of *others* from the severity of our censure, yet charity or
almsgiving is totally unable to conceal *our own* from the observance of
our all-righteous Judge. Indeed, the only cover for these, or to speak
more properly, the discharge of all their stains, is *faith*, — is the
*blood* of Christ, working with repentance towards God.” — *Bishop
Warburton,* quoted by *Bloomfield.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc45008.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p27"></span> <span id="iv.v.iii-p27.1"></span>Sic
tamen ut limis rapias quid prima secundo  
<span id="iv.v.iii-p27.3"></span>Cera velit versu. Sat. lib. 2:5, 53.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc45008.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p28"></span> <span
id="iv.v.iii-p28.1"></span>Quisquis ingentes oculo irretorto  
<span id="iv.v.iii-p28.3"></span>Spectat acervos.  
— Carm. lib. it. Od. 2:23.

<span id="iv.v.iii-p29"></span>The sin here referred to must have some
public act, punishable by law. The word means an observer of other
people’s affairs, but he must have done so for some sinister purpose. He
was probably a pryer into matters of state or government in order to
create discontent and to raise commotions; and this was an evil which
prevailed much at the time among the Jews. Hence “seditions,” or
factions, would convey probably the right meaning. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc45008.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p15"></span> It certainly *appears* as a quotation, as
the words are literally the same. It is to be observed that the Hebrew
has “on earth,” which seems to confirm the view that saved here refers
to deliverances from the troubles, trials, and persecutions, which the
righteous have to go through during life; and that *scarcely,* or
hardly, or with difficulty, as rendered by *Doddridge* and *Macknight,*
is to be limited to the time of the Christian’s course in this world;
for, as *Macknight* observes, the Apostle speaks in his Second Epistle
of an abundant entrance into the heavenly kingdom being vouchsafed to
all faithful Christians. See <span id="iv.v.iv-p15.1"></span>[2Pe
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#011)<span id="iv.v.iv-p15.1"></span> —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc45008.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.v.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iv-p18"></span> The two words, “ungodly,” <span
id="iv.v.iv-p18.1"></span>ἀσεβὴς, and “sinner,” <span
id="iv.v.iv-p18.2"></span>ἀμαρτωλὸς, exactly correspond with <span
id="iv.v.iv-p18.3"></span>רשע and <span id="iv.v.iv-p18.4"></span>חוטא
in Hebrew; the first is he who is not pious, not a worshipper of God,
having neither fear nor love towards him; and the second is the wicked,
and open and shameless transgressor, who regards not what is just and
right. *Grotius* says, that the first is he who shews no piety towards
God; and that the second is one who observes no justice towards man. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc45009)
