[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45030)  [Next](cc45032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span>The Epistle of jude

<span id="viii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Jude
1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ,
and brother of James, to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and
preserved in Jesus Christ, *and* called:

<span id="viii.ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Judas Jesu Christi servus, frater
autem Jacobi,, vocatis qui in Deo Patre sanctificati sunt, et in Jesu
Christo custoditi,

<span id="viii.ii.i-p4"></span>**2**. Mercy unto you, and peace, and
love, be multiplied.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Misericordia vobis et pax et
dilectio augeatur.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.i-p7"></span><span id="viii.ii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.i-p8"></span>**1** *Jude the servant of Jesus Christ*.
He calls himself the servant of Christ, not as the name applies to all
the godly, but with respect to his apostleship; for they were deemed
peculiarly the servants of Christ, who had some public office committed
to them. And we know why the apostles were wont to give themselves this
honorable name. Whosoever is not called, arrogates to himself
presumptuously the right and authority of teaching. Then their calling
was an evidence to the apostles, that they did not thrust themselves
into their office through their own will. It was not, however, of itself
sufficient to be appointed to their office, except they faithfully
discharged it. And, no doubt, he who declares himself to be the servant
of God, includes both these things, that is, that God is the bestower of
the office which he exercises, and that he faithfully performs what has
been committed to him. Many act falsely, and falsely boast to be what
they are very far from being: we ought always to examine whether the
reality corresponds with the profession.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p9"></span>*And brother of James*. He mentions a
name more celebrated than his own, and more known to the churches. For
though faithfulness of doctrine and authority do not depend on the names
of mortal men, yet it is a confirmation to the faith, when the integrity
of the man who undertakes the office of a teacher is made certain to us.
Besides, the authority of James is not here brought forward as that of a
private individual, but because he was counted by all the Church as one
of the chief apostles of Christ. He was the son of Alpheus, as I have
said elsewhere. Nay, this very passage is a sufficient proof to me
against Eusebius and others, who say, that he was a disciple, named
Oblias, \[James,\] mentioned by Luke, in <span
id="viii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>[Ac
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013)<span
id="viii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>; <span id="viii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>[Ac
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#018)<span
id="viii.ii.i-p9.2"></span>, who was more eminent than the apostles in
the Church.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) But there is no
doubt but that Jude mentions here his own brother, because he was
eminent among the apostles. It is, then, probable, that he was the
person to whom the chief honor was conceded by the rest, according to
what Luke relates.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p11"></span>*To them that are sanctified by God the
Father*, or, *to the called who are sanctified, etc.*  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) By this expression, “the called,” he
denotes all the faithful, because the Lord has separated them for
himself. But as calling is nothing else but the effect of eternal
election, it is sometimes taken for it. In this place it makes but
little difference in which way you take it; for he, no doubt, commends
the grace of God, by which he has been pleased to choose them as his
peculiar treasure. And he intimates that men do not anticipate God, and
that they never come to him until he draws them.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p13"></span>Of the same he says that they were
*sanctified in God the Father*, which may be rendered, “by God the
Father.” I have, however, retained the very form of the expression, that
readers may exercise their own judgment. For it may be, that this is the
sense, — that being profane in themselves, they had their holiness in
God. But the way in which God sanctifies is, by regenerating us by his
Spirit.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p14"></span>Another reading, which the Vulgate has
followed, is somewhat harsh, “To the beloved (<span
id="viii.ii.i-p14.1"></span>ἠγαπημένοις) in God the Father.” I therefore
regard it as corrupt; and it is, indeed, found but in a few copies.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p15"></span>He further adds, that they were
*preserved in Jesus Christ*. For we should be always in danger of death
through Satan, and he might take us at any moment as an easy prey, were
we not safe under the protection of Christ, whom the Father has given to
be our guardian, so that none of those whom he has received under his
care and shelter should perish.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p16"></span>Jude then mentions here a threefold
blessing, or favor of God, with regard to all the godly, — that he has
made them by his calling partakers of the gospel; that he has
regenerated them, by his Spirit, unto newness of life; and that he has
preserved them by the hand of Christ, so that they might not fall away
from salvation.

<span id="viii.ii.i-p17"></span><span id="viii.ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.i-p18"></span>**2.** *Mercy to you.* Mercy means
nearly the same as grace in the salutations of Paul. Were any one to
wish for a refined distinction, it may be said that grace is properly
the effect of mercy; for there is no other reason why God has embraced
us in love, but that he pitied our miseries. *Love* may be understood as
that of God towards men, as well as that of men towards one another.
 <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) If it be referred to God, the
meaning is, that it might increase towards them, and that the assurance
of divine love might be daily more confirmed in their hearts. The other
meaning is, however, not unsuitable, that God would kindle and confirm
in them mutual love.

<span id="viii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Jude
3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Beloved, when I gave all
diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for
me to write unto you, and exhort *you*, that ye should earnestly contend
for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Dilecti, quum omne studium
adhiberem ad scribendum vobis de communi salute, necesse habui scribere
vobis ad vos hortandos ut certando adjuvetis eam, quae semel tradita est
sanctis, fidem.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p4"></span>**4.** For there are certain men crept
in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation,
ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Subingressi enim sunt quidam
homines, olim praescripti judicium, impii, Dei nostri gratiam
transferentes in lasciviam, et Deum, qui solus est Herus, et Dominum
Jesum Christum negantes.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p7"></span><span id="viii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p8"></span>**3.** *When I gave diligence*. I have
rendered the words <span id="viii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>σπουδὴν ποιούμενος,
“Applying care:” literally they are, “Making diligence.” But many
interpreters explain the sentence in this sense, that a strong desire
constrained Jude to write, as we usually say of those under the
influence of some strong feeling, that they cannot govern or restrain
themselves. Then, according to these expounders, Jude was under a sort
of necessity, because a desire to write suffered him not to rest. But I
rather think that the two clauses are separate, that though he was
inclined and solicitous to write, yet a necessity compelled him. He then
intimates, that he was indeed glad and anxious to write to them, but yet
necessity urged him to do so, even because they were assailed (according
to what follows) by the ungodly, and stood in need of being prepared to
fight with them.  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189)

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p10"></span>Then, in the first place, Jude
testifies that he felt so much concern for their salvation, that he
wished himself, and was indeed anxious to write to them; and, secondly,
in order to rouse their attention, he says that the state of things
required him to do so. For necessity adds strong stimulants. Had they
not been forewarned how necessary his exhortation was, they might have
been slothful and negligent; but when he makes this preface, that he
wrote on account of the necessity of their case, it was the same as
though he had blown a trumpet to awake them from their torpor.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p11"></span>*Of the common salvation*. Some copies
add “your,” but without reason, as I think; for he makes salvation
common to them and to himself. And it adds not a little weight to the
doctrine that is announced, when any one speaks according to his own
feelings and experience; for vain is what we say, if we speak of
salvation to others, when we ourselves have no real knowledge of it.
Then, Jude professed himself to be (so to speak) an experimental
teacher, when he associated himself with the godly in the participation
of the same salvation.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p12"></span>*And exhort you*. Literally, “exhorting
you;” but as he points out the end of his counsel, the sentence ought to
be thus expressed. What I have rendered, “to help the faith by
contending,” means the same as to strive in retaining the faith, and
courageously to sustain the contrary assaults of Satan.  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) For he reminds them that in order to
persevere in the faith, various contests must be encountered and
continual warfare maintained. He says that faith had been *once
delivered*, that they might know that they had obtained it for this end,
that they might never fail or fall away.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p14"></span><span id="viii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p15"></span>**4.** *For there are certain men crept
in unawares*. Though Satan is ever an enemy to the godly, and never
ceases to harass them, yet Jude reminds those to whom he was writing of
the state of things at that time. Satan now, he says, attacks and
harasses you in a peculiar manner; it is therefore necessary to take up
arms to resist him. We hence learn that a good and faithful pastor ought
wisely to consider what the present state of the Church requires, so as
to accommodate his doctrine to its wants.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p16"></span>The word <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>παρεισέδυσαν, which he uses, denotes an
indirect and stealthy insinuation, by which the ministers of Satan
deceive the unwary; for Satan sows his tares in the night, and while
husbandmen are asleep, in order that he may corrupt the seed of God. And
at the same time he teaches us that it is an intestine evil; for Satan
in this respect also is crafty, as he raises up those who are of the
flock to do mischief, in order that they may more easily creep in.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p17"></span>*Before of old ordained*. He calls that
judgment, or condemnation, or a reprobate mind, by which they were led
astray to pervert the doctrine of godliness; for no one can do such a
thing except to his own ruin. But the metaphor is taken from this
circumstance, because the eternal counsel of God, by which the faithful
are ordained unto salvation, is called a book: and when the faithful
heard that these were given up to eternal death, it behooved them to
take heed lest they should involve themselves in the same destruction.
It was at the same time the object of Jude to obviate danger, lest the
novelty of the thing should disturb and distress any of them; for if
these were already long ago ordained, it follows that the Church is not
tried or exercised but according to the infallible counsel of God.
 <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191)

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p19"></span>*The grace of our God*. He now
expresses more clearly what the evil was; for he says that they abused
the grace of God, so as to lead themselves and others to take an impure
and profane liberty in sinning. But the grace of God has appeared for a
far different purpose, even that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this world. Let us, then,
know that nothing is more pestilential than men of this kind, who from
the grace of Christ take a cloak to indulge in lasciviousness.  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192)

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p21"></span>Because we teach that salvation is
obtained through God’s mercy alone, the Papists accuse us of this crime.
But why should we use words to refute their effrontery, since we
everywhere urge repentance, the fear of God, and newness of life, and
since they themselves not only corrupt the whole world with the worst
examples, but also by their ungodly teaching take away from the world
true holiness and the pure worship of God? Though I rather think, that
those of whom Jude speaks, were like the libertines of our time, as it
will be more evident from what follows.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p22"></span>*The only Lord God*, or, *God who alone
is Lord*. Some old copies have, “Christ, who alone is God and Lord.”
And, indeed, in the Second Epistle of Peter, Christ alone is mentioned,
and there he is called Lord.  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193)
But He means that *Christ* is *denied*, when they who had been redeemed
by his blood, become again the vassals of the Devil, and thus render
void as far as they can that incomparable price. That Christ, then, may
retain us as his peculiar treasure, we must remember that he died and
rose again for us, that he might have dominion over our life and death.

<span id="viii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Jude
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p2"></span>**5.** I will therefore put you in
remembrance, though ye once knew this, how that the Lord, having saved
the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed them that
believed not.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p3"></span>**5.** Commonefacere autem vos volo,
quum istud semel noveritis, quod Dominus postquam ex terra Egypti
populum servaverat, postea non credentes perdidit.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p4"></span>**6.** And the angels which kept not
their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p5"></span>**6.** Angelos vero qui principatum
(*vel, initium*) suum non servaverant, sed reliquerant suum domicilium,
judicium magnae diei vinculis aeternis sub caligine servavit.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p6"></span>**7.** Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and
the cities about them in like manner, giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an
example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p7"></span>**7.** Quemadmodum Sodoma et Gomorrha,
et qae circum erant urbes, quum simili modo scortatae essent, et
abiissent post carnem alienam, propositae sunt ignis aeterni judicium
sustinentes.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p10"></span>**5.** *I will therefore put you in
remembrance*, or, *remind you*. He either modestly excuses himself, lest
he should seem to teach as it were the ignorant things unknown to them;
or, indeed, he openly declares in an emphatical manner, (which I approve
more of,) that he adduced nothing new or unheard of before, in order
that what he was going to say might gain more credit and authority. I
only recall, he says, to your mind what you have already learnt. As he
ascribes knowledge to them, so he says that they stood in need of
warnings, lest they should think that the labor he undertook towards
them was superfluous; for the use of God’s word is not only to teach
what we could not have otherwise known, but also to rouse us to a
serious meditation of those things which we already understand, and not
to suffer us to grow torpid in a cold knowledge.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p11"></span>Now, the meaning is, that after having
been called by God, we ought not to glory carelessly in his grace, but
on the contrary, to walk watchfully in his fear; for if any trifles thus
with God, the contempt of his grace will not be unpunished. And this he
proves by three examples. He first refers to the vengeance which God
executed on those unbelievers, whom he had chosen as his people, and
delivered by his power. Nearly the same reference is made by Paul in
<span id="viii.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>[1Co
10:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001)<span
id="viii.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>. The import of what he says is, that
those whom God had honored with the greatest blessings, whom he had
extolled to the same degree of honor as we enjoy at this day, he
afterwards severely punished. Then in vain were all they proud of God’s
grace, who did not live in a manner suitable to their calling.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p12"></span>The word *people* is by way of honor
taken for the holy and chosen nation, as though he had said that it
availed them nothing, that they by a singular favor had been taken into
covenant. By calling them *unbelieving*, he denotes the fountain of all
evils; for all their sins, mentioned by Moses, were owing to this,
because they refused to be ruled by God’s word. For where there is the
subjection of faith, there obedience towards God necessarily appears in
all the duties of life.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p13"></span><span id="viii.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p14"></span>**6.** *And the angels*. This is an
argument from the greater to the less; for the state of angels is higher
than ours; and yet God punished their defection in a dreadful manner. He
will not then forgive our perfidy, if we depart from the grace unto
which he has called us. This punishment, inflicted on the inhabitants of
heaven, and on such superior ministers of God, ought surely to be
constantly before our eyes, so that we may at no time be led to despise
God’s grace, and thus rush headlong into destruction.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p15"></span>The word <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>ἀρχὴ in this place, may be aptly taken for
*beginning* as well as for *principality* or *dominion*. For Jude
intimates that they suffered punishment, because they had despised the
goodness of God and deserted their first vocation. And there follows
immediately an explanation, for he says that they had *left their own
habitation*; for, like military deserters, they left the station in
which they had been placed.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p16"></span>We must also notice the atrocity of
the punishment which the Apostle mentions. They are not only free
spirits but celestial powers; they are now held bound by perpetual
chains. They not only enjoyed the glorious light of God, but his
brightness shone forth in them, so that from them, as by rays, it spread
over all parts of the universe; now they are sunk in darkness. But we
are not to imagine a certain place in which the devils are shut up, for
the Apostle simply intended to teach us how miserable their condition
is, since the time they apostatized and lost their dignity. For wherever
they go, they drag with them their own chains, and remain involved in
darkness. Their extreme punishment is in the meantime, deferred until
the great day comes.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p17"></span><span id="viii.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p18"></span>**7.** *Even as Sodom and Gomorrha*.
This example is more general, for he testifies that God, excepting none
of mankind, punishes without any difference all the ungodly. And Jude
also mentions in what follows, that the fire through which the five
cities perished was a type of the eternal fire. Then God at that time
exhibited a remarkable example, in order to keep men in fear till the
end of the world. Hence it is that it is so often mentioned in
Scripture; nay, whenever the prophets wished to designate some memorable
and dreadful judgment of God, they painted it under the figure of
sulfurous fire, and alluded to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha. It
is not, therefore, without reason that Jude strikes all ages with
terror, by exhibiting the same view.

<span id="viii.ii.iii-p19"></span>When he says, *the cities about them
in like manner, giving themselves over to fornication*, I do not apply
these words to the Israelites and the angels, but to Sodom and Gomorrha.
It is no objection that the pronoun <span
id="viii.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>τούτοις is masculine, for Jude refers to
the inhabitants and not to the places. To *go after strange flesh*, is
the same as to be given up to monstrous lusts; for we know that the
Sodomites, not content with the common manner of committing fornication,
polluted themselves in a way the most filthy and detestable. We ought to
observe, that he devotes them to eternal fire; for we hence learn, that
the dreadful spectacle which Moses describes, was only an image of a
much heavier punishment.

<span id="viii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Jude
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p2"></span>**8.** Likewise also these *filthy*
dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p3"></span>**8.** Similiter isti quoque somniis
delusi, carnem quidem contaminant, dominationem vero, rejiciunt, et in
glorias maledicta congerunt.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p4"></span>**9.** Yet Michael the archangel, when
contending with the devil he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not
bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p5"></span>**9.** Atqui Michael archangelus, quando
judicio disceptans cum diabolo, disputabat de corpore Mosis, non ausus
fuit judicium inferre contumeliae; sed dixit, Increpet te Dominus.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p6"></span>**10.** But these speak evil of those
things which they know not: but what they know naturally, as brute
beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p7"></span>**10.** Isti vero quae cumque non
noverunt, convitiis incessunt; quaecunque vero naturaliter tanquam bruta
animalia sciunt, in iis corrumpuntur.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p10"></span>**8.** *Likewise also these*. This
comparison is not to be pressed too strictly, as though he compared
these whom he mentions in all things to be Sodomites, or to the fallen
angels, or to the unbelieving people. He only shews that they were
vessels of wrath appointed to destruction, and that they could not
escape the hand of God, but that he would some time or another make them
examples of his vengeance. For his design was to terrify the godly to
whom he was writing, lest they should entangle themselves in their
society.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p11"></span>But he begins here more clearly to
describe these impostors. And he says first, that they polluted their
flesh as it were by dreaming, by which words he denotes their stupid
effrontery, as though he had said that they abandoned themselves to all
kinds of filth, which the most wicked abhor, except sleep took away
shame and also consciousness. It is then a metaphorical mode of
speaking, by which he intimates that they were so dull and stupid as to
give up themselves without any shame to every kind of baseness.  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p15"></span>There is a contrast to be noticed, when
he says that they *defiled* or *polluted* *the flesh*, that is, that
they degraded what was less excellent, and that yet they despised as
disgraceful what is deemed especially excellent among mankind.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p16"></span>It appears from the second clause that
they were seditious men, who sought anarchy, that, being loosed from the
fear of the laws, they might sin more freely. But these two things are
nearly always connected, that they who abandon themselves to iniquity,
do also wish to abolish all order. Though, indeed, their chief object is
to be free from every yoke, it yet appears from the words of Jude that
they were wont to speak insolently and reproachfully of magistrates,
like the fanatics of the present day, who not only grumble because they
are restrained by the authority of magistrates, but furiously declaim
against all government, and say that the power of the sword is profane
and opposed to godliness; in short, they superciliously reject from the
Church of God all kings and all magistrates. *Dignities* or *glories*
are orders or ranks eminent in power or honor.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p17"></span><span id="viii.ii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p18"></span>**9.** *Yet Michael the archangel*.
Peter gives this argument shorter, and states generally, that angels,
far more excellent than men, dare not bring forward a railing judgment.
\[<span id="viii.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>[2Pe
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#011)<span
id="viii.ii.iv-p18.1"></span>.\]

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p19"></span>But as this history is thought to have
been taken from an apocryphal book, it has hence happened that less
weight has been attached to this Epistle. But since the Jews at that
time had many things from the traditions of the fathers, I see nothing
unreasonable in saying that Jude referred to what had already been
handed down for many ages. I know indeed that many puerilities had
obtained the name of tradition, as at this day the Papists relate as
traditions many of the silly dotages of the monks; but this is no reason
why they should not have had *some* historical facts not committed to
writing.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p20"></span>It is beyond controversy that Moses was
buried by the Lord, that is, that his grave was concealed according to
the known purpose of God. And the reason for concealing his grave is
evident to all, that is, that the Jews might not bring forth his body to
promote superstition. What wonder then is it, when the body of the
prophet was hidden by God, Satan should attempt to make it known; and
that angels, who are ever ready to serve God, should on the other hand
resist him? And doubtless we see that Satan almost in all ages has been
endeavoring to make the bodies of God’s saints idols to foolish men.
Therefore this Epistle ought not to be suspected on account of this
testimony, though it is not found in Scripture.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p21"></span>That Michael is introduced alone as
disputing against Satan is not new. We know that myriads of angels are
ever ready to render service to God; but he chooses this or that to do
his business as he pleases. What Jude relates as having been said by
Michael, is found also in the book of Zechariah,

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p22"></span>“Let God chide (or check) thee,
Satan.”  
(<span id="viii.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>[Zec
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002)<span
id="viii.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p23"></span>And it is a comparison, as they say,
between the greater and the less. Michael dared not to speak more
severely against Satan (though a reprobate and condemned) than to
deliver him to God to be restrained; but those men hesitated not to load
with extreme reproaches the powers which God had adorned with peculiar
honors.

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p24"></span><span id="viii.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p25"></span>**10.** *But these speak evil of those
things which they know not.* He means that they had no taste for
anything but what was gross, and as it were beastly, and therefore did
not perceive what was worthy of honor; and that yet they added audacity
to madness, so that they feared not to condemn things above their
comprehension; and that they also labored under another evil — for when
like beasts they were carried away to those things which gratified the
senses of the body, they observed no moderation, but gorged themselves
excessively like the swine which roll themselves in stinking mud. The
adverb *naturally* is set in opposition to reason and judgment for the
instinct of nature alone rules in brute animals; but reason ought to
govern men and to bridle their appetites.

<span id="viii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Jude
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#011)<span id="viii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.v-p2"></span>**11.** Woe unto them! for they have gone
in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p3"></span>**11.** Vae illis, quoniam viam Cain
ingressi sunt (<span id="viii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>[Ge
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012)<span
id="viii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>;) et deceptione mercedis Balaam effusi sunt
(<span id="viii.ii.v-p3.2"></span>[Nu
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#021)<span
id="viii.ii.v-p3.2"></span>;) et contradictione Core perierunt (<span
id="viii.ii.v-p3.3"></span>[Nu
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#002)<span
id="viii.ii.v-p3.3"></span>.)

<span id="viii.ii.v-p4"></span>**12.** These are spots in your feasts of
charity, when they feast with you, feeding themselves without fear:
clouds *they are* without water, carried about of winds; trees whose
fruit withereth, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;

<span id="viii.ii.v-p5"></span>**12.** Hi sunt in fraternis vestris
conviviis maculae, inter se (*vel vobiscum*) convivantes, secure
pascentes seipsos; nubes aqua carentes, quae a ventis circum aguntur;
arbores autummi emarcidae, et eradicata infrugiferae, bis emortuae, et
eradicatae;

<span id="viii.ii.v-p6"></span>**13.** Raging waves of the sea, foaming
out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p7"></span>**13.** Undae efferatae maris,
despumantes sua ipserum dedecora; stelie erraticae, quibus caligo
tenebrarum in aeternum servata est.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.v-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.v-p10"></span>**11.** *Woe unto them.* It is a wonder
that he inveighs against them so severely, when he had just said that it
was not permitted to an angel to bring a railing accusation against
Satan. But it was not his purpose to lay down a general rule. He only
shewed briefly, by the example of Michael, how intolerable was their
madness when they insolently reproached what God honored. It was
certainly lawful for Michael to fulminate against Satan his final curse;
and we see how vehemently the prophets threatened the ungodly; but when
Michael forbore extreme severity (otherwise lawful), what madness was it
to observe no moderation towards those excelling in glory? But when he
pronounced woe on them, he did not so much imprecate evil on them, but
rather reminded them what sort of end awaited them; and he did so, lest
they should carry others with them to perdition.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p11"></span>He says that they were the *imitators of
Cain*, who being ungrateful to God and perverting his worship through an
ungodly and wicked heart, forfeited his birthright. He says that they
were *deceived like Balaam* by a reward, because they adulterated the
doctrine of true religion for the sake of filthy lucre. But the metaphor
he uses, expresses something more; for he says that they *overflowed*,
even because their excess was like overflowing water. He says in the
third place, that they *imitated the contradiction of Core*, because
they disturbed the order and quietness of the church.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p12"></span><span id="viii.ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.v-p13"></span>**12.** *These are spots in your feasts
of charity*. They who read, “among your charities,” do not, as I think,
sufficiently explain the true meaning. For he calls those feasts
*charities*, (<span id="viii.ii.v-p13.1"></span>ἀγάπαις,) which the
faithful had among themselves for the sake of testifying their brotherly
unity. Such feasts, he says, were disgraced by impure men, who
afterwards fed themselves to an excess; for in these there was the
greatest frugality and moderation. It was then not right that these
gorgers should be admitted, who afterwards indulged themselves to an
excess elsewhere.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p14"></span>Some copies have, “Feasting with you,”
which reading, if approved, has this meaning, that they were not only a
disgrace, but that they were also troublesome and expensive, as they
crammed themselves without fear, at the public expense of the church.
Peter speaks somewhat different, \[<span
id="viii.ii.v-p14.1"></span>[2Pe
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#013)<span
id="viii.ii.v-p14.1"></span>,\] who says that they took delight in
errors, and feasted together with the faithful, as though he had said
that they acted inconsiderately who cherished such noxious serpents, and
that they were very foolish who encouraged their excessive luxury. And
at this day I wish there were more judgment in some good men, who, by
seeking to be extremely kind to wicked men, bring great damage to the
whole church.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p15"></span>*Clouds they are without water*. The two
similitudes found in Peter are here given in one, but to the same
purpose, for both condemn vain ostentation: these unprincipled men,
though promising much, were yet barren within and empty, like clouds
driven by stormy winds, which give hope of rain, but soon vanish into
nothing. Peter adds the similitude of a dry and empty fountain; but Jude
employs other metaphors for the same end, that they were *trees fading*,
as the vigor of trees in autumn disappears. He then calls them trees
*unfruitful, rooted up*, and *twice dead*;  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) as though he had said, that there was
no sap within, though leaves might appear.

<span id="viii.ii.v-p17"></span><span id="viii.ii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.v-p18"></span>**13.** *Raging waves of the sea*. Why
this was added, we may learn more fully from the words of Peter: \[<span
id="viii.ii.v-p18.1"></span>[2 Pet.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#018)<span
id="viii.ii.v-p18.1"></span>\] it was to shew, that being inflated with
pride, they breathed out, or rather cast out the scum of high-flown
stuff of words in grandiloquent style. At the same time they brought
forth nothing spiritual, their object being on the contrary to make men
as stupid as brute animals. Such, as it has been before stated, are the
fanatics of our day, who call themselves Libertines. You may justly say
that they make only rumbling sounds; for, despising common language,
they form for themselves an exotic idiom, I know not what. They seem at
one time to carry their disciples above heaven, then they suddenly fall
down to beastly errors, for they imagine a state of innocency in which
there is no difference between baseness and honesty; they imagine a
spiritual life, when fear is extinguished, and when every one heedlessly
indulges himself; they imagine that we become gods, because God absorbs
the spirits when they quit their bodies. With the more care and
reverence ought the simplicity of Scripture to be studied, lest, by
reasoning more refinedly than is right, we should not draw men to
heaven, but on the contrary be involved in manifold labyrinths. He
therefore calls them *wandering stars*, because they dazzled the eyes by
a sort of evanescent light.

<span id="viii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Jude
14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014)<span
id="viii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p2"></span>**14.** And Enoch also, the seventh from
Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten
thousands of his saints,

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p3"></span>**14.** Prius autem etiam de iis
vaticinatus est septimus ab Adam Enoch, dicens, Ecce venit Dominus in
sanctis millibus suis,

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p4"></span>**15.** To execute judgment upon all,
and to convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly
deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard
*speeches* which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p5"></span>**15.** Ut faciat judicium adversus
omnes, et redarguat ex eis omnes impios de factis omnibus impietatis
quae impie patrarunt deque omnibus duris quae loquuti sunt adversus Deum
peccatores impii.

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p6"></span>**16.** These are murmurers,
complainers, walking after their own lusts; and their mouth speaketh
great swelling *words*, having men’s persons in admiration because of
advantage.

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p7"></span>**16.** Hi sunt murmuratores, queruli,
juxta concupiscentias suas ambulantes, et os illorum loquitur tumida,
admirantes personas, utilitatis gratia.

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p10"></span>**14.** *And Enoch also*. I rather
think that this prophecy was unwritten, than that it was taken from an
apocryphal book; for it may have been delivered down by memory to
posterity by the ancients.  <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) Were
any one to ask, that since similar sentences occur in many parts of
Scripture, why did he not quote a testimony written by one of the
prophets? the answer is obvious, that he wished to repeat from the
oldest antiquity what the Spirit had pronounced respecting them: and
this is what the words intimate; for he says expressly that he was *the
seventh from Adam*, in order to commend the antiquity of the prophecy,
because it existed in the world before the flood.

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p12"></span>But I have said that this prophecy was
known to the Jews by being reported; but if any one thinks otherwise, I
will not contend with him, nor, indeed, respecting the epistle itself,
whether it be that of Jude or of some other. In things doubtful, I only
follow what seems probable.

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p13"></span>*Behold, the Lord cometh*, or *came*.
The past tense, after the manner of the prophets, is used for the
future. He says, that the Lord would *come with ten thousand of his
saints;*  <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) and by *saints* he
means the faithful as well as angels; for both will adorn the tribunal
of Christ, when he shall descend to judge the world. He says, *ten
thousand*, as Daniel also mentions myriads of angels, (<span
id="viii.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>[Da
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)<span
id="viii.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>;) in order that, the multitude of the
ungodly may not, like a violent sea, overwhelm the children of God; but
that they may think of this, that the Lord will sometime collect his own
people, a part of whom are dwelling in heaven, unseen by us, and a part
are hid under a great mass of chaff.

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p15"></span><span id="viii.ii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p16"></span>But the vengeance suspended over the
wicked ought to keep the elect in fear and watchfulness. He speaks of
*deeds* and *words*, Because their corrupters did much evil, not only by
their wicked life, but also by their impure and false speech. And their
words were *hard*, on account of the refractory audacity, by which,
being elated, they acted insolently.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p18"></span><span id="viii.ii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p19"></span>**16.** *These are murmurers*. They who
indulge their depraved lusts, are hard to please, and morose, so that
they are never satisfied. Hence it is, that they always murmur and
complain, however kindly good men may treat them.  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) He condemns their proud language,
because they haughtily made a boast of themselves; but at the same time
he shews that they were mean in their disposition, for they were
servilely submissive for the sake of gain. And, commonly, this sort of
inconsistency is seen in unprincipled men of this kind. When there is no
one to check their insolence, or when there is nothing that stands in
their way, their pride is intolerable, so that they imperiously arrogate
everything to themselves; but they meanly flatter those whom they fear,
and from whom they expect some advantage. He takes *persons* as
signifying eternal greatness and power.

<span id="viii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Jude
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#017)<span
id="viii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p2"></span>**17.** But, beloved, remember ye the
words which were spoken before of the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ;

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p3"></span>**17.** Vos autem dilecti, memores
estis (*vel, estote*) verborum quae praedicta sunt ab apostolis Domini
Christ: nostri Jesu nempe,

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p4"></span>**18.** How that they told you there
should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own
ungodly lusts.

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p5"></span>**18.** Quod vobis dixerunt, ultimo
tempore futuros (*vel, venturos*) derisores, qui secundum
concupiscentias tias suarum impietatum ambularent.

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p6"></span>**19.** These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit.

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p7"></span>**19.** Hi sunt qui seipsos segregant,
animales, Spiritum non habentes.

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p8"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p9"></span><span id="viii.ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p10"></span>**17.** *But, beloved*. To a most
ancient prophecy he now adds the admonitions of the apostles, the memory
of whom was recent. As to the verb <span
id="viii.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>μνήσθητε, it makes no great difference,
whether you read it as declarative or as an exhortation; for the meaning
remains the same, that being fortified by the prediction he quotes, they
ought to be terrified.

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p11"></span><span id="viii.ii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p12"></span>By *the last time* he means that in
which the renewed condition of the Church received a fixed form till the
end of the world; and it began at the first coming of Christ.

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p13"></span>After the usual manner of Scripture,
he calls them scoffers who, being inebriated with a profane and impious
contempt of God, rush headlong into a brutal contempt of the Divine
Being, so that no fear nor reverence keeps them any longer within the
limits of duty: as no dread of a future judgment exists in their hearts,
so no hope of eternal life. So at this day the world is full of
Epicurean despisers of God, who having cast off every fear, madly scoff
at the whole doctrine of true religion, regarding it as fabulous.

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p14"></span><span id="viii.ii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p15"></span>**19.** *These be they who separate
themselves*. Some Greek copies have the participle by itself, other
copies add <span id="viii.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>ἑαυτοὺς, “themselves;”
but the meaning is nearly the same. He means that they separated from
the Church, because they would not bear the yoke of discipline, as they
who indulge the flesh dislike spiritual life.  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) The word *sensual*, or *animal*,
stands opposed to spiritual, or to the renovation of grace; and hence it
means the vicious or corrupt, such as men are when not regenerated. For
in that degenerated nature which we derive from Adam, there is nothing
but what is gross and earthly; so that no part of us aspires to God,
until we are renewed by his Spirit.

<span id="viii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="viii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Jude
20-25](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#020)<span
id="viii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p2"></span>**20.** But ye, beloved, building up
yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost,

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p3"></span>**20.** Vos autem dilecti, sanctissimæ
vestræ fidei vosmet superstruentes, in Spiritu Sancti precantes,

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p4"></span>**21.** Keep yourselves in the love of
God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p5"></span>**21**. Vosmet in charitate servate,
expectantes misericordiam Domini nostri Jesu Christi in vitam eternam.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p6"></span>**22.** And of some have compassion,
making a difference.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p7"></span>**22.** Et hos quidem miseramini,
dijudicantes;

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p8"></span>**23.** And others save with fear,
pulling *them* out of the fire; hating even the garment spotted by the
flesh.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p9"></span>**23.** Illos verò per timorem
servate, ex incendio rapientes, odio prosquentes etiam maculatam a’
carne tunicam.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p10"></span>**24.** Now unto him that is able to
keep you from falling, and to present *you* faultless before the
presence of his glory with exceeding joy,

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p11"></span>**24.** Ei autem qui servare potest
vos (*vel, eos*) à peccato immunes, et statuere in conspectu gloriae
suae reprehensibiles cum exultatione,

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p12"></span>**25.** To the only wise God our
Saviour, *be* glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever.
Amen.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p13"></span>**25.** Soli sapienti Deo, Servatori
nostro, gloria et magnificentia et perium et potestas, nunc, et in omnia
secula. Amen.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p14"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p15"></span><span id="viii.ii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p16"></span>**20.** *But ye, beloved*. He shews
the manner in which they could overcome all the devices of Satan, that
is, by having love connected with faith, and by standing on their guard
as it were in their watch-tower, until the coming of Christ. But as he
uses often and thickly his metaphors, so he has here a way of speaking
peculiar to himself, which must be briefly noticed.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p17"></span>He bids them first to *build
themselves on faith*; by which he means, that the foundation of faith
ought to be retained, but that the first instruction is not sufficient,
except they who have been already grounded on true faith, went on
continually towards perfection. He calls their faith *most holy,* in
order that they might wholly rely on it, and that, leaning on its
firmness, they might never vacillate.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p18"></span>But since the whole perfection of man
consists in faith, it may seem strange that he bids them to build upon
it another building, as though faith were only a commencement to man.
This difficulty is removed by the Apostle in the words which follow,
when he adds, that men build on faith when love is added; except,
perhaps, some one may prefer to take this meaning, that men build on
faith, as far as they make proficiency in it, and doubtless the daily
progress of faith is such, that itself rises up as a building.  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) Thus the Apostle teaches us, that in
order to increase in faith, we must be instant in prayer and maintain
our calling by love.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p22"></span>*Praying in the Holy Ghost*. The way
of persevering is, when we are endued with the power of God. Hence
whenever the question is respecting the constancy of faith, we must flee
to prayer. And as we commonly pray in a formal manner, he adds, *In the
Spirit*; as though he had said, that such is our sloth, and that such is
the coldness of our flesh, that no one can pray aright except he be
roused by the Spirit of God; and that we are also so inclined to
diffidence and trembling, that no one dares to call God his Father,
except through the teaching of the same Spirit; for from him is
solicitude, from him is ardor and vehemence, from him is alacrity, from
him is confidence in obtaining what we ask; in short, from him are those
unutterable groanings mentioned by Paul (<span
id="viii.ii.viii-p22.1"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span
id="viii.ii.viii-p22.1"></span>.) It is not, then, without reason that
Jude teaches us, that no one can pray as he ought without having the
Spirit as his guide.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p23"></span><span id="viii.ii.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p24"></span>**21.** *Keep yourselves in the love
of God.* He has made love as it were the guardian and the ruler of our
life; not that he might set it in opposition to the grace of God, but
that it is the right course of our calling, when we make progress in
love. But as many things entice us to apostasy, so that it is difficult
to keep us faithful to God to the end, he calls the attention of the
faithful to the last day. For the hope of that alone ought to sustain
us, so that we may at no time despond; otherwise we must necessarily
fail every moment.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p25"></span>But it ought to be noticed that he
would not have us to hope for eternal life, except through the mercy of
Christ: for he will in such a manner be our judge, as to have no other
rule in judging us than that gratuitous benefit of redemption obtained
by himself.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p26"></span><span id="viii.ii.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p27"></span>**22.** *And of some have
compassion*. He adds another exhortation, shewing how the faithful ought
to act in reproving their brethren, in order to restore them to the
Lord. He reminds them that such ought to be treated in different ways,
every one according to his disposition: for to the meek and teachable we
ought to use kindness; but others, who are hard and perverse, must be
subdued by terror.  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) This is the
*difference* which he mentions.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p29"></span>The participle <span
id="viii.ii.viii-p29.1"></span>διακρινόμενοι, I know not why this is
rendered in a passive sense by Erasmus. It may, indeed, be rendered in
either way, but its active meaning is more suitable to the context. The
meaning then is, that if we wish to consult the well-being of such as go
astray, we must consider the character and disposition of every one; so
that they who are meek and tractable may in a kind manner be restored to
the right way, as being objects of pity; but if any be perverse, he is
to be corrected with more severity. And as asperity is almost hateful,
he excuses it on the ground of necessity; for otherwise, they who do not
willingly follow good counsels, cannot he saved.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p30"></span>Moreover, he employs a striking
metaphor. When there is a danger of fire, we hesitate not to snatch away
violently whom we desire to save; for it would not be enough to beckon
with the finger, or kindly to stretch forth the hand. So also the
salvation of some ought to be cared for, because they will not come to
God, except when rudely drawn. Very different is the old translation,
which reading is however found in many of the Greek copies; the Vulgate
is, “Rebuke the judged,” (<span id="viii.ii.viii-p30.1"></span>*Arguite
dijudicatos*.) But the first meaning is more suitable, and is, I think,
according to the old and genuine reading. The word *to save*, is
transferred to men, not that they are the authors, but the ministers of
salvation.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p31"></span><span id="viii.ii.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p32"></span>**23.** *Hating even the garment*.
This passage, which otherwise would appear obscure, will have no
difficulty in it, when the metaphor is rightly explained. He would have
the faithful not only to beware of contact with vices, but that no
contagion might reach them, he reminds them that everything that borders
on vices and is near to them ought to be avoided: as, when we speak of
lasciviousness, we say that all excitements to lusts ought to be
removed. The passage will also become clearer, when the whole sentence
is filled up, that is, that we should hate not only the flesh, but also
the garment, which, by a contact with it, is infected. The particle
<span id="viii.ii.viii-p32.1"></span>καὶ even serves to give greater
emphasis. He, then, does not allow evil be cherished by indulgence, so
that he bids all preparations and all accessories, as they say, to be
cut off.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p33"></span><span id="viii.ii.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p34"></span>**24** *Now unto him that is able to
keep you*. He closes the Epistle with praise to God; by which he shews
that our exhortations and labors can do nothing except through the power
of God accompanying them.  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203)

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p39"></span>Some copies have “them” instead of
“you.” If we receive this reading, the sense will be, “It is, indeed,
your duty to endeavor to save them; but it is God alone who can do this”
However, the other reading is what I prefer; in which there is an
allusion to the preceding verse; for after having exhorted the faithful
to save what was perishing, that they might understand that all their
efforts would be vain except God worked with them, he testifies that
they could not be otherwise saved than through the power of God. In the
latter clause there is indeed a different verb, <span
id="viii.ii.viii-p39.1"></span>φυλάξαι, which means *to guard*; so the
allusion is to a remoter clause, when he said, *Keep yourselves*

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p40"></span>END OF THE EPISTLE OF JUDE

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc45031.htm#fr_186) <span
id="viii.ii.i-p9.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.i-p10"></span> Some have held, that James, mentioned
in the forecited places in Acts, was not James the apostle, but another
James, a disciple, and one of the seventy, who was also called Oblias:
but this is not correct. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc45031.htm#fr_187) <span
id="viii.ii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.i-p12"></span> So *Beza* renders the words, “To the
called, sanctified by God the Father, and preserved by Jesus Christ:”
that is, to the effectually called, (as the word commonly means,) set
apart and separated by God from the ungodly world, and kept by Christ,
having been committed to his care and protection. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc45031.htm#fr_188) <span
id="viii.ii.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.i-p19"></span> As *mercy* is that of God, so it is
more consistent to consider “peace” and “love’’ to be those of God: “may
the mercy” of God, “and the peace” of God, “and the love” of God, “be
increased (or multiplied) to you” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc45031.htm#fr_189) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p9"></span> Then the rendering would be, “Beloved,
when I was applying all care to write to you of the common salvation, I
deemed (or found) it necessary to write to you, in order to exhort you
to contend for the faith once delivered to the saints.” *Macknight* and
some others give another meaning to the first clause, and one more
literal: “Beloved, making all haste to write to you, concerning the
common salvation, I have thought it necessary,” etc. For this haste the
Apostle gives a reason in the following verse, “For some men have
stealthily crept in,” etc. This is the most obvious meaning of the
passage. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc45031.htm#fr_190) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p13"></span> The meaning of the verb is, to combat
for, to strive, fight or contend for. It is a word derived from the
games, and expresses a strenuous effort. Our version conveys well its
meaning, “earnestly contend for the faith;” or, the words may be
rendered, “strenuously combat for the faith;” not with the sword, says
*Beza*, but with sound doctrine and the example of a holy life. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc45031.htm#fr_191) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p18"></span> The words literally are, “Who have
been long ago (or, some time past) forewritten of for (or, as to) this
judgment.” The reference is to prophecy; such creepers in for the
purpose of corrupting the truth had been foretold; and this creeping in
for such a purpose was a judgment for yielding up themselves to the
delusions of Satan. The word <span id="viii.ii.ii-p18.1"></span>πάλαι
refers indefinitely to what is past, either long ago, or some time past.
See <span id="viii.ii.ii-p18.2"></span>[Mt
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p18.2"></span>, and <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p18.3"></span>[Mr
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p18.3"></span>. The reference may be to ancient
prophecies, or to those of our Savior and his Apostles. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc45031.htm#fr_192) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p20"></span> “The grace of God” here is evidently
the gospel. They transformed, says *Grotius*, the gospel to a libidinous
doctrine. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc45031.htm#fr_193) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p23"></span> *Griesbach* excludes <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>Θεὸν, “God,” from the text: then the
passage would correspond in sense, with <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>[2Pe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>; literally, “denying the only sovereign
and Lord of us, Jesus Christ.” The word <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p23.3"></span>δεσπότην, sovereign, or master, is used by
Jude as well as by Peter. It was not the grace, but the ruling power of
Christ that was denied; they boasted of his grace, but did not submit to
him as a king. Hence the word <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p23.4"></span>δεσπότης is used — one exercising absolute
power. We may render the words, “denying our only sovereign and Lord,
Jesus Christ.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc45031.htm#fr_194) <span
id="viii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p12"></span> The “dreaming” is connected with the
three things which follow, defiling the flesh, despising government and
slandering dignities. Hence the idea conveyed by our version, in which
*filthy* is introduced, is by no means correct. Allusion seems to be
made to the pretensions of false prophets in former times. See <span
id="viii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Jer
23:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#025)<span
id="viii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>. The false prophets taught what they
pretended to see in dreams, as dreams as well as visions were vouchsafed
to true prophets. See <span id="viii.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>[Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="viii.ii.iv-p12.2"></span>. It is not improbable that those referred
to here pretended that they had received what they taught., by
supernatural dreams; for how otherwise could they deceive others,
especially respecting errors so gross and palpable as are here
mentioned? The eighth verse is, as to its construction, connected with
the seventh. The <span id="viii.ii.iv-p12.3"></span>ὡς and the <span
id="viii.ii.iv-p12.4"></span>ὁμοίως are corresponding terms; “as Sodom
and Gomorrha, etc., are set forth for an example, in like manner also
these would be.” This is the drift of the passage; —

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p13"></span>**8.** “In like manner, indeed, shall
also these dreamers be that is,  
an example of divine vengeance,  
who defile the flesh, despise dominion, and revile dignities.”

<span id="viii.ii.iv-p14"></span>Peter threatened them with “swift
destruction,” <span id="viii.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>[2Pe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)<span
id="viii.ii.iv-p14.1"></span>. There are here three things mentioned
which apply to the three instances previously adduced: like the
Sodomites they defiled the flesh; like the fallen angels they despised
dominion; and like the Israelites in the wilderness, they reviled
dignities; for it was especially by opposing the power given to Moses
that the Israelites manifested their unbelief. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc45031.htm#fr_195) <span
id="viii.ii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.v-p16"></span> “Twice dead” is deemed by some a
proverbial expression to signify what is altogether dead; or, as by
*Macknight*, it means that they were dead when professing Judaism, and
dead after having made a profession of the gospel. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc45031.htm#fr_196) <span
id="viii.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p11"></span> This is the most common opinion. There
is no evidence of such a *book* being known for some time after this
epistle was written; and the book so called was probably a forgery,
occasioned by this reference to Enoch’s prophecy. See *Macknight*’*s*
Preface to this Epistle. Until of late, it was supposed to be lost; but
in 1821, the late Archbishop *Laurence*, having found an Ethiopia
version of it, published it with a translation. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc45031.htm#fr_197) <span
id="viii.ii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p14"></span> Literally, “with his holy myriads.” —
*Ed*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc45031.htm#fr_198) <span
id="viii.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p17"></span> There seems to be a want of due order
in the 15th verse; the execution of judgment is mentioned first, and
then the conviction of the ungodly; but it is an order which exactly
corresponds with numberless passages in Scripture: the final action
first, and then that which lends to it. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc45031.htm#fr_199) <span
id="viii.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vi-p20"></span> We may render the words “Grumblers and
fault-finders,” that is, as the word means, with their own lot: they
grumbled or murmured against others, and were discontented with their
own condition; and yet walked in such a way (that is, in indulging their
lusts,) as made their lot worse and occasioned still more grumbling. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc45031.htm#fr_200) <span
id="viii.ii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.vii-p16"></span> This is the common interpretation,
and yet it seems inconsistent with what is previously said of these men,
that they crept in stealthily, and “feasted” with the members of the
Church. The <span id="viii.ii.vii-p16.1"></span>ἑαυτοὺς, though retained
by *Griesbach*, is excluded by *Wetstein* and others, being absent from
most of the MSS. The verb <span
id="viii.ii.vii-p16.2"></span>ἀποδιορίζω, means to separate by a
boundary two portions from one another, and hence metaphorically to
separate or cause divisions: “These be they who cause divisions.” They
were doing the same thing as those mentioned by Paul in <span
id="viii.ii.vii-p16.3"></span>[Ro
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#017)<span
id="viii.ii.vii-p16.3"></span>. They were producing discords *in* the
Church, and not separations *from* it; and by continuing in it, they
became “spots and stains” to its members. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc45031.htm#fr_201) <span
id="viii.ii.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p19"></span> It is better to take “faith” here
metonymically for the word or doctrine of faith, the gospel; and the
sense would be more evident, were we to render <span
id="viii.ii.viii-p19.1"></span>ἑαυτοὺς, “one another,” as it means in
<span id="viii.ii.viii-p19.2"></span>[1Th
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#013)<span
id="viii.ii.viii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p20"></span>**20.** “But ye, beloved, building
one another on your most holy faith,  
(on the most holy doctrine which you believe,) praying by the  
**21.** Holy Spirit, keep one another in love to God,  
waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.  
And on some, indeed, have compassion, making a difference;  
but others save with fear,” etc.

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p21"></span>The whole passage would read thus
better, when their duty towards one another is specifically pointed out.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc45031.htm#fr_202) <span
id="viii.ii.viii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p28"></span> Though most agree that by “fear”
here is meant terror, that is, that the persons referred to are to be
terrified by the judgment which awaited them; yet what follows seems
favorable to another view, that fear means the care and caution with
which they were to be treated; for the act of saving them is compared to
that of a man snatching anything from the fire, in doing which he must
be careful lest he himself should be burnt; and then the other
comparison, that of a man shunning an infected garment lest he should
catch the contagion, favors the same view. Hence our version seems right
— “*with* fear.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc45031.htm#fr_203) <span
id="viii.ii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p35"></span> The doxology is as follows, —

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p36"></span>“To the only wise God (or, to the
wise God alone) our Savior, be glory and greatness, might and dominion,
both now and through all ages.”

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p37"></span>“Dominion” (<span
id="viii.ii.viii-p37.1"></span>ἐξουσία) is the right to govern, imperial
authority or power; “might” (<span
id="viii.ii.viii-p37.2"></span>κράτος) is strength to effect his
purpose, omnipotence; “greatness” (<span
id="viii.ii.viii-p37.3"></span>μεγαλωσύνη) comprises knowledge, wisdom,
holiness, and everything that constitutes what is really great and
magnificent; and (<span id="viii.ii.viii-p37.4"></span>δόξα) is the
result of all these things which belong to God; all terminate in his
glory. The ultimate issue is first mentioned, then the things which lead
to it. It is by acknowledging his sovereign power, his capacity to
exercise that power — his omnipotence, and his greatness in everything
that constitutes greatness, that we give him the glory, the honor, and
the praise due to his name. — *Ed.*

<span id="viii.ii.viii-p38"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scripture Translations](cc45032)
