[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45012)  [Next](cc45014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="v.iii.i"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[1 John
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. My little children, these things
write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous:

<span id="v.iii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Filioli mei, haec scribo vobis, ut
non peccetis; quod si quis peccaverit, advocatum habemus apud Patrem,
Jesum Christum justum:

<span id="v.iii.i-p4"></span>**2**. And he is the propitiation for our
sins; and not for ours only, but also for *the sins of* the whole world.

<span id="v.iii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis
nostris, non pro nostris autem solum, sed etiam pro totius mundi.

<span id="v.iii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.i-p7"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p8"></span>**1.** *My little children.* It is not only
the sum and substance of the preceding doctrine, but the meaning of
almost the whole gospel, that we are to depart from sin; and yet, though
we are always exposed to God’s judgment, we are certain that Christ so
intercedes by the sacrifice of his death, that the Father is propitious
to us. In the meantime, he also anticipates an objection, lest any one
should think that he gave license to sin when he spoke of God’s mercy,
and shewed that it is presented to us all. He then joins together two
parts of the gospel, which unreasonable men separate, and thus lacerate
and mutilate. Besides, the doctrine of grace has always been calumniated
by the ungodly. When the expiation of sins by Christ is set forth, they
boastingly say that a license is given to sin.

<span id="v.iii.i-p9"></span>To obviate these calumnies, the Apostle
testifies first that the design of his doctrine was to keep men from
sinning; for when he says, *that ye sin not*, his meaning only is, that
they, according to the measure of human infirmity, should abstain from
sins. And to the same purpose is what I have already said respecting
fellowship with God, that we are to be conformable to him. He is not,
however, silent as to the gratuitous remission of sins; for though
heaven should fall and all things be confounded, yet this part of truth
ought never to be omitted; but, on the contrary, what Christ is ought to
be preached clearly and distinctly.

<span id="v.iii.i-p10"></span>So ought we also to do at this day. As the
flesh is inclined to wantonness, men ought to be carefully warned, that
righteousness and salvation are provided in Christ for this end, that we
may become the holy possession of God. Yet whenever it happens that men
wantonly abuse the mercy of God, there are many snarlish men who load us
with calumny, as though we gave loose reins to vices. We ought still
boldly to go on and proclaim the grace of Christ, in which especially
shines forth the glory of God, and in which consists the whole salvation
of men. These barkings of the ungodly ought, I repeat it, to be wholly
disregarded; for we see that the apostles were also by these barkings
assailed.

<span id="v.iii.i-p11"></span>For this reason he immediately adds the
second clause, that when we sin we *have an advocate* By these words he
confirms what we have already said, that we are very far from being
perfectly righteous, nay, that we contract new guilt daily, and that yet
there is a remedy for reconciling us to God, if we flee to Christ; and
this is alone that in which consciences call acquiesce, in which is
included the righteousness of men, in which is founded the hope of
salvation.

<span id="v.iii.i-p12"></span>The conditional particle, *if*, ought to
be viewed as causal; for it cannot be but that we sin. In short, John
means, that we are not only called away from sin by the gospel, because
God invites us to himself, and offers to us the Spirit of regeneration,
but that a provision is made for miserable sinners, that they may have
God always propitious to them, and that the sins by which they are
entangled, do not prevent them from becoming just, because they have a
Mediator to reconcile them to God. But in order to shew how we return
into favor with God, he says that Christ is our advocate; for he appears
before God for this end, that he may exercise towards us the power and
efficacy of his sacrifice. That this may be better understood, I will
speak more homely. The intercession of Christ is a continual application
of his death for our salvation. That God then does not impute to us our
sins, this comes to us, because he has regard to Christ as intercessor.

<span id="v.iii.i-p13"></span>But the two names, by which he afterwards
signalizes Christ, properly belong to the subject of this passage. He
calls him *just* and *a propitiation*. It is necessary for him to be
both, that he might sustain the office and person of an Advocate; for
who that is a sinner could reconcile God to us? For we are excluded from
access to him, because no one is pure and free from sin. Hence no one is
fit to be a high priest, except he is innocent and separated from
sinners, as it is also declared in <span id="v.iii.i-p13.1"></span>[Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026)<span id="v.iii.i-p13.1"></span>.
*Propitiation* is added, because no one is fit to be a high priest
without a sacrifice. Hence, under the Law, no priest entered the
sanctuary without blood; and a sacrifice, as a usual seal, was wont,
according to God’s appointment, to accompany prayers. By this symbol it
was God’s design to shew, that whosoever obtains favor for us, must be
furnished with a sacrifice; for when God is offended, in order to pacify
him a satisfaction is required. It hence follows, that all the saints
who have ever been and shall be, have need of an advocate, and that no
one except Christ is equal to undertake this office. And doubtless John
ascribed these two things to Christ, to shew that he is the only true
advocate.

<span id="v.iii.i-p14"></span>Now, as no small consolation comes to us,
when we hear that Christ not only died for us to reconcile us to the
Father, but that he continually intercedes for us, so that an access in
his name is open to us, that our prayers may be heard; so we ought
especially to beware, lest this honor, which belongs peculiarly to him,
should be transferred to another.

<span id="v.iii.i-p15"></span>But we know that under the Papacy this
office is ascribed indiscriminately to the saints. Thirty years ago,
this so remarkable an article of our faith, that Christ is our advocate,
was nearly buried; but at this day they allow that he is indeed one of
many, but not the only one. They among the Papists who have a little
more modesty, do not deny that Christ excels others; but they afterwards
join with him a vast number of associates. But the words clearly mean
that he cannot be an advocate who is not a priest; and the priesthood
belongs to none but to Christ alone. In the meantime we do not take away
the mutual intercessions of saints, which they exercise in love towards
one another; but this has nothing to do with the dead who have removed
from their intercourse with men; and nothing with that patronage which
they feign for themselves, that they may not be dependent on Christ
alone. For though brethren pray for brethren, yet they all, without
exception, look to one advocate. There is, then, no doubt but the
Papists set up against Christ so many idols as the patrons or advocates
they devise for themselves.

<span id="v.iii.i-p16"></span>We must also notice by the way, that those
err very grossly, who imagine that Christ falls on his knees before the
Father to pray for us. Such thoughts ought to be renounced, for they
detract from the celestial glory of Christ; and the simple truth ought
to be retained, that the fruit of his death is ever new and perpetual,
that by his intercession he renders God propitious to us, and that he
sanctifies our prayers by the odor of his sacrifice, and also aids us by
pleading for us.

<span id="v.iii.i-p17"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p18"></span>**2** *And not for ours only* He added
this for the sake of amplifying, in order that the faithful might be
assured that the expiation made by Christ, extends to all who by faith
embrace the gospel.

<span id="v.iii.i-p19"></span>Here a question may be raised, how have
the sins of the whole world been expiated? I pass by the dotages of the
fanatics, who under this pretense extend salvation to all the reprobate,
and therefore to Satan himself. Such a monstrous thing deserves no
refutation. They who seek to avoid this absurdity, have said that Christ
 <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) suffered sufficiently for the
whole world, but efficiently only for the elect. This solution has
commonly prevailed in the schools. Though then I allow that what has
been said is true, yet I deny that it is suitable to this passage; for
the design of John was no other than to make this benefit common to the
whole Church. Then under the word *all* or whole, he does not include
the reprobate, but designates those who should believe as well as those
who were then scattered through various parts of the world. For then is
really made evident, as it is meet, the grace of Christ, when it is
declared to be the only true salvation of the world.

<span id="v.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#000)<span id="v.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>: 3-6

<span id="v.iii.ii-p2"></span>**3**. And hereby we do know that we know
him, if we keep his commandments.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p3"></span>**3**. Atque in hoc cognoscimus quod
cognovimus eum, si praecepta ejus servamus.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p4"></span>**4**. He that saith, I know him, and
keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p5"></span>**4**. Qui dicit, Novi eum, et praecepta
ejus non servat, mendax est, et in eo veritas non est.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p6"></span>**5**. But whoso keepeth his word, in him
verily is the love of God perfected: hereby know we that we are in him.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p7"></span>**5**. Qui vero servat ejus sermonem, vere
in ipso charitas Dei perfecta est; in hoc cognoscimus quod in ipso
sumus.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p8"></span>**6**. He that saith he abideth in him
ought himself also so to walk,even as he walked.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p9"></span>**6**. Qui dicit se in eo manere, debet,
sicut ille ambulavit, ita et ipse ambulare.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p12"></span>**3** *And hereby*, or *by this*. After
having treated of the doctrine respecting the gratuitous remission of
sins, he comes to the exhortations which belong to it, and which depend
on it. And first indeed he reminds us that the knowledge of God, derived
from the gospel, is not ineffectual, but that obedience proceeds from
it. He then shews what God especially requires from us, what is the
chief thing in life, even love to God. What we read here of the living
knowledge of God, the Scripture does not without reason repeat
everywhere; for nothing is more common in the world than to draw the
doctrine of religion to frigid speculations. In this way theology has
been adulterated by the Sorbonian sophists, so that from their whole
science not even the least spark of true religion shines forth. And
curious men do everywhere learn so much from God’s word, as enables them
to prattle for the sake of display. In short, no evil has been more
common in all ages than vainly to profess God’s name.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p13"></span>John then takes this principle as
granted, that the knowledge of God is efficacious. He hence concludes,
that they by no means know God who keep not his precepts or
commandments. Plato, though groping in darkness, yet denied that “the
beautiful” which he imagined, could be known, without filling man with
the admiration of itself; so he says in his Phaedrus and in other
places. How then is it possible for thee to know God, and to be moved by
no feeling? Nor does it indeed proceed only from God’s nature, that to
know him is immediately to love him; but the Spirit also, who
illuminates our minds, inspires our hearts with a feeling conformable to
our knowledge. At the same time the knowledge of God leads us to fear
him and to love him. For we cannot know him as Lord and Father, as he
shews himself, without being dutiful children and obedient servants. In
short, the doctrine of the gospel is a lively mirror in which we
contemplate the image of God, and are transformed into the same, as Paul
teaches us in <span id="v.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>[2Co
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="v.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>.
Where, therefore, there is no pure conscience, nothing can be there but
an empty phantom of knowledge.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p14"></span>We must notice the order when he says,
*We do know that we know him*; for he intimates that obedience is so
connected with knowledge, that the last is yet in order the first, as
the cause is necessarily before its effect.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p15"></span>*If we keep his commandments* But there
is no one who in everything keeps them; there would thus be no knowledge
of God in the world. To this I answer, that the Apostle is by no means
inconsistent with himself; since he has before shewed that all are
guilty before God, he does not understand that those who keep his
commandments wholly satisfy the law (no such example can be found in the
world;) but that they are such as strive, according to the capacity of
human infirmity, to form their life in conformity to the will of God.
For whenever Scripture speaks of the righteousness of the faithful, it
does not exclude the remission of sins, but on the contrary, begins with
it.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p16"></span>But we are not hence to conclude that
faith recumbs on works; for though every one receives a testimony to his
faith from his works, yet it does not follow that it is founded on them,
since they are added as an evidence. Then the certainty of faith depends
on the grace of Christ alone; but piety and holiness of life distinguish
true faith from that knowledge of God which is fictitious and dead; for
the truth is, that those who are in Christ, as Paul says, have put off
the old man. (<span id="v.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>[Col
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p17"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p18"></span>**4** *He that saith, I know him* How
does he prove that they are liars who boast that they have faith without
piety? even by the contrary effect; for he has already said, that the
knowledge of God is efficacious. For God is not known by a naked
imagination, since he reveals himself inwardly to our hearts by the
Spirit. Besides, as many hypocrites vainly boast that they have faith,
the Apostle charges all such with falsehood; for what he says would be
superfluous, were there no false and vain profession of Christianity
made by man.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p19"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p20"></span>**5** *But whoso keepeth* He now defines
what a true keeping of God’s law is, even to love God. This passage is,
I think, incorrectly explained by those who understand that they please
the true God who keep his word. Rather take this as its meaning, “to
love God in sincerity of heart, is to keep his commandments.” For he
intended, as I have before reminded you, briefly to shew what God
requires from us, and what is the holiness of the faithful. Moses also
said the same thing, when he stated the sum of the law.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p21"></span>“Now, O Israel, what does the Lord
require of thee, but to fear and love him, and to walk in his
precepts?”  
(<span id="v.iii.ii-p21.2"></span>[De
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p22"></span>And again he says,

<span id="v.iii.ii-p23"></span>“Choose life, even to love the Lord thy
God, to serve him and to cleave to him.” (<span
id="v.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>[Deut.
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#020)<span id="v.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p24"></span>For the law, which is spiritual, does not
command only external works, but enjoins this especially, to love God
with the whole heart.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p25"></span>That no mention is here made of what is
due to men, ought not to be viewed as unreasonable; for brotherly love
flows immediately from the love of God, as we shall hereafter see.
Whosoever, then, desires that his life should be approved by God, must
have all his doings directed to this end. If any one objects and says,
that no one has ever been found who loved God thus perfectly; to this I
reply, that it is sufficient, provided every one aspired to this
perfection according to the measure of grace given unto him. In the
meantime, the definition is, that the perfect love of God is the
complete keeping of his law. To make progress in this as in knowledge,
is what we ought to do.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p26"></span>*Hereby know we that we are in him* He
refers to that fruit of the gospel which he had mentioned, even
fellowship with the Father and the Son; and he thus confirms the former
sentence, by stating what follows, as a consequence. For if it be the
end of the gospel to hold communion with God, and no communion can be
without love, then no one makes a real progress in faith except he who
cleaves from the heart to God.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p27"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p28"></span>**6** *He that saith he abideth in him*
As he has before set before us God as light for an example, he now calls
us also to Christ, that we may imitate him. Yet he does not simply
exhort us to imitate Christ; but from the union we have with him, he
proves that we ought to be like him. A likeness in life and deeds, he
says, will prove that we abide in Christ. But from these words he passes
on to the next clause, which he immediately adds respecting love to the
brethren.

<span id="v.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#000)<span id="v.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>:
7-11

<span id="v.iii.iii-p2"></span>**7**. Brethren, I write no new
commandment unto you, but an old commandment which ye had from the
beginning. The old commandment is the word which ye have heard from the
beginning.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p3"></span>**7**. Fratres, non mandatum novum
mandment scribo vobis, sed mandatum vetus, quod habuistis ab initio:
mandatum vetus est sermo quem audistis ab initio.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p4"></span>**8**. Again, a new commandment I write
unto you, which thing is true in him and in you: because the darkness is
past, and the true light now shineth.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p5"></span>**8**. Rursum mandatum novum scribo
vobis, quae est veritas in ipso et in vobis; quia tenebrae transeunt, et
lumen verum jam lucet.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p6"></span>**9**. He that saith he is in the light,
and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p7"></span>**9**. Quia dicit se in luce esse, et
fratrem suum odit, in tenebræ est adhuc.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p8"></span>**10**. He that loveth his brother
abideth in the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p9"></span>**10**. Qui diligit fratrem suum, in luce
manet, et offendiculum in eo non est.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p10"></span>**11**. But he that hateth his brother
is in darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he
goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his eyes.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p11"></span>**11**. Qui vero fratrem suum odit, in
tenebris ambulat, nec scit quo vadat, quia tenebrae excaecarunt oculos
ejus.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.iii-p13"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p14"></span>**7** *Brethren, I write no new
commandment* This is an explanation of the preceding doctrine, that to
love God is to keep his commandments. And not without reason did he
largely dwell on this point. First, we know that novelty is disliked or
suspected. Secondly, we do not easily undertake an unwonted yoke. In
addition to these things, when we have embraced any kind of doctrine, we
dislike to have anything changed or made new in it. For these reasons
John reminds us, that he taught nothing respecting love but what had
been heard by the faithful from the beginning, and had by long usage
become old.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p15"></span>Some explain oldness differently, even
that Christ now prescribes no other rule of life under the Gospel than
what God did formerly under the Law. This is indeed most true; nor do I
object but that he afterwards calls in this sense the word of the gospel
*the old commandment* But I think that he now means only, that these
were the first elements of the gospel, that they had been thus taught
from the beginning, that there was no reason why they should refuse that
as unusual by which they ought to have been long ago imbued. For the
relative seems to be used in a causative sense. He calls it then *old*,
not because it was taught the fathers many ages before, but because it
had been taught them on their new entrance into a religious life. And it
served much to claim their faith, that it had *proceeded* from Christ
himself from whom they had received the gospel.  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63)

<span id="v.iii.iii-p17"></span>*The old commandment* The word *old*, in
this place, probably extends further; for the sentence is fuller, when
he says, *the word which ye have heard from the beginning is the old
commandment* And as I, indeed, think, he means that the gospel ought not
to be received as a doctrine lately born, but what has proceeded from
God, and is his eternal truth; as though he had said, “Ye ought not to
measure the antiquity of the gospel which is brought to you, by time;
since therein is revealed to you the eternal will of God: not only then
has God delivered to you this rule of a holy life, when ye were first
called to the faith of Christ, but the same has always been prescribed
and approved by him.” And, doubtless, this only ought to be deemed
antiquity, and deserves faith and reverence, which has its origin from
God. For the fictions of men, whatever long prescription of years they
may have, cannot acquire so much authority as to subvert the truth of
God.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p18"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p19"></span>**8** *Again, a new commandment*
Interpreters do not appear to me to have attained the meaning of the
Apostle. He says *new*, because God, as it were, renews it by daily
suggesting it, so that the faithful may practice it through their whole
life, for nothing more excellent can be sought for by them. The elements
which children learn give place in time to what is higher and more
solid. On the contrary, John denies that the doctrine respecting
brotherly love is of this kind, is one which grows old with time, but
that it is perpetually in force, so that it is no less the highest
perfection than the very beginning.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p20"></span>It was, however, necessary that this
should be added, for as men are more curious than what they ought to be,
there are many who always seek something new. Hence there is a weariness
as to simple doctrine, which produces innumerable prodigies of errors,
when every one gapes continually for new mysteries. Now, when it is
known that the Lord proceeds in the same even course, in order to keep
us through life in that which we have learnt, a bridle is cast on
desires of this kind. Let him, then, who would reach the goal of wisdom,
as to the right way of living, make proficiency in love.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p21"></span>*Which then is true*, or *which is
truth*. He proves by this reason what he had said; for this one command
respecting love, as to our conduct in life, constitutes the whole truth
of Christ. Besides, what other greater revelation can be expected? for
Christ, doubtless, is the end and the completion of all things. Hence
the word *truth* means this, that they stood, as it were at the goal,
for it is to be taken for a completion or a perfect state. He joins
Christ to them, as the head to the members, as though he had said, that
the body of the Church has no other perfection, or, that they would then
be really united to Christ, if holy love existed continually among them.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p22"></span>Some give another explanation, “That
which is the truth in Christ, is also in you.” But I do not see what the
meaning of this is.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p23"></span>*Because the darkness is past.* The
present time is here instead of the past; for he means, that as soon as
Christ brings light, we have the full brightness of knowledge: not that
every one of the faithful becomes wise the first day as much as he ought
to be, (for even Paul testifies that he labored to apprehend what he had
not apprehended, (<span id="v.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>[Php
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>,) but that the knowledge of Christ alone is
sufficient to dissipate darkness. Hence, daily progress is necessary;
and the faith of every one has its dawn before it reaches the noonday.
But as God continues the inculcation of the same doctrine, in which he
bids us to make advances, the knowledge of the Gospel is justly said to
be the true light, when Christ, the Sun of righteousness, shines. Thus
the way is shut up against the audacity of those men who try to corrupt
the purity of the Gospel by their own fictions; and we may safely
denounce an anathema on the whole theology of the Pope, for it wholly
obscures the true light.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p24"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p25"></span>**9** *He that saith he is in the light*
He pursues the same metaphor. He said that love is the only true rule
according to which our life is to be formed; he said that this rule or
law is presented to us in the Gospel; he said, lastly, that it is there
as the meridian light, which ought to be continually looked on. Now, on
the other hand, he concludes that all are blind and walk in darkness who
are strangers to love. But that he mentioned before the love of God and
now the love of the brethren, involves no more contrariety than there is
between the effect and its cause. Besides, these are so connected
together that they cannot be separated.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p26"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p27"></span>John says in <span
id="v.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>[1Jo
3:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>, that we falsely boast of love to God,
except we love our brethren; and this is most true. But he now takes
love to the brethren as a testimony by which we prove that we love God.
In short, since love so regards God, that in God it embraces men, there
is nothing strange in this, that the Apostle, speaking of love, should
refer at one time to God, at another to the brethren; and this is what
is commonly done in Scripture. The whole perfection of life is often
said to consist in the love of God; and again, Paul teaches us, that the
whole law is fulfilled by him who loves his neighbor, (<span
id="v.iii.iii-p27.2"></span>[Ro
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p27.2"></span>;) and Christ declares that the main points
of the law are righteousness, judgment, and truth. (<span
id="v.iii.iii-p27.3"></span>[Mt
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p27.3"></span>.) Both these things are true and agree well
together, for the love of God teaches us to love men, and we also in
reality prove our love to God by loving men at his command. However this
may be, it remains always certain that love is the rule of life. And
this ought to be the more carefully noticed, because all choose rather
almost anything else than this one commandment of God.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p28"></span>To the same purpose is what follows,
*and there is no occasion of stumbling in him* — that is, in him who
acts in love; for, he who thus lives will never stumble.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64)

<span id="v.iii.iii-p30"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p31"></span>**11.** *But he that hateth his
brother.* He again reminds us, that whatever specious appearance of
excellency thou shewest, there is yet nothing but what is sinful if love
be absent. This passage may be compared with <span
id="v.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>[1Co
13:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>, and no long explanation is needed. But
this doctrine is not understood by the world, because the greater part
are dazzled by all sorts of masks or disguises. Thus, fictitious
sanctity dazzles the eyes of almost all men, while love is neglected,
or, at least, driven to the farthest corner.

<span id="v.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 John
2:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012)<span
id="v.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p2"></span>**12**. I write unto you, little children,
because your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p3"></span>**12**. Scribo vobis, filioli, quoniam
remittuntur vobis peccata vestra propter homer ejus.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p4"></span>**13**. I write unto you, fathers, because
ye have known him *that is* from the beginning. I write unto you, young
men, because ye have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you, little
children, because ye have known the Father.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p5"></span>**13**. Scribo vobis, patres, quoniam
novistis eum qui est ab initio. Scribo vobis, adolescentes, quoniam
vicistis malum illum. Scribo vobis, pueri, quoniam novistis Patrem.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p6"></span>**14**. I have written unto you, fathers,
because ye have known him *that is* from the beginning. I have written
unto you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abideth
in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p7"></span>**14**. Scripsi vobis, patres, quoniam
novistis eum qui est ab initio. Scripsi vobis, adolescentes, quia fortes
estis, et verbum Dei manet in vobis, et vicistis malum illum.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.iv-p9"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p10"></span>**12** *Little children* This is still a
general declaration, for he does not address those only of a tender age,
but by *little children* he means men of all ages, as in the first
verse, and also hereafter. I say this, because interpreters have
incorrectly applied the term to children. But John, when he speaks of
children, calls them <span id="v.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>παιδία, a word
expressive of age; but here, as a spiritual father, he calls the old as
well as the young, <span id="v.iii.iv-p10.2"></span>τεκνία He will,
indeed, presently address special words to different ages; yet they are
mistaken who think that he begins to do so here. But, on the contrary,
lest the preceding exhortation should obscure the free remission of
sins, he again inculcates the doctrine which peculiarly belongs to
faith, in order that the foundation may with certainty be always
retained, that salvation is laid up for us in Christ alone.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p11"></span>Holiness of life ought indeed to be
urged, the fear of God ought to be carefully enjoined, men ought to be
sharply goaded to repentance, newness of life, together with its fruits,
ought to be commended; but still we ought ever to take heed, lest the
doctrine of faith be smothered, — that doctrine which teaches that
Christ is the only author of salvation and of all blessings; on the
contrary, such moderation ought to be presented, that faith may ever
retain its own primacy. This is the rule prescribed to us by John:
having faithfully spoken of good works, lest he should seem to give them
more importance than he ought to have done, he carefully calls us back
to contemplate the grace of Christ.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p12"></span>*Your sins are forgiven you* Without this
assurance, religion would not be otherwise than fading and shadowy; nay,
they who pass by the free remission of sins, and dwell on other things,
build without a foundation. John in the meantime intimates, that nothing
is more suitable to stimulate men to fear God than when they are rightly
taught what blessing Christ has brought to them, as Paul does, when he
beseeches by the bowels of God’s mercies. (<span
id="v.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Php
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.iv-p13"></span>It hence appears how wicked is the
calumny of the Papists, who pretend that the desire of doing what is
right is frozen, when that is extolled which alone renders us obedient
children to God. For the Apostle takes this as the ground of his
exhortation, that we know that God is so benevolent to us as not to
impute to us our sins.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p14"></span>*For his name’s sake* The material cause
is mentioned, lest we should seek other means to reconcile us to God.
For it would not be sufficient to know that God forgives us our sins,
except we came directly to Christ, and to that price which he paid on
the cross for us. And this ought the more to be observed, because we see
that by the craft of Satan, and by the wicked fictions of men, this way
is obstructed; for foolish men attempt to pacify God by various
satisfactions, and devise innumerable kinds of expiations for the
purpose of redeeming themselves. For as many means of deserving pardon
we intrude on God, by so many *obstacles* are we prevented from
approaching him. Hence John, not satisfied with stating simply the
doctrine, that God remits to us our sins, expressly adds, that he is
propitious to us from a regard to Christ, in order that he might exclude
all other reasons. We also, that we may enjoy this blessing, must pass
by and forget all other names, and rely only on the name of Christ.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p15"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p16"></span>**13** *I write unto you, fathers* He
comes now to enumerate different ages, that he might shew that what he
taught was suitable to every one of them. For a general address
sometimes produces less effect; yea, such is our perversity, that few
think that what is addressed to all belongs to them. The old for the
most part excuse themselves, because they have exceeded the age of
learning; children refuse to learn, as they are not yet old enough; men
of middle age do not attend, because they are occupied with other
pursuits. Lest, then, any should exempt themselves, he accommodates the
Gospel to all. And he mentions three ages, the most common division of
human life. Hence also, the Lacedemonian chorus had three orders; the
first sang, “What ye are we shall be;” the last, “What ye are we have
been;” and the middle, “We are what one of you have been and the other
will be.” Into these three degrees John divides human life.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p17"></span>He, indeed, begins with the old, and says
that the Gospel is suitable to them, because they learnt from it to know
the eternal Son of God. Moroseness is the character of the old, but they
become especially unteachable, because they measure wisdom by the number
of years. Besides, Horace in his Art of Poetry, has justly noticed this
fault in them, that they praise the time of their youth and reject
whatever is differently done or said. This evil John wisely removes,
when he reminds us that the Gospel contains not only a knowledge that is
ancient, but what also leads us to the very eternity of God. It hence
follows that there is nothing here which they can dislike. He says that
Christ was *from the beginning*; I refer this to his Divine presence, as
being co-eternal with the Father, as well as to his power, of which the
Apostle speaks in Hebrews, that he was yesterday what he is today; as
though he had said,

<span id="v.iii.iv-p18"></span>“If antiquity delights you, ye have
Christ, who is superior to all antiquity; therefore his disciples ought
not to be ashamed of him who includes all ages in Himself.” (<span
id="v.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Heb
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span id="v.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>)

<span id="v.iii.iv-p19"></span>We must, at the same time, notice what
that religion is which is really ancient, even that which is founded on
Christ, for otherwise it will be of no avail, however long it may have
existed, if it derives its origin from error.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p20"></span>*I write unto you, young men* Though it
be a diminutive word, <span id="v.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>νεανίσκοι,  <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) yet there is no doubt but that he directs
his word to all who were in the flower of their age. We also know that
those of that age are so addicted to the vain cares of the world, that
they think but little of the kingdom of God; for the rigor of their
minds and the strength of their bodies in a manner inebriate them. Hence
the Apostle reminds them where true strength is, that they might no more
exult as usual in the flesh. *Ye are strong,* he says, *because ye have
overcome Satan*. The copulative here is to be rendered causatively. And,
doubtless, that strength is what we ought to seek, even that which is
spiritual. At the same time he intimates that it is not had otherwise
than from Christ, for he mentions the blessings which we receive through
the Gospel. He says that they had conquered who were as yet engaged in
the contest; but our condition is far otherwise than that of those who
fight under the banners of men, for war is doubtful to them and the
issue is uncertain; but we are conquerors before we engage with the
enemy, for our head Christ has once for all conquered for us the whole
world.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p22"></span>*I write unto you, young children* They
needed another direction. That the Gospel is well adapted to young
children the Apostle concludes, because they find there the Father. We
now see how diabolical is the tyranny of the Pope, which drives away by
threats all ages from the doctrine of the Gospel, while the Spirit of
God so carefully addresses them all.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p23"></span>But these things which the Apostle makes
particular, are also general; for we should wholly fall off into vanity,
except our infirmity were sustained by the eternal truth of God. There
is nothing in us but what is frail and fading, except the power of
Christ dwells in us. We are all like orphans until we attain the grace
of adoption by the Gospel. Hence, what he declares respecting young
children is also true as to the old. But yet his object was to apply to
each what was most especially necessary for them, that he might shew
that they all without exception stood in need of the doctrine of the
Gospel. The particle <span id="v.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>ὅτι is explained
in two ways, but the meaning I have given to it is the best, and agrees
better with the context.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p24"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p25"></span>**14** *I have written unto you, fathers*
These repetitions I deem superfluous; and it is probable that when
unskillful readers falsely thought that he spoke twice of little
children, they rashly introduced the other two clauses. It might at the
same time be that John himself, for the sake of amplifying, inserted the
second time the sentence respecting the young men, (for he adds, that
they were strong, which he had not said before;) but that the copyists
presumptuously filled up the number.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66)

<span id="v.iii.v"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[1 John
2:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p2"></span>**15**. Love not the world, neither the
things *that are* in the world. If any man love the world, the love of
the Father is not in him.

<span id="v.iii.v-p3"></span>**15**. Ne diligatis mundum, neque ea quae
in mundo sunt: si quis diligit mundum non est charitas Patris in eo.

<span id="v.iii.v-p4"></span>**16**. For all that *is* in the world, the
lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is
not of the Father, but is of the world.

<span id="v.iii.v-p5"></span>**16**. Quia quicquid est in mundo (nempe
concupiscentia carnis, concupiscentia oculorum, et superbia vitae) non
est ex Patre, sed ex mundo est.

<span id="v.iii.v-p6"></span>**17**. And the world passeth away, and the
lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.

<span id="v.iii.v-p7"></span>**17**. Atqui mundus transit, et
concupiscentia ejus; qui autem facit voluntatem Dei manet in aeternum.

<span id="v.iii.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.v-p9"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p10"></span>**15** *Love not* He had said before that
the only rule for living religiously, is to love God; but as, when we
are occupied with the vain love of the world, we turn away all our
thoughts and affections another way, this vanity must first be torn away
from us, in order that the love of God may reign within us. Until our
minds are cleansed, the former doctrine may be iterated a hundred times,
but with no effect: it would be like pouring water on a ball; you can
gather, no, not a drop, because there is no empty place to retain water.
 <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)

<span id="v.iii.v-p12"></span>By the *world* understand everything
connected with the present life, apart from the kingdom of God and the
hope of eternal life. So he includes in it corruptions of every kind,
and the abyss of all evils. In the world are pleasures, delights, and
all those allurements by which man is captivated, so as to withdraw
himself from God.  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68)

<span id="v.iii.v-p14"></span>Moreover, the love of the world is thus
severely condemned, because we must necessarily forget God and ourselves
when we regard nothing so much as the earth; and when a corrupt lust of
this kind rules in man, and so holds him entangled that he thinks not of
the heavenly life, he is possessed by a beastly stupidity.

<span id="v.iii.v-p15"></span>*If any man love the world* He proves by
an argument from what is contrary, how necessary it is to cast away the
love of the world, if we wish to please God; and this he afterwards
confirms by an argument drawn from what is inconsistent; for what
belongs to the world is wholly at variance with God. We must bear in
mind what I have already said, that a corrupt mode of life is here
mentioned, which has nothing in common with the kingdom of God, that is,
when men become so degenerated, that they are satisfied with the present
life, and think no more of immortal life than mute animals. Whosoever,
then, makes himself thus a slave to earthly lusts, cannot be of God.

<span id="v.iii.v-p16"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p17"></span>**16** *The lust of the flesh*, or,
*namely, the lust of the flesh*. The old interpreter renders the verse
otherwise, for from one sentence he makes two. Those Greek authors do
better, who read these words together, “Whatever is in the world is not
of God;” and then the three kinds of lusts they introduce
parenthetically. For John, by way of explanation, inserted these three
particulars as examples, that he might briefly shew what are the
pursuits and thoughts of men who live for the world; but whether it be a
full and complete division, it does not signify much; though you will
not find a worldly man in whom these lusts do not prevail, at least one
of them. It remains for us to see what he understands by each of these.

<span id="v.iii.v-p18"></span>The first clause is commonly explained of
all sinful lusts in general; for the flesh means the whole corrupt
nature of man. Though I am unwilling to contend, yet I am unwilling to
dissemble that I approve of another meaning. Paul, when forbidding, in
<span id="v.iii.v-p18.1"></span>[Ro
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span id="v.iii.v-p18.1"></span>,
to make provision for the flesh as to its lusts, seems to me to be the
best interpreter of this place. What, then, is the flesh there? even the
body and all that belongs to it. What, then, is the lust or desire of
the flesh, but when worldly men, seeking to live softly and delicately,
are intent only on their own advantages? Well known from Cicero and
others, is the threefold division made by Epicurus; for he made this
difference between lusts; he made some natural and necessary, some
natural and not necessary, and some neither natural nor necessary. But
John, well knowing the insubordination (<span
id="v.iii.v-p18.2"></span>ἀταξία)of the human heart unhesitantly
condemns the lust of the flesh, because it always flows out
immoderately, and never observes any due medium. He afterwards comes
gradually to grosser vices.

<span id="v.iii.v-p19"></span>*The lust of the eyes* He includes, as I
think, libidinous looks as well as the vanity which delights in pomps
and empty splendor.

<span id="v.iii.v-p20"></span>In the last place follows *pride* or
*haughtiness*; with which is connected ambition, boasting, contempt of
others, blind love of self, headstrong self-confidence.

<span id="v.iii.v-p21"></span>The sum of the whole is, that as soon as
the world presents itself, our lusts or desires, when our heart is
corrupt, are captivated by it, like unbridled wild beasts; so that
various lusts, all which are adverse to God, bear rule in us. The Greek
word, <span id="v.iii.v-p21.1"></span>βὶος rendered life, (<span
id="v.iii.v-p21.2"></span>*vita*,) means the way or manner of living.

<span id="v.iii.v-p22"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p23"></span>**17** *And the world passeth away* As
there is nothing in the world but what is fading, and as it were for a
moment, he hence concludes that they who seek their happiness from it,
make a wretched and miserable provision for themselves, especially when
God calls us to the ineffable glory of eternal life; as though he had
said, “The true happiness which God offers to his children, is eternal;
it is then a shameful thing for us to be entangled with the world, which
with all its benefits will soon vanish away.” I take *lust* here
metonymically, as signifying what is desired or coveted, or what
captivates the desires of men. The meaning is, that what is most
precious in the world and deemed especially desirable, is nothing but a
shadowy phantom.

<span id="v.iii.v-p24"></span>By saying that they who do the will of God
shall *abide for ever*, or *perpetually*, he means that they who seek
God shall be perpetually blessed. Were any one to object and say, that
no one doeth what God commands, the obvious answer is, that what is
spoken of here is not the perfect keeping of the law, but the obedience
of faith, which, however imperfect it may be, is yet approved by God.
The will of God is first made known to us in the law; but as no one
satisfies the law, no happiness can be hoped from it. But Christ comes
to meet the despairing with new aid, who not only regenerates us by his
Spirit that we may obey God, but makes also that our endeavor, such as
it is, should obtain the praise of perfect righteousness.

<span id="v.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[1 John
2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018)<span
id="v.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vi-p2"></span>**18**. Little children, it is the last
time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are
there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p3"></span>**18**. Filioli, novissima hora est; et
sicut audistis quod Antichristus venturus sit, etiam nunc Antichristi
multi coeperunt esse: unde scimus esse novissimam horam.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p4"></span>**19**. They went out from us, but they
were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would *no doubt* have
continued with us; but *they went out*, that they might be made manifest
that they were not all of us.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p5"></span>**19**. Ex nobis egressi sunt, sed non
erant ex nobis; nam si fuissent ex nobis, permansissent utique nobiscum;
sed ut manifesti fierent quod non erant omnes ex nobis.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.vi-p7"></span><span id="v.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vi-p8"></span>**18** *It is the last time*, or *hour*.
He confirms the faithful against offenses by which they might have been
disturbed. Already many sects had risen up, which rent the unity of
faith and caused disorder in the churches. But the Apostle not only
fortifies the faithful, lest they should falter, but turns the whole to
a contrary purpose; for he reminds them that the last time had already
come, and therefore he exhorts them to a greater vigilance, as though he
had said, “Whilst various errors arise, it behooves you to be awakened
rather than to be overwhelmed; for we ought hence to conclude that
Christ is not far distant; let us then attentively look for him, lest he
should come upon us suddenly.” In the same way it behooves us to comfort
ourselves at this day, and to see by faith the near advent of Christ,
while Satan is causing confusion for the sake of disturbing the Church,
for these are the signs of the last time.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p9"></span>But so many ages having passed away since
the death of John, seem to prove that this prophecy is not true: to this
I answer, that the Apostle, according to the common mode adopted in the
Scripture, declares to the faithful, that nothing more now remained but
that Christ should appear for the redemption of the world. But as he
fixes no time, he did not allure the men of that age by a vain hope, nor
did he intend to cut short in future the course of the Church and the
many successions of years during which the Church has hitherto remained
in the world. And doubtless, if the eternity of God’s kingdom be borne
in mind, so long a time will appear to us as a moment. We must
understand the design of the Apostle, that he calls that the last time,
during which all things shall be so completed, that nothing will remain
except the last revelation of Christ.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p10"></span>*As ye have heard that antichrist will
come* He speaks as of a thing well known. We may hence conclude that the
faithful had been taught and warned from the beginning respecting the
future disorder of the Church, in order that they might, carefully keep
themselves in the faith they professed, and also instruct posterity in
the duty of watchfulness. For it was God’s will that his Church should
be thus tried, lest any one knowingly and willingly should be deceived,
and that there might be no excuse for ignorance. But we see that almost
the whole world has been miserably deceived, as though not a word had
been said about Antichrist.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p11"></span>Moreover, under the Papacy there is
nothing more notorious and common than the future coming of Antichrist;
and yet they are so stupid, that they perceive not that his tyranny is
exercised over them. Indeed, the same thing happens altogether to them
as to the Jews; for though they hold the promises respecting the
Messiah, they are yet further away from Christ than if they had never
heard his name; for the imaginary Messiah, whom they have invented for
themselves, turns them wholly aside from the Son of God; and were any
one to shew Christ to them from the Law and the Prophets, he would only
spend his labor in vain. The Popes have imagined an Antichrist, who for
three years and a half is to harass the Church. All the marks by which
the Spirit of God has pointed out Antichrist, clearly appear in the
Pope; but the triennial Antichrist lays fast hold on the foolish
Papists, so that seeing they do not see. Let us then remember, that
Antichrist has not only been announced by the Spirit of God, but that
also the marks by which he may be distinguished have been mentioned.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p12"></span>*Even now are there many antichrists.*
This may seem to have been added by way of correction, as they falsely
thought that it would be some one kingdom; but it is not so. They who
suppose that he would be only one man, are indeed greatly mistaken. For
Paul, referring to a future defection, plainly shows that it would be a
certain body or kingdom. (<span id="v.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>[2Th
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span id="v.iii.vi-p12.1"></span>.)
He first predicts a defection that would prevail through the whole
Church, as a universal evil; he then makes the head of the apostasy the
adversary of Christ, who would sit in the temple of God, claiming for
himself divinity and divine honors. Except we desire willfully to err,
we may learn from Paul’s description to know Antichrist. That passage I
have already explained; it is enough now touch on it by the way.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p13"></span>But how can that passage agree with the
words of John, who says that there were already many antichrists? To
this I reply, that John meant no other thing than to say, that some
particular sects had already risen, which were forerunners of a future
Antichrist; for Cerinthus, Basilides, Marcion, Valentinus, Ebion,
Arrius, and others, were members of that kingdom which the Devil
afterwards raised up in opposition to Christ. Properly speaking,
Antichrist was not yet in existence; but the mystery of iniquity was
working secretly. But John uses the name, that he might effectually
stimulate the care and solicitude of the godly to repel frauds.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p14"></span>But if the Spirit of God even then
commanded the faithful to stand on their watch, when they saw at a
distance only signs of the coming enemy, much less is it now a time for
sleeping, when he holds the Church under his cruel and oppressive
tyranny, and openly dishonors Christ.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p15"></span><span id="v.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vi-p16"></span>**19** *They went out from us* He
anticipates another objection, that the Church seemed to have produced
these pests, and to have cherished them for a time in its bosom. For
certainly it serves more to disturb the weak, when any one among us,
professing the true faith, falls away, than when a thousand aliens
conspire against us. He then confesses that they had gone out from the
bosom of the Church; but he denies that they were ever of the Church.
But the way of removing this objection is, to say, that the Church is
always exposed to this evil, so that it is constrained to bear with many
hypocrites who know not Christ, really, however much they may by the
mouth profess his name.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p17"></span>By saying, *They went out from us*, he
means that they had previously occupied a place in the Church, and were
counted among the number of the godly. He, however, denies that they
were of them, though they had assumed the name of believers, as chaff
though mixed with wheat on the same floor cannot yet be deemed wheat.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p18"></span>*For if they had been of us* He plainly
declares that those who fell away had never been members of the Church.
And doubtless the seal of God, under which he keeps his own, remains
sure, as Paul says, (<span id="v.iii.vi-p18.1"></span>[2Ti
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span
id="v.iii.vi-p18.1"></span>.) But here arises a difficulty, for it
happens that many who seemed to have embraced Christ, often fall away.
To this I answer, that there are three sorts of those who profess the
Gospel; there are those who feign piety, while a bad conscience reproves
them within; the hypocrisy of others is more deceptive, who not only
seek to disguise themselves before men, but also dazzle their own eyes,
so that they seem to themselves to worship God aright; the third are
those who have the living root of faith, and carry a testimony of their
own adoption firmly fixed in their hearts. The two first have no
stability; of the last John speaks, when he says, that it is impossible
that they should be separated from the Church, for the seal which God’s
Spirit engraves on their hearts cannot be obliterated; the incorruptible
seed, which has struck roots, cannot be pulled up or destroyed.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p19"></span>He does not speak here of the constancy
of men, but of God, whose election must be ratified. He does not then,
without reason declare, that where the calling of God is effectual,
perseverance would be certain. He, in short, means that they who fall
away had never been thoroughly imbued with the knowledge of Christ, but
had only a light and a transient taste of it.

<span id="v.iii.vi-p20"></span>*That they might be made manifest* He
shews that trial is useful and necessary for the Church. It hence
follows, on the other hand, that there is no just cause for
perturbation. Since the Church is like a threshing-floor, the chaff must
be blown away that the pure wheat may remain. This is what God does,
when he casts out hypocrites from the Church, for he then cleanses it
from refuse and filth.

<span id="v.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p2"></span>**20**. But ye have an unction from the
Holy One, and ye know all things.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p3"></span>**20**. Et vos unctionem habetis a
Sancto, et novistis omnia.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p4"></span>**21**. I have not written unto you
because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie
is of the truth.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p5"></span>**21**. Non scripsi vobis, quia non
noveritis veritatem; sed quia novistis eam, et quia omne mendacium ex
veritate non est.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p6"></span>**22**. Who is a liar but he that denieth
that Jesus is the Christ? He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and
the Son.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p7"></span>**22**. Quis est mendax, nisi qui negat
Jesum esse Christum? Hic est antichristus, qui negat Patrem et Filium.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p8"></span>**23**. Whosoever denieth the Son, the
same hath not the Father: *(but) he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the
Father also.*

<span id="v.iii.vii-p9"></span>**23**. Omnis qui negat Filium, neque
Patrem habet.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.vii-p11"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p12"></span>**20** *But ye have an unction.* The
Apostle modestly excuses himself for having so earnestly warned them,
lest they should think that they were indirectly reproved, as though
they were rude and ignorant of those things which they ought to have
well known. So Paul conceded wisdom to the Romans, that they were able
and fit to admonish others. He at the same time shewed that they stood
in need of being reminded, in order that they might rightly perform
their duty. (<span id="v.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>[Rom.
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#015)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>.) The Apostles did not, however, speak thus
in order to flatter them; but they thus wisely took heed lest their
doctrine should be rejected by any, for they declared what was suitable
and useful, not only to the ignorant, but also to those well instructed
in the Lord’s school.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p13"></span>Experience teaches us how fastidious the
ears of men are. Such fastidiousness ought indeed to be far away from
the godly; it yet behooves a faithful and wise teacher to omit nothing
by which he may secure a hearing from all. And it is certain that we
receive what is said with less attention and respect, when we think that
he who speaks disparages the knowledge which has been given us by the
Lord. The Apostle by this praise did at the same time stimulate his
readers, because they who were endued with the gift of knowledge, had
less excuse if they did not surpass others in their proficiency.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p14"></span>The state of the case is, that the
Apostle did not teach them as though they were ignorant, and acquainted
only with the first elements of knowledge, but reminded them of things
already known, and also exhorted them to rouse up the sparks of the
Spirit, that a full brightness might shine forth in them. And in the
next words he explained himself, having denied that he wrote to them
because they knew not the truth, but because they had been well taught
in it; for had they been wholly ignorant and novices, they could not
have comprehended his doctrine.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p15"></span>Now, when he says that they knew *all
things*, it is not to be taken in the widest sense, but ought to be
confined to the subject treated of here. But when he says that they had
*an unction from the Holy One*, he alludes, no doubt, to the ancient
types. The oil by which the priests were anointed was obtained from the
sanctuary; and Daniel mentions the coming of Christ as the proper time
for anointing the Most Holy. (<span id="v.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Da
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>.) For he was anointed by the Father, that
he might pour forth on us a manifold abundance from his own fullness. It
hence follows that men are not rightly made wise by the acumen of their
own minds, but by the illumination of the Spirit; and further, that we
are not otherwise made partakers of the Spirit than through Christ, who
is the true sanctuary and our only high priest.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69)

<span id="v.iii.vii-p17"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p18"></span>**21** *And that no lie is of the
truth.* He concedes to them a judgment, by which they could distinguish
truth from falsehood; for it is not the dialectic proposition, that
falsehood differs from truth, (such as are taught as general rules in
the schools;) but what is said is applied to that which is practical and
useful; as though he had said, that they did not only hold what was
true, but were also so fortified against the impostures and fallacies of
the ungodly, that they wisely took heed to themselves. Besides, he
speaks not of this or of that kind of falsehood; but he says, that
whatever deception Satan might contrive, or in whatever way he might
attack them, *they* would be able readily to distinguish between light
and darkness, because they had the Spirit as their guide.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p19"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p20"></span>**22** *Who is a liar* He does not
assert that they alone were liars who denied that the Son of God
appeared in the flesh, lest no one in unloosing the knot should above
measure torment himself; but that they surpassed all others, as though
he had said, that except this be deemed a lie, no other could be so
reckoned; as we are wont commonly to say, “If perfidy towards God and
men is not a crime, what else can we call a crime?”  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70)

<span id="v.iii.vii-p22"></span>What he had generally said of false
prophets, he now applies to the state of his own time; for he points
out, as by the finger, those who disturbed the Church. I readily agree
with the ancients, who thought that Cerinthus and Carpocrates are here
referred to. But the denial of Christ extends much wider; for it is not
enough in words to confess that Jesus is the Christ, except he is
acknowledged to be such as the Father offers him to us in the gospel.
The two I have named gave the title of Christ to the Son of God, but
imagined him to be man only. Others followed them, such as Arius, who,
adorning him with the name of God, robbed him of his eternal divinity.
Marcion dreamt that he was a mere phantom. Sabellius imagined that he
differed nothing from the Father. All these denied the Son of God; for
not one of them really acknowledged the true Christ; but, adulterating,
as far as they could, the truth respecting him, they devised for
themselves an idol instead of Christ. Then broke out Pelagius, who,
indeed, raised no dispute respecting Christ’s essence, but allowed him
to be true man and God; yet he transferred to us almost all the honor
that belongs to him. It is, indeed, to reduce Christ to nothing, when
his grace and power are set aside.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p23"></span>So the Papists, at this day, setting up
freewill in opposition to the grace of the Holy Spirit, ascribing a part
of their righteousness and salvation to the merits of works, feigning
for themselves innumerable advocates, by whom they render God propitious
to them, have a sort of fictitious Christ, I know not what; but the
lively and genuine image of God, which shines forth in Christ, they
deform by their wicked inventions; they lessen his power, subvert and
pervert his office.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p24"></span>We now see that Christ, is denied,
whenever those things which peculiarly belong to him, are taken away
from him. And as Christ is the end of the law and of the gospel, and has
in himself all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, so he is the mark
at which all heretics level and direct their arrows. Therefore the
Apostle does not, without reason, *make* those the chief impostors, who
fight against Christ, in whom the full truth is exhibited to us.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p25"></span>*He is Antichrist* He speaks not of that
prince of defection who was to occupy the seat of God; but all those who
seek to overthrow Christ, he puts them among that impious band. And that
he might amplify their crime, he asserts that the Father, no less than
the Son, is denied by them; as though he had said, “They have no longer
any religion, because they wholly cast away God.” And this he afterwards
confirms, by adding this reason, that the Father cannot be separated
from the Son.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p26"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p27"></span>Now this is a remarkable sentence, and
ought to be reckoned among the first axioms of our religion. yea, when
we have confessed that there is one true God, this second article ought
necessarily to be added, that he is no other but he who is made known in
Christ. The Apostle does not here treat distinctly of the unity of
essence. It is, indeed, certain, that the Son cannot be disunited from
the Father, for he is of the same essence, (<span
id="v.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>ὁμοούσιος;) but another thing is spoken of
here, that is, that the Father, who is invisible, has revealed himself
only in his Son. Hence he is called the image of the Father, (<span
id="v.iii.vii-p27.2"></span>[Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p27.2"></span>,) because he sets forth and exhibits to us
all that is necessary to be known of the Father. For the naked majesty
of God would, by its immense brightness, ever dazzle our eyes; it is
therefore necessary for us to look on Christ. This is to come to the
light, which is justly said to be otherwise inaccessible.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p28"></span>I say, again, that there is not here a
distinct discussion respecting the eternal essence of Christ, which he
has in common with the Father. This passage is, indeed, abundantly
sufficient to prove it: but John calls us to this practical part of
faith, that as God has given himself to us to be enjoyed only in Christ,
he is elsewhere sought for in vain; or (if any one prefers what is
clearer) that as in Christ dwells all the fullness of the Deity, there
is no God apart from him. It hence follows, that Turks, Jews, and such
as are like them, have a mere idol and not the true God. For by whatever
titles they may honor the God whom they worship, still, as they *reject*
him without whom they cannot come to God, and in whom God has really
manifested himself to us, what have they but some creature or fiction of
their own? They may flatter themselves as much as they please, with
their own speculations, who, without Christ, philosophize on divine
things; it is still certain that they do nothing but rave and rant,
because, as Paul says, they hold not the Head. (<span
id="v.iii.vii-p28.1"></span>[Col
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p28.1"></span>.) It is obvious, hence, to conclude how
necessary is the knowledge of Christ.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p29"></span>Many copies have the opposite sentence,
“He who confesses the Son,” etc. But as I think that a note by some
copyist has *crept* into the text, I hesitated not to omit it.  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) But if its insertion be approved, the
meaning would be, that there is no right confession of God except the
Father be acknowledged in the Son.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p31"></span>Were any one to object and say, that
many of the ancients thought rightly of God, to whom Christ was not
known: I allow that the knowledge of Christ has not been always so
explicitly revealed, nevertheless, I contend that it has been always
true, that as the light of the sun comes to us by its rays, so the
knowledge of God has been communicated through Christ.

<span id="v.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>[1
John 2:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#024)<span
id="v.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p2"></span>**24**. Let that therefore abide in you,
which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from
the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son,
and in the Father.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p3"></span>**24**. Ergo quod audistis ab initio, in
vobis maneat: si in vobis manserit quod ab initio audistis, et vos in
Patre et Filio manebitis.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p4"></span>**25**. And this is the promise that he
hath promised us, *even* eternal life.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p5"></span>**25**. Atque haec est promissio, quam
ipse nobis promisit, nempe vitae eternae (*vel, quam nobis pollicitus
est vitam eternam.*)

<span id="v.iii.viii-p6"></span>**26**. These *things* have I written
unto you concerning them that seduce you.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p7"></span>**26**. Haec scripsi vobis de iis qui
seducunt vos.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p8"></span>**27**. But the anointing which ye have
received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you:
but as the same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and
is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p9"></span>**27**. Et unctio quam accepistis ab eo,
in vobis manet; neque opus habetis ut quis vos doceat; sed quemadmodum
unctio docet vos de omnibus, et veritas est, et non est mendacium; et
quemadmodum docuit vos, manete in eo (*vel, in ea.*)

<span id="v.iii.viii-p10"></span>**28**. And now, little children, abide
in him; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be
ashamed before him at his coming.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p11"></span>**28**. Et nunc filioli, manete in eo,
ut quum apparuerit, habeamus fiduciam, neque pudefiamus ab ejus
praesentia.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p12"></span>**29**. If ye know that he is
righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of
him.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p13"></span>**29**. Si nostis quod justus sit,
cognoscite quod quisquis facit justitiam ex eo genitus est.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p14"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.viii-p15"></span><span id="v.iii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p16"></span>**24** *Let that therefore abide in
you* He annexes an exhortation to the former doctrine; and that it might
have more weight, he points out the fruit they would receive from
obedience. He then exhorts them to perseverance in the faith, so that
they might retain fixed in their hearts what they had learnt.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p17"></span>But when he says, *from the beginning*,
he does not mean that antiquity alone was sufficient to prove any
doctrine true; but as he has already shown that they had been rightly
instructed in the pure gospel of Christ, he concludes that they ought of
right to continue in it. And this order ought to be especially noticed;
for were we unwilling to depart from that doctrine which we have once
embraced, whatever it may be, this would not be perseverance, but
perverse obstinacy. Hence, discrimination ought to be exercised, so that
a reason for our faith may be made evident from God’s word: then let
inflexible perseverance follow.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p18"></span>The Papists boast of “a beginning,”
because they have imbibed their superstitions from childhood. Under this
pretense they allow themselves obstinately to reject the plain truth.
Such perverseness shews to us, that we ought always to begin with the
certainty of truth.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p19"></span>*In that which ye have heard* Here is
the fruit of perseverance, that they in whom God’s truth remains, remain
in God. We hence learn what we are to seek in every truth pertaining to
religion. He therefore makes the greatest proficiency, who makes such
progress as wholly to cleave to God. But he in whom the Father dwells
not through his Son, is altogether vain and empty, whatever knowledge he
may possess. Moreover, this is the highest commendation of sound
doctrine, that it unites us to God, and that in it is found whatever
pertains to the real fruition of God.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p20"></span><span id="v.iii.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p21"></span>In the last place, he reminds us that
*it is real happiness when God dwells in us*. The words he uses are
ambiguous. They may be rendered, “*This is the promise which he has
promised to us, even eternal life*.”  <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) You may, however, adopt either of these
renderings, for the meaning is still the same. The sum of what is said
is, that we cannot live otherwise than by nourishing to the end the seed
of life sown in our hearts. John insists much on this point, that not
only the beginning of a blessed life is to be found in the knowledge of
Christ, but also its perfection. But no repetition of it can be too
much, since it is well known that it has ever been a cause of ruin to
men, that being not content with Christ, they have had a hankering to
wander beyond the simple doctrine of the gospel.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p23"></span><span id="v.iii.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p24"></span>**26** *These things have I written
unto you* The apostle excuses himself again for having admonished them
who were well endued with knowledge and judgment. But he did this, that
they might apply for the guidance of the Spirit, lest his admonition
should be in vain; as though he had said, “I indeed do my part, but
still it is necessary that the Spirit of God should direct you in all
things; for in vain shall I, by the sound of my voice, beat your ears,
or rather the air, unless he speaks within you.”

<span id="v.iii.viii-p25"></span>When we hear that he wrote concerning
seducers, we ought always to bear in mind, that it is the duty of a good
and diligent pastor not only to gather a flock, but also to drive away
wolves’ for what will it avail to proclaim the pure gospel, if we
connive at the impostures of Satan? No one, then, can faithfully teach
the Church, except he is diligent in banishing errors whenever he finds
them spread by seducers. What he says of the *unction* having been
received *from him*, I refer to Christ.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p26"></span><span id="v.iii.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p27"></span>**27** *And ye need not* Strange must
have been the purpose of John, as I have already said, if he intended to
represent teaching as useless. He did not ascribe to them so much
wisdom, as to deny that they were the scholars of Christ. He only meant
that they were by no means so ignorant as to need things as it were
unknown to be taught them, and that he did not set before them anything
which the Spirit of God might not of himself suggest to them. Absurdly,
then, do fanatical men lay hold on this passage, in order to exclude
from the Church the use of the outward ministry. He says that the
faithful, taught by the Spirit, already understood what he delivered to
them, so that they had no need to learn things unknown to them. He said
this, that he might add more authority to his doctrine, while every one
repeated in his heart an assent to it, engraven as it were by the finger
of God. But as every one had knowledge according to the measure of his
faith, and as faith in some was small, in others stronger, and in none
perfect, it hence follows, that no one knew so much, that there was no
room for progress.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p28"></span>There is also another use to be made of
this doctrine, — that when men really understand what is needful for
them, we are yet to warn and rouse them, that they may be more
confirmed. For what John says, that they were taught all things by the
Spirit, ought not to be taken generally, but to be confined to what is
contained in this passage. He had, in short, no other thing in view than
to strengthen their faith, while he recalled them to the examination of
the Spirit, who is the only fit corrector and approver of doctrine, who
seals it on our hearts, so that we may certainly know that God speaks.
For while faith ought to look to God, he alone can be a witness to
himself, so as to convince our hearts that what our ears receive has
come from him.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p29"></span>And the same is the meaning of these
words, *As the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth*;
that is, the Spirit is like a seal, by which the truth of God is
testified to you. When he adds, *and is no lie*, he points out another
office of the Spirit, even that he endues us with judgment and
discernment, lest we should be deceived by lies, lest we should hesitate
and be perplexed, lest we should vacillate as in doubtful things.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p30"></span>*As it hath taught you, ye shall abide
in him*, or, *abide in him*. He had said, that the Spirit abode in them;
he now exhorts them to abide in the revelation made by him, and he
specifies what revelation it was, “Abide,” he says, “in Christ, as the
Spirit hath taught you.” Another explanation, I know, is commonly given,
“Abide in it,” that is, the unction. But as the repetition which
immediately follows, cannot apply to any but to Christ, I have no doubt
but that he speaks here also of Christ; and this is required by the
context; for the Apostle dwells much on this point, that the faithful
should retain the true knowledge of Christ, and that they should not go
to God in any other way.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p31"></span><span id="v.iii.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p32"></span>He at the same time shews, that the
children of God are for no other end illuminated by the Spirit, but that
they may know Christ. Provided they turned not aside from him, he
promised them the fruit of perseverance, even confidence, so as not to
be ashamed at his presence. For faith is not a naked and a frigid
apprehension of Christ, but a lively and real sense of his power, which
produces confidence. Indeed, faith cannot stand, while tossed daily by
so many waves, except it looks to the coming of Christ, and, supported
by his power, brings tranquillity to the conscience. But the nature of
confidence is well expressed, when he says that it can boldly sustain
the presence of Christ. For they who indulge securely in their vices,
turn their backs as it were on God; nor can they otherwise obtain peace
than by forgetting him. This is the security of the flesh, which
stupefies men; so that turning away from God, they neither dread sin nor
fear death; and in the meantime they shun the tribunal of Christ. But a
godly confidence delights to look on God. Hence it is, that the godly
calmly wait for Christ, nor do they dread his coming.

<span id="v.iii.viii-p33"></span><span id="v.iii.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p34"></span>**29.** *If ye know that he is
righteous* He again passes on to exhortations, so that he mingles these
continually with doctrine throughout the Epistle; but he proves by many
arguments that faith is necessarily connected with a holy and pure life.
The first argument is, that we are spiritually begotten after the
likeness of Christ; it hence follows, that no one is born of Christ but
he who lives righteously. It is at the same time uncertain whether he
means Christ or God, when he says that they who are born of him do
righteousness. It is a mode of speaking certainly used in Scripture,
that we are born of God in Christ; but there is nothing inconsistent in
the other, that they are born of Christ, who are renewed by his Spirit.
 <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc45013.htm#fr_62) <span
id="v.iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p20"></span> “It seems to me that the Apostle is to be
understood as speaking only of all those who believe, whether Jews or
Gentiles, over the whole world.” — *Doddridge*. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc45013.htm#fr_63) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p16"></span> That this view is correct, appears
evident from the words, “which *ye* had from the beginning;” he calls it
“old,” because they had been taught it from “the beginning,” that is, of
the gospel. Then “new” can mean no other thing than what *Calvin*
states, that it continues still in force, it being, as it were, always
new. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc45013.htm#fr_64) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p29"></span> Literally, “and to him there is not a
stumblingblock;” that is, nothing that causes him to stumble or fall. He
is not like him mentioned in the next verse, who “*walks* in darkness
and knows not whither he goeth.” The sentence seems to have been taken
from <span id="v.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>[Ps
119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>, with this only difference, that it is
“*to* them,” instead of “*to* him.” There is in the *Sept* no
preposition, but in Hebrew the preposition “to” is used; and <span
id="v.iii.iii-p29.2"></span>ἐν has sometimes this meaning in the New
Testament. See <span id="v.iii.iii-p29.3"></span>[Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p29.3"></span>; <span id="v.iii.iii-p29.4"></span>[1Th
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.iii-p29.4"></span>.
— Ed.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc45013.htm#fr_65) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p21"></span> The diminutive termination often
expresses affection; hence <span id="v.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>νεανίσκοι
may properly be rendered, “dear youth,” or “dear young men;” and so
<span id="v.iii.iv-p21.2"></span>τεκνία μου, in the first verse, may be
rendered, “My dear children.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc45013.htm#fr_66) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p26"></span> There are no different readings that can
justify the supposition of an interpolation. The only reading that
*Griesbach* considers probable is <span
id="v.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>ἔγραψα for <span
id="v.iii.iv-p26.2"></span>γράφω at the end of the 13th verse. If that
be adopted, then the three characters are twice mentioned, and in
regular order. The objection that <span
id="v.iii.iv-p26.3"></span>τεκνία in ver. 12, is <span
id="v.iii.iv-p26.4"></span>παιδία in ver. 13, is not valid, for he uses
the latter in the same sense as the former in ver. 18, as denoting
Christians in general; while here, in connection with “fathers” and
“young men,” they must mean those young in years or in the profession of
the gospel. The repetition is for the sake of emphasis. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc45013.htm#fr_67) <span
id="v.iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p11"></span> It is considered by many, such as
*Macknight* and *Scott*, that the three former verses are connected with
this — that the particulars stated with regard to little children,
fathers, and young men, are adduced as reasons to enforce this
exhortation, “Love not the world,” etc. And this no doubt is the best
view of the passage. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc45013.htm#fr_68) <span
id="v.iii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p13"></span> There are *two* things, the world, and
the things that are in the world. The world, thus distinguished from
what is in it, means, according to *Macknight*, the wicked and
unbelieving, the men of the world, as when our Savior says, “the world,”
that is, the unbelieving Jews, “hateth you,” <span
id="v.iii.v-p13.1"></span>[Joh
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019)<span id="v.iii.v-p13.1"></span>.
According to this view, the contrast in verse 17 appears very suitable,
“The world (the ungodly men of the world) passeth away, and its lust,
(their lust;) but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.”
Others think that the blessings of the world are meant, the good things
necessary for the support of man, and that these are not to be *loved*,
though they may be rightly used. In this case, “in the world” must have
a different meaning, a thing not unusual in Scripture; it must mean in
the present state of things. But the most consistent view is the first,
that is, to take “the world” throughout as signifying the ungodly men of
the world. What prevail among them are the lusts here mentioned, —
sensual gratification, avarice, and ambition, the three gods who rule
and reign in mankind. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc45013.htm#fr_69) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p16"></span> “From the Holy One,” from the Father,
say some; from the Son, say others; from the Holy Spirit, according to a
third party. By comparing this verse with <span
id="v.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>[1 John
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028)<span id="v.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>,
we see reason to conclude that the “Holy One” is Christ, who had
promised the Spirit to teach his people. The unction, or the anointing,
is the act of the Spirit by which the truth is taught. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc45013.htm#fr_70) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p21"></span> Taking this view of the passage, we may
give this rendering, — “Who is a liar, except it be he who denies that
Jesus is the Christ?” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc45013.htm#fr_71) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p30"></span> The words are found in most of the
MSS., and in most of the versions, and in many of the Fathers. Besides,
they wholly comport with the usual style of the Apostle, whose common
practice it was to state things positively and negatively, and *vice
versa*. Sec especially <span id="v.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>[1Jo
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#012)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc45013.htm#fr_72) <span
id="v.iii.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p22"></span> This, which is our version, is, no
doubt, the best construction. “*Promise*” is a metonymy for what is
promised: “This is the promise, which he hath promised to us, *even*
eternal life.” “Eternal life” is in apposition with “which.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc45013.htm#fr_73) <span
id="v.iii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p35"></span> It is the character of John’s style
that he often passes as it were abruptly from the Son to the Father, and
from the Father to the Son; and often the antecedent is not the next
preceding word, but one at some distance: we find this to be the case by
what the sentence contains, as in the present instance; the new birth is
never ascribed to the Son, referred to in the foregoing verse, but to
the Father or to the Spirit. Hence we must conclude that the righteous
one spoken of here, who together with the Son is mentioned in the 22d
verse, is the Father. As the intervening verses, with the exception of
the 23d, which is only explanatory of the previous verse, apply to the
Son, so this verse seems to refer to the Father, consistently with a
mode of writing common in Scripture. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc45014)
