[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45015)  [Next](cc45017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="v.vi.i"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="v.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[1 John
5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001)<span id="v.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p2"></span>**1**. Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the
Christ is born of God: and everyone that loveth him that begat, loveth
him also that is begotten of him.

<span id="v.vi.i-p3"></span>**1**. Omnis qui credit quod Jesus est
Christus, ex Deo genitus est; et omnis qui diligit eum qui genuit,
diligit etiam eum qui genitus est ab eo.

<span id="v.vi.i-p4"></span>**2**. By this we know that we love the
children of God, when we love God, and keep his commandments.

<span id="v.vi.i-p5"></span>**2**. In hoc cognoscimus quod diligimus
filios Dei, si Deum diligimus, et praecepta ejus servamus.

<span id="v.vi.i-p6"></span>**3**. For this is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments: and his commandments are not grievous.

<span id="v.vi.i-p7"></span>**3**. Haec est dilectio Dei, ut praecepta
ejus servemus, et praecepta ejus gravia non sunt.

<span id="v.vi.i-p8"></span>**4**. For whatsoever is born of God
overcometh the world: and this is the victory that overcometh the world,
*even* our faith.

<span id="v.vi.i-p9"></span>**4**. Quoniam omne qued ex Deo genitum est,
vincit mundum: et haec est victoria quae vincit mundum, fides nostra.

<span id="v.vi.i-p10"></span>**5**. Who is he that overcometh the world,
but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?

<span id="v.vi.i-p11"></span>**5**. Quis est qui vincit mundum, nisi qui
credit quod Jesus est Filius Dei?

<span id="v.vi.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="v.vi.i-p13"></span><span id="v.vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p14"></span>**1** *Whosoever believeth* He confirms by
another reason, that faith and brotherly love are united; for since God
regenerates us by faith he must necessarily be loved by us as a Father;
and this love embraces all his children. Then faith cannot be separated
from love.

<span id="v.vi.i-p15"></span>The first truth is, that all born of God,
believe that Jesus is the Christ; where, again, you see that Christ
alone is set forth as the object of faith, as in him it finds
righteousness, life, and every blessing that can be desired, and God in
all that he is.  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) Hence the only
true way of believing is when we direct our minds to him. Besides, to
believe that he is the Christ, is to hope from him all those things
which have been promised as to the Messiah.

<span id="v.vi.i-p17"></span>Nor is the title, *Christ*, given him here
without reason, for it designates the office to which he was appointed
by the Father. As, under the Law, the full restoration of all things,
righteousness and happiness, were promised through the Messiah; so at
this day the whole of this is more clearly set forth in the gospel. Then
Jesus cannot be received as Christ, except salvation be sought from him,
since for this end he was sent by the Father, and is daily offered to
us.

<span id="v.vi.i-p18"></span>Hence the Apostle declares that all they
who really believe have been born of God; for faith is far above the
reach of the human mind, so that we must be drawn to Christ by our
heavenly Father; for not any of us can ascend to him by his own
strength. And this is what the Apostle teaches us in his Gospel, when he
says, that those who believe in the name of the only-begotten, *were not
born of blood nor of the flesh*. (<span id="v.vi.i-p18.1"></span>[Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="v.vi.i-p18.1"></span>.)
And Paul says, that we are endued, *not with the spirit of this world,
but with the Spirit that is from God, that we may know the things given
us by him*. (<span id="v.vi.i-p18.2"></span>[1Co
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span id="v.vi.i-p18.2"></span>.)
For eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the mind conceived, the reward
laid up for those who love God; but the Spirit alone penetrates into
this mystery. And further, as Christ is given to us for sanctification,
and brings with it the Spirit of regeneration, in short, as he unites us
to his own body, it is also another reason why no one can have faith,
except he is born of God.

<span id="v.vi.i-p19"></span>*Loveth him also that is begotten of him*
Augustine and some others of the ancients have applied this to Christ,
but not correctly. For though the Apostle uses the singular number, yet
he includes all the faithful; and the context plainly shows that his
purpose was no other than to trace up brotherly love to faith as its
fountain. It is, indeed, an argument drawn from the common course of
nature; but what is seen among men is transferred to God.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)

<span id="v.vi.i-p22"></span>But we must observe, that the Apostle does
not so speak of the faithful only, and pass by those who are without, as
though the former are alone to be loved, and no care and no account to
be had for the latter; but he teaches us as it were by this first
exercise to love all without exception, when he bids us to make a
beginning with the godly.  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90)

<span id="v.vi.i-p24"></span><span id="v.vi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p25"></span>**2** *By this we know* He briefly shows in
these words what true love is, even that which is towards God. He has
hitherto taught us that there is never a true love to God, except when
our brethren are also loved; for this is ever its effect. But he now
teaches us that men are rightly and duly loved, when God holds the
primacy. And it is a necessary definition; for it often happens, that we
love men apart from God, as unholy and carnal friendships regard only
private advantages or some other vanishing objects. As, then, he had
referred first to the effect, so he now refers to the cause; for his
purpose is to shew that mutual love ought to be in such a way cultivated
that God may be honored.

<span id="v.vi.i-p26"></span>To the love of God he joins the keeping of
the law, and justly so; for when we love God as our Father and Lord,
reverence must necessarily be connected with love. Besides, God cannot
be separated from himself. As, then, he is the fountain of all
righteousness and equity, he who loves him must necessarily have his
heart prepared to render obedience to righteousness. The love of God,
then, is not idle or inactive.  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)

<span id="v.vi.i-p28"></span>But from this passage we also learn what is
the keeping of the law. For if, when constrained only by fear, we obey
God by keeping his commandments, we are very far off from true
obedience. Then, the first thing is, that our hearts should be devoted
to God in willing reverence, and then, that our life should be formed
according to the rule of the law. This is what Moses meant when, in
giving a summary of the law, he said,

<span id="v.vi.i-p29"></span>“O Israel, what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to love him and to obey him?” (<span
id="v.vi.i-p29.1"></span>[De
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)<span id="v.vi.i-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.vi.i-p30"></span><span id="v.vi.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p31"></span>**3** *His commandments are not grievous*
This has been added, lest difficulties, as it is usually the case,
should damp or lessen our zeal. For they who with a cheerful mind and
great ardor have pursued a godly and holy life, afterwards grow weary,
finding their strength inadequate. Therefore John, in order to rouse our
efforts, says that God’s commandments are not grievous.

<span id="v.vi.i-p32"></span>But it may, on the other hand, be objected
and said that we have found it far otherwise by experience, and that
Scripture testifies that the yoke of the law is insupportable. (<span
id="v.vi.i-p32.1"></span>[Ac 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)<span
id="v.vi.i-p32.1"></span>.) The reason also is evident, for as the
denial of self is, as it were, a prelude to the keeping of the law, can
we say that it is easy for a man to deny himself? nay, since the law is
spiritual, as Paul, in <span id="v.vi.i-p32.2"></span>[Ro
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span id="v.vi.i-p32.2"></span>,
teaches us, and we are nothing but flesh, there must be a great discord
between us and the law of God. To this I answer, that this difficulty
does not arise from the nature of the law, but from our corrupt flesh;
and this is what Paul expressly declares; for after having said that it
was impossible for the Law to confer righteousness on us, he immediately
throws the blame on our flesh.

<span id="v.vi.i-p33"></span>This explanation fully reconciles what is
said by Paul and by David, which apparently seems wholly contradictory.
Paul makes the law the master of death, declares that it effects nothing
but to bring on us the wrath of God, that it was given to increase sin,
that it lives in order to kill us. David, on the other hand, says that
it is sweeter than honey, and more desirable than gold; and among other
recommendations he mentions the following — that it cheers hearts,
converts to the Lord, and quickens. But Paul compares the law with the
corrupt nature of man; hence arises the conflict: but David shews how
they think and feel whom God by his Spirit has renewed; hence the
sweetness and delight of which the flesh knows nothing. And John has not
omitted this difference; for he confines to God’s children these words,
*God’s commandments are not grievous*, lest any one should take them
literally; and he intimates that, it comes through the power of the
Spirit, that it is not grievous nor wearisome to us to obey God.

<span id="v.vi.i-p34"></span>The question, however, seems not as yet to
be fully answered; for the faithful, though ruled by the Spirit, of God,
yet, carry on a hard contest with their own flesh; and how muchsoever
they may toil, they yet hardly perform the half of their duty; nay, they
almost fail under their burden, as though they stood, as they say,
between the sanctuary and the steep. We see how Paul groaned as one held
captive, and exclaimed that he was wretched, because he could not fully
serve God. My reply to this is, that the law is said to be easy, as far
as we are endued with heavenly power, and overcome the lusts of the
flesh. For however the flesh may resist, yet the faithful find that
there is no real enjoyment except in following God.

<span id="v.vi.i-p35"></span>It must further be observed, that John does
not speak of the law only, which contains nothing but commands, but
connects with it the paternal indulgence of God, by which the rigor of
the law is mitigated. As, then, we know that we are graciously forgiven
by the Lord, when our works do not come up to the law, this renders us
far more prompt to obey, according to what we find in <span
id="v.vi.i-p35.1"></span>[Ps
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004)<span id="v.vi.i-p35.1"></span>,

<span id="v.vi.i-p36"></span>“With thee is propitiation, that thou
mayest be feared.”

<span id="v.vi.i-p37"></span>Hence, then, is the facility of keeping the
law, because the faithful, being sustained by pardon, do not despond
when they come short of what they ought to be. The Apostle, in the
meantime, reminds us that we must fight, in order that we may serve the
Lord; for the whole world hinders us to go where the Lord calls us.
Then, he only keeps the law who courageously resists the world.

<span id="v.vi.i-p38"></span><span id="v.vi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p39"></span>**4** *This is the victory* As he had said
that all who are born of God overcome the world, he also sets forth the
way of overcoming it. For it might be still asked, whence comes this
victory? He then makes the victory over the world to depend on faith.
 <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)

<span id="v.vi.i-p44"></span>This passage is remarkable, for though
Satan continually repeats his dreadful and horrible onsets, yet the
Spirit of God, declaring that we are beyond the reach of danger, removes
fear, and animates us to fight with courage. And the past time is more
emphatical than the present or the future; for he says, *that has
overcome*, in order that we might feel certain, as though the enemy had
been already put to flight. It is, indeed, true, that our warfare
continues through life, that our conflicts are daily, nay, that new and
various battles are every moment on every side stirred up against us by
the enemy; but as God does not arm us only for one day, and as faith is
not that of one day, but is the perpetual work of the Holy Spirit, we
are already partakers of victory, as though we had already conquered.

<span id="v.vi.i-p45"></span>This confidence does not, however,
introduce indifference, but renders us always anxiously intent on
fighting. For the Lord thus bids his people to be certain, while yet he
would not have them to be secure; but on the contrary, he declares that
they have already overcome, in order that they may fight more
courageously and more strenuously.

<span id="v.vi.i-p46"></span>The term *world* has here a wide meaning,
for it includes whatever is adverse to the Spirit of God: thus, the
corruption of our nature is a part of the world; all lusts, all the
crafts of Satan, in short, whatever leads us away from God. Having such
a force to contend with, we have an immense war to carry on, and we
should have been already conquered before coming to the contest, and we
should be conquered a hundred times daily, had not God promised to us
the victory. But God encourages us to fight by promising us the victory.
But as this promise secures to us perpetually the invincible power of
God, so, on the other hand, it annihilates all the strength of men. For
the Apostle does not teach us here that God only brings some help to us,
so that being aided by him, we may be sufficiently able to resist; but
he makes victory to depend on faith alone; and faith receives from
another that by which it overcomes. They then take away from God what is
his own, who sing triumph to their own power.

<span id="v.vi.i-p47"></span><span id="v.vi.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p48"></span>**5** *Who is he that overcometh the world*
This is a reason for the previous sentence; that is, we conquer by
faith, because we derive strength from Christ; as Paul also says,

<span id="v.vi.i-p49"></span>“I can do all things through him that
strengtheneth me,”  
(<span id="v.vi.i-p49.2"></span>[Php
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013)<span id="v.vi.i-p49.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.vi.i-p50"></span>He only then can conquer Satan and the
world, and not succumb to his own flesh, who, diffident as to himself,
recumbs on Christ’s power alone. For by *faith* he means a real
apprehension of Christ, or an effectual laying hold on him, by which we
apply his power to ourselves.

<span id="v.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
5:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006)<span id="v.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p2"></span>**6**. This is he that came by water and
blood, *even* Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood.
And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p3"></span>**6**. Hic est qui venit per aquam et
sanguinem, Jesum Christum; non in aqua solum, sed in aqua et sanguine;
et Spiritus est qui testificatur, quandoquidem Spiritus est veritas.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p4"></span>**7**. For there are three that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are
one.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p5"></span>**7**. Nam tres sunt qui testificantur in
coelo, Pater, Sermo, et Spiritus Sanctus; et hi tres unum sunt.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p6"></span>**8**. And there are three that bear
witness in earth, the Spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these
three agree in one.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p7"></span>**8**. Et tres sunt qui testificantur in
terra, Spiritus, aqua et sanguis; et hi tres in unum conveniunt.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p8"></span>**9**. If we receive the witness of men,
the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of God which he
hath testified of his Son.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p9"></span>**9**. Si testimonium hominum recipimus,
testimonium Dei majus est; quoniam hoc est testimonium Dei, quod
testificatus est de Filio suo.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.vi.ii-p11"></span><span id="v.vi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p12"></span>**6** *This is he that came* That our
faith may rest safely on Christ, he says the real substance of the
shadows of the law appears in him. For I doubt not but that he alludes
by the words *water and blood* to the ancient rites of the law. The
comparison, moreover, is intended for this end, not only that we may
know that the Law of Moses was abolished by the coming of Christ, but
that we may seek in him the fulfillment of those things which the
ceremonies formerly typified. And though they were of various kinds, yet
under these two the Apostle denotes the whole perfection of holiness and
righteousness, for by water was all filth washed away, so that men might
come before God pure and clean, and by blood was expiation made, and a
pledge given of a full reconciliation with God; but the law only
adumbrated by external symbols what was to be really and fully performed
by the Messiah.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p13"></span>John then fitly proves that Jesus is the
Christ of the Lord formerly promised, because he brought with him that
by which he sanctifies us wholly.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p14"></span>And, indeed, as to the blood by which
Christ reconciled God, there is no doubt, but how he came by water may
be questioned. But that the reference is to baptism is not probable. I
certainly think that John sets forth here the fruit and effect of what
he recorded in the Gospel history; for what he says there, that water
and blood flowed from the side of Christ, is no doubt to be deemed a
miracle. I know that such a thing does happen naturally to the dead; but
it happened through God’s purpose, that Christ’s side became the
fountain of blood and water, in order that the faithful may know that
cleansing (of which the ancient baptisms were types) is found in him,
and that they might know that what all the sprinklings of blood formerly
presignified was fulfilled. On this subject we dwelt more at large on
the ninth and tenth chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p15"></span>*And it is the Spirit that beareth
witness* He shews in this clause how the faithful know and feel the
power of Christ, even because the Spirit renders them certain; and that
their faith might not vacillate, he adds, that a full and real firmness
or stability is produced by the testimony of the Spirit. And he calls
the Spirit *truth*, because his authority is indubitable, and ought to
be abundantly sufficient for us.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p16"></span><span id="v.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p17"></span>**7.** *There are three than bear record
in heaven* The whole of this verse has been by some omitted. Jerome
thinks that this has happened through design rather than through
mistake, and that indeed only on the part of the Latins. But as even the
Greek copies do not agree, I dare not assert any thing on the subject.
Since, however, the passage flows better when this clause is added, and
as I see that it is found in the best and most approved copies, I am
inclined to receive it as the true reading.  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) And the meaning would be, that God, in
order to confirm most abundantly our faith in Christ, testifies in three
ways that we ought to acquiesce in him. For as our faith acknowledges
three persons in the one divine essence, so it is called in so really
ways to Christ that it may rest on him.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p22"></span>When he says, *These three are one*, he
refers not to essence, but on the contrary to consent; as though he had
said that the Father and his eternal Word and Spirit harmoniously
testify the same thing respecting Christ. Hence some copies have <span
id="v.vi.ii-p22.1"></span>εἰς ἓν, “for one.” But though you read <span
id="v.vi.ii-p22.2"></span>ἓν εἰσιν, as in other copies, yet there is no
doubt but that the Father, the Word and the Spirit are said to be one,
in the same sense in which afterwards the blood and the water and the
Spirit are said to agree in one.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p23"></span>But as the Spirit, who is one witness, is
mentioned twice, it seems to be an unnecessary repetition. To this I
reply, that since he testifies of Christ in various ways, a twofold
testimony is fitly ascribed to him. For the Father, together with his
eternal Wisdom and Spirit, declares Jesus to be the Christ as it were
authoritatively, then, in this ease, the sole majesty of the deity is to
be considered by us. But as the Spirit, dwelling in our hearts, is an
earnest, a pledge, and a seal, to confirm that decree, so he thus again
speaks on earth by his grace.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p24"></span>But inasmuch as all do not receive this
reading, I will therefore so expound what follows, as though the Apostle
referred to the witnesses only on the earth.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p25"></span><span id="v.vi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p26"></span>**8** *There are three* He applies what
had been said of water and blood to it’s own purpose, in order that they
who reject Christ might have no excuse; for by testimonies abundantly
strong and clear, he proves that it is he who had been formerly
promised, inasmuch as water and blood, being the pledges and the effects
of salvation, really testify that he had been sent by God. He adds a
third witness, the Holy Spirit, who yet holds the first place, for
without him the wafer and blood would have flowed without any benefit;
for it is he who seals on our hearts the testimony of the water and
blood; it is he who by his power makes the fruit of Christ’s death to
come to us; yea, he makes the blood shed for our redemption to penetrate
into our hearts, or, to say all in one word, he makes Christ with all
his blessings to become ours. So Paul, in <span
id="v.vi.ii-p26.1"></span>[Ro 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span
id="v.vi.ii-p26.1"></span>, after having said that Christ by his
resurrection manifested himself to be the Son of God, immediately adds,
“Through the sanctification of the Spirit.” For whatever signs of divine
glory may shine forth in Christ, they would yet be obscure to us and
escape our vision, were not the Holy Spirit to open for us the eyes of
faith.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p27"></span>Readers may now understand why John
adduced the Spirit as a witness together with the water and the blood,
even because it is the peculiar office of the Spirit, to cleanse our
consciences by the blood of Christ, to cause the cleansing effected by
it to be efficacious. On this subject some remarks are made at the
beginning of the Second Epistle of Peter,  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) where he uses nearly the same mode of
speaking, that is, that the Holy Spirit cleanses our hearts by the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)

<span id="v.vi.ii-p34"></span>But from these words we may learn, that
faith does not lay hold on a bare or an empty Christ, but that his power
is at the same time vivifying. For to what purpose has Christ been sent
on the earth, except to reconcile God by the sacrifice of his death?
except the office of washing had been allotted to him by the Father?

<span id="v.vi.ii-p35"></span>It may however be objected, that the
distinction here mentioned is superfluous, because Christ cleansed us by
expiating our sins; then the Apostle mentions the same thing twice. I
indeed allow that cleansing is included in expiation; therefore I made
no difference between the water and the blood, as though they were
distinct; but if any one of us considers his own infirmity, he will
readily acknowledge that it is not in vain or without reason that blood
is distinguished from the water. Besides, the Apostle, as it has been
stated, alludes to the rites of the law; and God, on account of human
infirmity, had formerly appointed, not only sacrifices, but also
washings. And the Apostle meant distinctly to show that the reality of
both has been exhibited in Christ, and on this account he had said
before, “Not by water only,” for he means, that not only some part of
our salvation is found in Christ, but the whole of it, so that nothing
is to be sought elsewhere.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p36"></span><span id="v.vi.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p37"></span>**9** *If we receive the witness*, or
*testimony*, *of men* He proves, reasoning from the less to the greater,
how ungrateful men are when they reject Christ, who has been approved,
as he has related, by God; for if in worldly affairs we stand to the
words of men, who may lie and deceive, how unreasonable it is that God
should have less credit given to him, when sitting as it were on his own
throne, where he is the supreme judge. Then our own corruption alone
prevents us to receive Christ,, since he gives us full proof for
believing in his power. Besides, he calls not only that the testimony of
God which the Spirit imprints on our hearts, but also that which we
derive from the water and the blood. For that power of cleansing and
expiating was not earthly, but heavenly. Hence the blood of Christ is
not to be estimated according to the common manner of men; but we must
rather look to the design of God, who ordained it for blotting out sins,
and also to that divine efficacy which flows from it.

<span id="v.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[1 John
5:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#009)<span id="v.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p2"></span>**9**. — For this is the witness of God
which he hath testified of his Son.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p3"></span>**9**. — Porro hoc est testimonium Dei,
quod testificatus est de Filio suo.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p4"></span>**10**. He that believeth on the Son of
God hath the witness in himself: he that believeth not God hath made him
a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his Son.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p5"></span>**10**. Qui credit in Filium Dei, habet
testimonium in seipso; qui non credit Deo, mendacem facit eum; quia non
credidit in testimonium quod testificatus est Deus de Filio suo.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p6"></span>**11**. And this is the record, that God
hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p7"></span>**11**. Et hoc est testimonium, quod vitam
aeternam dedit nobis Deus; et haec vita in Filio ejus est.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p8"></span>**12**. He that hath the Son hath life;
*and* he that hath not the Son of God hath not life.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p9"></span>**12**. Qui habet Filium, habet vitam; qui
non habet Filium Dei, vitam non habet.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p10"></span> 

<span id="v.vi.iii-p11"></span><span id="v.vi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p12"></span>**9** *For this is the witness*, or
*testimony*, *of God* The particle <span id="v.vi.iii-p12.1"></span>ὅτι
does not mean here the cause, but is to be taken as explanatory; for the
Apostle, after having reminded us that God deserves to be believed much
more than men, now adds, that we can have no faith in God, except by
believing in Christ, because God sets him alone before us and makes us
to stand in him. He hence infers that we believe safely and with
tranquil minds in Christ, because God by his authority warrants our
faith. He does not say that God speaks outwardly, but that every one of
the godly feels within that God is the author of his faith. It hence
appears how different from faith is a fading opinion dependent on
something else.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p13"></span>**10.** *He that believeth not* As the
faithful possess this benefit, that they know themselves to be beyond
the danger of erring, because they have God as their foundation; so he
makes the ungodly to be guilty of extreme blasphemy, because they charge
God with falsehood. Doubtless nothing is more valued by God than his own
truth, therefore no wrong more atrocious can be done to him, than to rob
him of this honor. Then in order to induce us to believe, he takes an
argument from the opposite side; for if to make God a liar be a horrible
and execrable impiety, because then what especially belongs to him is
taken away, who would not dread to withhold faith from the gospel, in
which God would have himself to be counted singularly true and faithful?
This ought to be carefully observed.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p14"></span>Some wonder why God commends faith so
much, why unbelief is so severely condemned. But the glory of God is
implicated in this; for since he designed to shew a special instance of
his truth in the gospel, all they who reject Christ there offered to
them, leave nothing to him. Therefore, though we may grant that a man in
other parts of his life is like an angel, yet his sanctity is diabolical
as long as he rejects Christ. Thus we see some under the Papacy vastly
pleased with the mere mask of sanctity, while they still most
obstinately resist the gospel. Let us then understand, that it is the
beginning of true religion, obediently to embrace this doctrine, which
he has so strongly confirmed by his testimony.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p15"></span><span id="v.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p16"></span>**11** *That God hath given us eternal
life* Having now set forth the benefit, he invites us to believe. It is,
indeed, a reverence due to God, immediately to receive, as beyond
controversy, whatever he declares to us. But since he freely offers life
to us, our ingratitude will be intolerable, except with prompt faith we
receive a doctrine so sweet and so lovely. And, doubtless, the words of
the Apostle are intended to shew, that we ought, not only reverently to
obey the gospel, lest we should affront God; but, that we ought to love
it, because it brings to us eternal life. We hence also learn what is
especially to be sought in the gospel, even the free gift of salvation;
for that God there exhorts us to repentance and fear, ought not to be
separated from the grace of Christ.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p17"></span>But the Apostle, that he might keep us
together in Christ, again repeats that life is found in him; as though
he had said, that no other way of obtaining life has been appointed for
us by God the Father. And the Apostle, indeed, briefly includes here
three things: that we are all given up to death until God in his
gratuitous favor restores us to life; for he plainly declares that life
is a gift from God: and hence also it follows that we are destitute of
it, and that it cannot be acquired by merits; secondly, he teaches us
that this life is conferred on us by the gospel, because there the
goodness and the paternal love of God is made known to us; lastly, he
says that we cannot otherwise become partakers of this life than by
believing in Christ.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p18"></span><span id="v.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iii-p19"></span>**12** *He that hath not the Son* This is
a confirmation of the last sentence. It ought, indeed, to have been
sufficient, that God made life to be in none but in Christ, that it
might be sought in him; but lest any one should turn away to another, he
excludes all from the hope of life who seek it not in Christ. We know
what it is to have Christ, for he is possessed by faith. He then shews
that all who are separated from the body of Christ are without life.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p20"></span>But this seems inconsistent with reason;
for history shews that there have been great men, endued with heroic
virtues, who yet were wholly unacquainted with Christ; and it seems
unreasonable that men of so great eminence had no honor. To this I
answer, that we are greatly mistaken if we think that whatever is
eminent in our eyes is approved by God; for, as it is said in Luke,

<span id="v.vi.iii-p21"></span>“What is highly esteemed by men is an
abomination with God.” (<span id="v.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>[Lu
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015)<span
id="v.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>)

<span id="v.vi.iii-p22"></span>For as the filthiness of the heart is hid
from us, we are satisfied with the external appearance; but God sees
that under this is concealed the foulest filth. It is, therefore, no
wonder if specious virtues, flowing from an impure heart, and tending to
no right end, have an ill odor to him. Besides, whence comes purity,
whence a genuine regard for religion, except from the Spirit of Christ?
There is, then, nothing worthy of praise except in Christ.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p23"></span>There is, further, another reason which
removes every doubt; for the righteousness of men is in the remission of
sins. If you take away this, the sure curse of God and eternal death
awaits all. Christ alone is he who *reconciles* the Father to us, as he
has once for all pacified him by the sacrifice of the cross. It hence
follows, that God is propitious to none but in Christ, nor is there
righteousness but in him.

<span id="v.vi.iii-p24"></span>Were any one to object and say, that
Cornelius, as mentioned by Luke, (<span id="v.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>[Ac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)<span
id="v.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>,) was accepted of God before he was called
to the faith of the gospel: to this I answer shortly, that God sometimes
so deals with us, that the seed of faith appears immediately on the
first day. Cornelius had no clear and distinct knowledge of Christ; but
as he had some perception of God’s mercy, he must at the same time
understand something of a Mediator. But as God acts in ways hidden and
wonderful, let us disregard those speculations which profit nothing, and
hold only to that plain way of salvation, which he has made known to us.

<span id="v.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[1 John
5:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#013)<span id="v.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p2"></span>**13**. These things have I written unto
you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye
have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of
God.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p3"></span>**13**. Haec scripsi vebis credentibus in
nomen Filii Dei, ut sciatis quod vitam habetis aeternam, et ut credatis
in nomen Filii Dei.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p4"></span>**14**. And this is the confidence that we
have in him, that, if we ask any thing according to his will, he heareth
us:

<span id="v.vi.iv-p5"></span>**14**. Atque haec est fiducia quam habemus
erga eum, quod si quid petierimus secundum voluntatem ejus, audit nos.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p6"></span>**15**. And if we know that he hear us,
whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of
him.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p7"></span>**15**. Si autem novimus quod audit nos,
quum quid petierimus; novimus quod habemus petitiones quas postulavimus
ab eo.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.vi.iv-p9"></span><span id="v.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p10"></span>**13** *These things have I written unto
you* As there ought to be a daily progress in faith, so he says that he
wrote to those who had already believed, so that they might believe more
firmly and with greater certainty, and thus enjoy a fuller confidence as
to eternal life. Then the use of doctrine is, not only to initiate the
ignorant in the knowledge of Christ, but also to confirm those more and
more who have been already taught. It therefore becomes us assiduously
to attend to the duty of learning, that our faith may increase through
the whole course of our life. For there are still in us many remnants of
unbelief, and so weak is our faith that what we believe is not yet
really believed except there be a fuller confirmation.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p11"></span>But we ought to observe the way in which
faith is confirmed, even by having the office and power of Christ
explained to us. For the Apostle says that he wrote these things, that
is, that eternal life is to be sought nowhere else but in Christ, in
order that they who were believers already might believe, that is, make
progress in believing. It is therefore the duty of a godly teacher, in
order to confirm disciples in the faith, to extol as much as possible
the grace of Christ, so that being satisfied with that, we may seek
nothing else.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p12"></span>As the Papists obscure this truth in
various ways, and extenuate it, they shew sufficiently by this one thing
that they care for nothing less than for the right doctrine of faith;
yea, on this account, their schools ought to be more shunned than all
the Scyllas and Charybdises in the world; for hardly any one can enter
them without a sure shipwreck to his faith.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p13"></span>The Apostle teaches further in this
passage, that Christ is the peculiar object of faith, and that to the
faith which we have in his name is annexed the hope of salvation. For in
this case the end of believing is, that we become the children and the
heirs of God.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p14"></span><span id="v.vi.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p15"></span>**14** *And this is the confidence* He
commends the faith which he mentioned by its fruit, or he shews that in
which our confidence especially is, that is, that the godly dare
confidently to call on God; as also Paul speaks in <span
id="v.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>[Eph
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012)<span id="v.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>,
that *we have by faith access to God with confidence*; and also in <span
id="v.vi.iv-p15.2"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="v.vi.iv-p15.2"></span>,
that *the Spirit gives us a mouth to cry Abba, Father*. And doubtless,
were we driven away from an access to God, nothing could make us more
miserable; but, on the other hand, provided this asylum be opened to us,
we should be happy even in extreme evils; nay, this one thing renders
our troubles blessed, because we surely know that God will be our
deliverer, and relying on his paternal love towards us, we flee to him.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p16"></span>Let us, then, bear in mind this
declaration of the Apostle, that calling on God is the chief trial of
our faith, and that God is not rightly nor in faith called upon except
we be fully persuaded that our prayers will not be in vain. For the
Apostle denies that those who, being doubtful, hesitate, are endued with
faith.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p17"></span>It hence appears that the doctrine of
faith is buried and nearly extinct under the Papacy, for all certainty
is taken away. They indeed mutter many prayers, and prattle much about
praying to God; but they pray with doubtful and fluctuating hearts, and
bid us to pray; and yet they even condemn this confidence which the
Apostle requires as necessary.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p18"></span>*According to his will* By this expression
he meant by the way to remind us what is the right way or rule of
praying, even when men subject their own wishes to God. For though God
has promised to do whatsoever his people may ask, yet he does not allow
them an unbridled liberty to ask whatever may come to their minds; but
he has at the same time prescribed to them a law according to which they
are to pray. And doubtless nothing is better for us than this
restriction; for if it was allowed to every one of us to ask what he
pleased, and if God were to indulge us in our wishes, it would be to
provide very badly for us. For what may be expedient we know not; nay,
we boil over with corrupt and hurtful desires. But God supplies a
twofold remedy, lest we should pray otherwise than according to what his
own will has prescribed; for he teaches us by his word what he would
have us to ask, and he has also set over us his Spirit as our guide and
ruler, to restrain our feelings, so as not to suffer them to wander
beyond due bounds. *For what or how to pray, we know not,* says Paul,
*but the Spirit helpeth our infirmity, and excites in us unutterable
groans.* (<span id="v.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>[Ro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span id="v.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>.)
We ought also to ask the mouth of the Lord to direct and guide our
prayers; for God in his promises has fixed for us, as it has been said,
the right way of praying.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p19"></span><span id="v.vi.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.iv-p20"></span>**15** *And if we know* This is not a
superfluous repetition, as it seems to be; for what the Apostle declared
in general respecting the success of prayer, he now affirms in a special
manner that the godly pray or ask for nothing from God but what they
obtain. But when he says that all the petitions of the faithful are
heard, he speaks of right and humble petitions, and such as are
consistent with the rule of obedience. For the faithful do not give
loose reins to their desires, nor indulge in anything that may please
them, but always regard in their prayers what God commands.

<span id="v.vi.iv-p21"></span>This, then, is an application of the
general doctrine to the special and private benefit of every one, lest
the faithful should doubt that God is propitious to prayers of each
individual, so that with quiet minds they may wait until the Lord should
perform what they pray for, and that being thus relieved from all
trouble and anxiety, they may cast on God the burden of their cares.
This ease and security ought not, however, to abate in them their
earnestness in prayer, for he who is certain of a happy event ought not
to abstain from praying to God. For the certainty of faith by no means
generates indifference or sloth. The Apostle meant; that every one
should be tranquil in these necessities when he has deposited his sighs
in the bosom of God.

<span id="v.vi.v"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p1"></span><span id="v.vi.v-p1.1"></span>[1 John
5:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)<span id="v.vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p2"></span>**16**. If any man see his brother sin a sin
*which* *is* not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life
for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not
say that he shall pray for it.

<span id="v.vi.v-p3"></span>**16**. Si quis viderit fratrem suum
peccantem peccato non ad mortem, petet; et dabit illi vitam peecanti,
dico, non ad mortem: est peccatum ad mortem; non pro illo, dico, ut quis
roget.

<span id="v.vi.v-p4"></span>**17**. All unrighteousness is sin: and
there is a sin not unto death.

<span id="v.vi.v-p5"></span>**17**. Omnis injustitia peccatum est; et
est peccatum non ad mortem.

<span id="v.vi.v-p6"></span>**18**. We know that whosoever is born of
God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and
that wicked one toucheth him not.

<span id="v.vi.v-p7"></span>**18**. Novlinus quod quisquis ex Deo
genitus est, non peccat; sed qui genitus est ex Deo servat seipsum, et
malignus non tangit eum.

<span id="v.vi.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.vi.v-p9"></span><span id="v.vi.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p10"></span>**16** *If any man* The Apostle extends
still further the benefits of that faith which he has mentioned, so that
our prayers may also avail for our brethren. It is a great thing, that
as soon as we are oppressed, God kindly invites us to himself, and is
ready to give us help; but that he hears us asking for others, is no
small confirmation to our faith in order that we may be fully assured
that we shall never meet with a repulse in our own case.

<span id="v.vi.v-p11"></span>The Apostle in the meantime exhorts us to
be mutually solicitous for the salvation of one another; and he would
also have us to regard the falls of the brethren as stimulants to
prayer. And surely it is an iron hardness to be touched with no pity,
when we see souls redeemed by Christ’s blood going to ruin. But he shews
that there is at hand a remedy, by which brethren can aid brethren. He
who will pray for the perishing, will, he says, restore life to him;
though the words, “he shall give,” may be applied to God, as though it
was said, God will grant to your prayers the life of a brother. But the
sense will still be the same, that the prayers of the faithful so far
avail as to rescue a brother from death. If we understand man to be
intended, that he will give life to a brother, it is a hyperbolical
expression; it however contains nothing inconsistent; for what is given
to us by the gratuitous goodness of God, yea, what is granted to others
for our sake, we are said to give to others. So great a benefit ought to
stimulate us not a little to ask for our brethren the forgiveness of
sins. And when the Apostle recommends sympathy to us, he at the same
time reminds us how much we ought to avoid the cruelty of condemning our
brethren, or an extreme rigor in despairing of their salvation.

<span id="v.vi.v-p12"></span>*A sin which is not unto death* That we may
not cast away all hope of the salvation of those who sin, he shews that
God does not so grievously punish their falls as to repudiate them. It
hence follows that we ought to deem them brethren, since God retains
them in the number of his children. For he denies that sins are to
death, not only those by which the saints daily offend, but even when it
happens that God’s wrath is grievously provoked by them. For as long as
room for pardon is left, death does not wholly retain its dominion.

<span id="v.vi.v-p13"></span>The Apostle, however, does not here
distinguish between venial and mortal sin, as it was afterwards commonly
done. For altogether foolish is that distinction which prevails under
the Papacy. The Sorbons acknowledge that there is hardly a mortal sin,
except there be the grossest baseness, such as may be, as it were,
tangible. Thus in venial sins they think that there may be the greatest
filth, if hidden in the soul. In short, they suppose that all the fruits
of original sin, provided they appear not outwardly, are washed away by
the slight sprinkling of holy water! And what wonder is it, since they
regard not as blasphemous sins, doubts respecting God’s grace, or any
lusts or evil desires, except they are consented to? If the soul of man
be assailed by unbelief, if impatience tempts him to rage against God,
whatever monstrous lusts may allure him, all these are to the Papists
lighter than to be deemed sins, at least after baptism. It is then no
wonder, that they make venial offenses of the greatest crimes; for they
weigh them in their own balance and not in the balance of God.

<span id="v.vi.v-p14"></span>But among the faithful this ought to be an
indubitable truth, that whatever is contrary to God’s law is sin, and in
its nature mortal; for where there is a transgression of the law, there
is sin and death.

<span id="v.vi.v-p15"></span>What, then, is the meaning of the Apostle?
He denies that sins are mortal, which, though worthy of death, are yet
not thus punished by God. He therefore does not estimate sins in
themselves, but forms a judgment of them according to the paternal
kindness of God, which pardons the guilt, where yet the fault is. In
short, God does not give over to death those whom he has restored to
life, though it depends not on them that they are not alienated from
life.

<span id="v.vi.v-p16"></span>*There is a sin unto death* I have already
said that the sin to which there is no hope of pardon left, is thus
called. But it may be asked, what this is; for it must be very
atrocious, when God thus so severely punishes it. It may be gathered
from the context, that it is not, as they say, a partial fall, or a
transgression of a single commandment, but apostasy, by which men wholly
alienate themselves from God. For the Apostle afterwards adds, that the
children of God do not sin, that is, that they do not forsake God, and
wholly surrender themselves to Satan, to be his slaves. Such a
defection, it is no wonder that it is mortal; for God never thus
deprives his own people of the grace of the Spirit; but they ever retain
some spark of true religion. They must then be reprobate and given up to
destruction, who thus fall away so as to have no fear of God.

<span id="v.vi.v-p17"></span>Were any one to ask, whether the door of
salvation is closed against their repentance; the answer is obvious,
that as they are given up to a reprobate mind, and are destitute of the
Holy Spirit, they cannot do anything else, than with obstinate minds,
become worse and worse, and add sins to sins. Moreover, as the sin and
blasphemy against the Spirit ever brings with it a defection of this
kind, there is no doubt but that it is here pointed out.

<span id="v.vi.v-p18"></span>But it may be asked again, by what
evidences can we know that a man’s fall is fatal; for except the
knowledge of this was certain, in vain would the Apostle have made this
exception, that they were not to pray for a sin of this kind. It is then
right to determine sometimes, whether the fallen is without hope, or
whether there is still a place for a remedy. This, indeed, is what I
allow, and what is evident beyond dispute from this passage; but as this
very seldom happens, and as God sets before us the infinite riches of
his grace, and bids us to be merciful according to his own example, we
ought not rashly to conclude that any one has brought on himself the
judgment of eternal death; on the contrary, love should dispose us to
hope well. But if the impiety of some appear to us not otherwise than
hopeless, as though the Lord pointed it out by the finger, we ought not
to contend with the just judgment of God, or seek to be more merciful
than he is.

<span id="v.vi.v-p19"></span><span id="v.vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p20"></span>**17** *All unrighteousness* This passage
may be explained variously. If you take it adversatively, the sense
would not be unsuitable, “Though all unrighteousness is sin, yet every
sin is not unto death.” And equally suitable is another meaning, “As sin
is every unrighteousness, hence it follows that every sin is not unto
death.” Some take *all unrighteousness* for complete unrighteousness, as
though the Apostle had said, that the sin of which he spoke was the
summit of unrighteousness. I, however, am more disposed to embrace the
first or the second explanation; and as the result is nearly the same, I
leave it to the judgment of readers to determine which of the two is the
more appropriate.

<span id="v.vi.v-p21"></span><span id="v.vi.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.v-p22"></span>**18** *We know that whosoever is born of
God* If you suppose that God’s children are wholly *pure* and free from
all sin, as the fanatics contend, then the Apostle is inconsistent with
himself; for he would thus take away the duty of mutual prayer among
brethren. Then he says that those *sin not* who do not wholly fall away
from the grace of God; and hence he inferred that prayer ought to be
made for all the children of God, because they sin not unto death. A
proof is added, that every one, born of God, keeps himself, that is,
keeps himself in the fear of God; nor does he suffer himself to be so
led away, as to lose all sense of religion, and to surrender himself
wholly to the devil and the flesh.

<span id="v.vi.v-p23"></span>For when he says, that he is *not touched
by that wicked one*, reference is made to a deadly wound; for the
children of God do not remain untouched by the assaults of Satan, but
they ward off his strokes by the shield of faith, so that they do not
penetrate into the heart. Hence spiritual life is never extinguished in
them. This is not to sin. Though the faithful indeed fall through the
infirmity of the flesh, yet they groan under the burden of sin, loathe
themselves, and cease not to fear God.

<span id="v.vi.v-p24"></span>*Keepeth himself*. What properly belongs to
God he transfers to us; for were any one of us the keeper of his own
salvation, it would be a miserable protection. Therefore Christ asks the
Father to keep us, intimating that it is not done by our own strength.
The advocates of freewill lay hold on this expression, that they may
thence prove, that we are preserved from sin, partly by God’s grace, and
partly by our own power. But they do not perceive that the faithful have
not from themselves the power of preservation of which the Apostle
speaks. Nor does he, indeed, speak of their power, as though they could
keep themselves by their own strength; but he only shews that they ought
to resist Satan, so that they may never be fatally wounded by his darts.
And we know that we fight with no other weapons but those of God. Hence
the faithful keep themselves from sin, as far as they are kept by God.
(<span id="v.vi.v-p24.1"></span>[Joh
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011)<span id="v.vi.v-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[1 John
5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)<span id="v.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p2"></span>**19** *And* we know that we are of God,
and the whole world lieth in wickedness.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p3"></span>**19**. Novimus quod ex Deo sumus, et
mundus torus in maligno positus est.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p4"></span>**20**. And we know that the Son of God is
come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, *even* in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God, and eternal life.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p5"></span>**20**. Novimus autem quod Filius Dei
venit, et dedit nobis intelligentiam, ut cognoscamus illum verum; et
sumus in ipso vero, in Filio ejus Jesu Christo: Hic est verus Deus, et
vita aeterna.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p6"></span>**21**. Little children, keep yourselves
from idols. Amen.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p7"></span>**21**. Filioli, custodite vos ab idolis.
Amen.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="v.vi.vi-p9"></span><span id="v.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p10"></span>**19** *We are of God* He deduces an
exhortation from his previous doctrine; for what he had declared in
common as to the children of God, he now applies to those he was writing
to; and this he did, to stimulate them to beware of sin, and to
encourage them to repel the onsets of Satan.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p11"></span>Let readers observe, that it is only true
faith, that applies to us, so to speak, the grace of God; for the
Apostle acknowledges none as faithful, but those who have the dignity of
being God’s children. Nor does he indeed put probable conjecture, as the
Sophists speak, for confidence; for he says that we *know*. The meaning
is, that as we have been born of God, we ought to strive to prove by our
separation from the world, and by the sanctity of our life, that we have
not been in vain called to so great all honor.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p12"></span>Now, this is an admonition very necessary
for all the godly; for wherever they turn their eyes, Satan has his
allurements prepared, by which he seeks to draw them away from God. It
would then be difficult for them to hold on in their course, were they
not so to value their calling as to disregard all the hindrances of the
world. Then, in order to be well prepared for the contest, these two
things must be borne in mind, that the world is wicked, and that our
calling is from God.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p13"></span>Under the term *world*, the Apostle no
doubt includes the whole human race. By saying that it *lieth in the
wicked one*, he represents it as being under the dominion of Satan.
There is then no reason why we should hesitate to shun the world, which
condemns God and delivers up itself into the bondage of Satan: nor is
there a reason why we should fear its enmity, because it is alienated
from God. In short, since corruption pervades all nature, the faithful
ought to study self-denial; and since nothing is seen in the world but
wickedness and corruption, they must necessarily disregard flesh and
blood that they may follow God. At the same time the other thing ought
to be added, that God is he who has called them, that under this
protection they may oppose all the machinations of the world and Satan.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p14"></span><span id="v.vi.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p15"></span>**20** *And we know that the Son of God is
come* As the children of God are assailed on every side, he, as we have
said, encourages and exhorts them to persevere in resisting their
enemies, and for this reason, because they fight under the banner of
God, and certainly know that they are ruled by his Spirit; but he now
reminds them where this knowledge is especially to be found.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p16"></span>He then says that God has been so made
known to us, that now there is no reason for doubting. The Apostle does
not without reason dwell on this point; for except our faith is really
founded on God, we shall never stand firm in the contest. For this
purpose the Apostle shews that we have obtained through Christ a sure
knowledge of the true God, so that we may not fluctuate in uncertainty.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p17"></span>By *true God* he does not mean one who
tells the truth, but him who is really God; and he so calls him to
distinguishing him from all idols. Thus *true* is in opposition to what
is fictitious; for it is <span id="v.vi.vi-p17.1"></span>ἀληθινὸς, and
not <span id="v.vi.vi-p17.2"></span>ἀληθής A similar passage is in John

<span id="v.vi.vi-p18"></span>“This is eternal life, to know thee,  
the only true God,  
and him whom thou hast sent,  
Jesus Christ.”  
(<span id="v.vi.vi-p18.5"></span>[Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="v.vi.vi-p18.5"></span>)

<span id="v.vi.vi-p19"></span>And he justly ascribes to Christ this
office of illuminating our minds as to the knowledge of God. For, as he
is the only true image of the invisible God, as he is the only
interpreter of the Father, as he is the only guide of life, yea, as he
is the life and light of the world and the truth, as soon as we depart
from him, we necessarily become vain in our own devices.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p20"></span>And Christ is said to have *given us an
understanding*, not only because he shews us in the gospel what sort of
being is the true God, and also illuminates us by his Spirit; but
because in Christ himself we have God manifested in the flesh, as Paul
says, since *in him dwells all the fullness of the Deity, and are hid
all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom*. (<span
id="v.vi.vi-p20.1"></span>[Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="v.vi.vi-p20.1"></span>.)
Thus it is that the face of God in a manner appears to us in Christ; not
that there was no knowledge, or a doubtful knowledge of God, before the
coming of Christ,, but that now he manifests himself more fully and more
clearly. And this is what Paul says in <span
id="v.vi.vi-p20.2"></span>[2Co
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="v.vi.vi-p20.2"></span>,
that

<span id="v.vi.vi-p21"></span>God, who formerly commanded light to shine
out of darkness at the creation of the world, hath now shone in our
hearts through the brightness of the knowledge of his glory in the face
of Christ.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p22"></span>And it must be observed, that this gift is
peculiar to the elect. Christ, indeed, kindles for all indiscriminately
the torch of his gospel; but all have not the eyes of their minds opened
to see it, but on the contrary Satan spreads the veil of blindness over
many. Then the Apostle means the light which Christ kindles within in
the hearts of his people, and which when once kindled, is never
extinguished, though in some it may for a time be smothered.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p23"></span>*We are in him that is true* By these
words he reminds us how efficacious is that knowledge which he mentions,
even because by it we are united to Christ; and become one with God; for
it has a living root, fixed in the heart, by which it comes that God
lives in us and we in him. As he says, without a copulative, that: *we
are in him that is true, in his Son*, he seems to express the manner of
our union with God, as though he had said, that we are in God through
Christ.  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="v.vi.vi-p25"></span>*This is the true God* Though the Arians
have attempted to elude this passage, and some agree with them at this
day, yet we have here a remarkable testimony to the divinity of Christ.
The Arians apply this passage to the Father, as though the Apostle
should again repeat that he is the true God. But nothing could be more
frigid than such a repetition. It has already twice testified that the
true God is he who has been made known to us in Christ, why should he
again add, *This is the true God*? It applies, indeed, most suitably to
Christ; for after having taught us that Christ is the guide by whose
hand we are led to God, he now, by way of amplifying, affirms that
Christ is that God, lest we should think that we are to seek further;
and he confirms this view by what is added, *and eternal life*. It is
doubtless the same that is spoken of, as being the true God and eternal
life. I pass by this, that the relative <span
id="v.vi.vi-p25.1"></span>οὗτος usually refers to the last person. I
say, then, that Christ is properly called eternal life; and that this
mode of speaking perpetually occurs in John, no one can deny.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p26"></span>The meaning is, that when we have Christ,
we enjoy the true and eternal God, for nowhere else is he to be sought;
and, secondly, that we become thus partakers of eternal life, because it
is offered to us in Christ though hid in the Father. The origin of life
is, indeed, the Father; but the fountain from which we are to draw it,
is Christ.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p27"></span><span id="v.vi.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p28"></span>**21** *Keep yourselves from idols* Though
this be a separate sentence, yet it is as it were an appendix to the
preceding doctrine. For the vivifying light of the Gospel ought to
scatter and dissipate, not only darkness, but also all mists, from the
minds of the godly. The Apostle not only condemns idolatry, but commands
us to beware of all images and idols; by which he intimates, that the
worship of God cannot continue uncorrupted and pure whenever men begin
to be in love with idols or images. For so innate in us is superstition,
that the least occasion will infect us with its contagion. Dry wood will
not so easily burn when coals are put under it, as idolatry will lay
hold on and engross the minds of men, when an occasion is given to them.
And who does not see that images are the sparks? What sparks do I say?
nay, rather torches, which are sufficient to set the whole world on
fire.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p29"></span>The Apostle at the same time does not only
speak of statues, but also of altars, and includes all the instruments
of superstitions. Moreover, the Papists are ridiculous, who pervert this
passage and apply it to the statues of Jupiter and Mercury and the like,
as though the Apostle did not teach generally, that there is a
corruption of religion whenever a corporeal form is ascribed to God, or
whenever statues and pictures form a part of his worship. Let us then
remember that we ought carefully to continue in the spiritual worship of
God, so as to banish far from us everything that may turn us aside to
gross and carnal superstitions.

<span id="v.vi.vi-p30"></span>end of the first epistle of John

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc45016.htm#fr_88) <span
id="v.vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p16"></span> Literally, “and the whole God — <span
id="v.vi.i-p16.1"></span>*totum Deum*.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc45016.htm#fr_89) <span
id="v.vi.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p20"></span> The literal rendering of the verse is as
follows, —

<span id="v.vi.i-p21"></span>“Every one who believes that Jesus is the
Christ has been begotten by God; and every one who loves the begetter
loves also the begotten by him.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc45016.htm#fr_90) <span
id="v.vi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p23"></span> The subject no doubt is love to the
*brethren* throughout; and this passage shews this most clearly. Love to
all is evidently a duty, but it is not taught here. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc45016.htm#fr_91) <span
id="v.vi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p27"></span> The love of God,” here clearly means love
to God: it is the love of which God is the object. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc45016.htm#fr_92) <span
id="v.vi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.i-p40"></span> The words literally are, —

<span id="v.vi.i-p41"></span>“For every thing begotten by God overcomes
the world,” etc. The neuter gender is used for the masculine, “every
thing” for “every one,” as in the first verse; or according to <span
id="v.vi.i-p41.1"></span>כל in Hebrew, it is used in a plural sense, for
<span id="v.vi.i-p41.2"></span>πάντες as in <span
id="v.vi.i-p41.3"></span>[Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002)<span id="v.vi.i-p41.3"></span>,
“that all (<span id="v.vi.i-p41.4"></span>πᾶν) which thou hast given
him, he should give them (<span id="v.vi.i-p41.5"></span>αὐτοῖς) eternal
life.”

<span id="v.vi.i-p42"></span>*Macknight* and others have said that the
neuter gender is used in order to comprehend all sorts of persons, males
and females, young and old, Jews and Gentiles, bond or free. Why, then,
was not the neuter gender used in the first verse? It is clearly a
peculiarity of style, and nothing else, and ought not to be retained in
a translation.

<span id="v.vi.i-p43"></span>“Victory” stands for that which brings
victory, the effect for the cause; or it may designate the person, as
<span id="v.vi.i-p43.1"></span>νίκη means sometimes the goddess of
victory. — “And this the conqueress who conquers the world, even our
faith.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc45016.htm#fr_93) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p18"></span> *Calvin* probably refers to printed
copies in his day, and not to Greek MSS. As far as the authority of MSS.
and versions and quotations goes, the passage is spurious, for it is not
found in *any* of the Greek MSS prior to the 16th century, nor in *any*
of the *early versions*, except the Latin, nor in some of the copies of
that version; nor is it quoted by any of the early *Greek* fathers, nor
by early *Latin* fathers, except a very few, and even their quotations
have been disputed. These are *facts* which no refined conjectures can
upset; and it is to be regretted that learned men, such as the late
*Bishop Burgess*, should have labored and toiled in an attempt so
hopeless as to establish the genuineness of this verse, or rather of a
part of this verse, and of the beginning of the following. The whole
passage is as follows, the spurious part being put within crotchets, —

<span id="v.vi.ii-p19"></span>**7**. “For there are three who bear
witness \[in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these
three are one:

<span id="v.vi.ii-p20"></span>**8**. And there are three who bear
witness in earth,\] the Spirit and the water and the blood; and these
three agree in one.”

<span id="v.vi.ii-p21"></span>As to the construction of the passage, as
far as grammar and sense are concerned, it may do with or without the
interpolation equally the same. What has been said to the contrary on
this point, seems to be nothing of a decisive character, in no way
sufficient to shew that the words are not spurious. Indeed, the passage
reads better without the interpolated words; and as to the sense, that
is, the sense in which they are commonly taken by the advocates of their
genuineness, it has no connection whatever with the general drift of the
passage. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc45016.htm#fr_94) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p28"></span> Although the commentary in 2Peter1:9
seems to be close to what *Calvin* is talking of here, it may be that
perhaps the First Epistle of Peter might be the one he had in mind. -
*fj.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc45016.htm#fr_95) <span
id="v.vi.ii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p29"></span> If we exclude the words deemed
interpolated, we may read the passage thus:

<span id="v.vi.ii-p30"></span>“This is he who came with water and blood,
even Jesus Christ; not with water only, but with water and blood: the
Spirit also beareth witness, for (or seeing that) the Spirit is truth
(or, is true); because there are three who bear witness, the Spirit, the
water, and the blood, and these three agree in one.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p31"></span>We see hence a reason why the Spirit is
said to be true, even because he is not alone, for the water and the
blood concur with him. Thus a testimony is formed consistently with the
requirement of the law. We hence also see the import of what is stated
when the testimony of men is mentioned, as though he had said, The
testimony of three men is received as valid, how much more valid is the
testimony of God, which has three witnesses in its behalf? It is called
God’s testimony, because the witnesses have been ordered and appointed
by him.

<span id="v.vi.ii-p32"></span>When it is said that he came with water
and blood, the meaning is, that he came, having water and blood; the
proposition <span id="v.vi.ii-p32.1"></span>διὰ has sometimes this
meaning, and it is changed in the second clause into <span
id="v.vi.ii-p32.2"></span>ἐν. We meet with similar instances in <span
id="v.vi.ii-p32.3"></span>[2Co
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011)<span id="v.vi.ii-p32.3"></span>,
and in <span id="v.vi.ii-p32.4"></span>[2Co
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)<span id="v.vi.ii-p32.4"></span>.
See <span id="v.vi.ii-p32.5"></span>[Rom.
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027), [Rom.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="v.vi.ii-p32.5"></span>

<span id="v.vi.ii-p33"></span>According to this construction, the
explanation of *Calvin* is alone the right one, that the water means
cleansing, and the blood expiation, the terms being borrowed from the
rites of the law; and a reference is also made to the law when the
witness of men is mentioned. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc45016.htm#fr_96) <span
id="v.vi.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.vi.vi-p24"></span> It is rendered by some, “through his Son
Jesus Christ.” Our version, “even in his Son Jesus Christ,” seems not to
be right, as it makes “him that is true,” to be the Son, while the
reference is to God, as in the previous clause. The true meaning would
be thus conveyed, “And we are in the true *God*, *being* in his Son
Jesus Christ;” for to be in Christ, is to be in God. Three MSS., the
Vulgate, and several of the Fathers, read thus, “and we are in his true
Son Jesus Christ”. — *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on James](cc45017)
