[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc45022)  [Next](cc45024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 45: Catholic Epistles*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="vi.vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[James
5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)<span id="vi.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p2"></span>**1** Go to now, *ye* rich men, weep and
howl for your miseries that shall come upon *you*

<span id="vi.vi.i-p3"></span>**1** Agedum nunc divites, plorate,
ululantes super miseriis vestris quae advenient vobis.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p4"></span>**2** Your riches are corrupted, and your
garments are motheaten.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p5"></span>**2** Divitiae vestrae putrefactae sunt,
vestimenta vestra a tineis excesa sunt.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p6"></span>**3** Your gold and silver is cankered; and
the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your
flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last
days.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p7"></span>**3** Aurum et argentum vestrum aerugine
corruptum est; et aerugo eorum in testimonium vobis erit, et exedet
carnes vestras sicut ignis: thesaurum congessistis in extremis diebus.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p8"></span>**4** Behold, the hire of the labourers who
have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud,
crieth: and the cries of them which have reaped are entered into the
ears of the Lord of sabaoth.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p9"></span>**4** Ecce merces operariorum, qui
messuerunt regiones vestras, quae fraude aversa est a vobis, clamat; et
clamores eorum qui messuerunt, in aures Domini Sabaoth introierunt.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p10"></span>**5** Ye have lived in pleasure on the
earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of
slaughter.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p11"></span>**5** In deliciis vixistis super terram;
lacivistis, enutristis corda vestra, sicut in die mactationis.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p12"></span>**6** Ye have condemned *and* killed the
just; *and* he doth not resist you.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p13"></span>**6** Condemnastis et occidistis justum,
et non resistit vobis.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p14"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.i-p15"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p16"></span>**1** *Go to now*. They are mistaken, as I
think, who consider that James here exhorts the rich to repentance. It
seems to me to be a simple denunciation of God’s judgment, by which he
meant to terrify them without giving them any hope of pardon; for all
that he says tends only to despair. He, therefore, does not address them
in order to invite them to repentance; but, on the contrary, he has a
regard to the faithful, that they, hearing of the miserable and of the
rich, might not envy their fortune, and also that knowing that God would
be the avenger of the wrongs they suffered, they might with a calm and
resigned mind bear them.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)

<span id="vi.vi.i-p20"></span>But he does not speak of the rich
indiscriminately, but of those who, being immersed in pleasures and
inflated with pride, thought of nothing but of the world, and who, like
inexhaustible gulfs, devoured everything; for they, by their tyranny,
oppressed others, as it appears from the whole passage.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p21"></span>*Weep and howl*, or, *Lament, howling*.
Repentance has indeed its weeping, but being mixed with consolation, it
does not proceed to howling. Then James intimates that the heaviness of
God’s vengeance will be so horrible and severe on the rich, that they
will be constrained to break forth into howling, as though he had said
briefly to them, “Woe to you!” But it is a prophetic mode of speaking:
the ungodly have the punishment which awaits them set before them, and
they are represented as already enduring it. As, then, they were now
flattering themselves, and promising to themselves that the prosperity
in which they thought themselves happy would be perpetual, he declared
that the most grievous miseries were nigh at hand.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p22"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p23"></span>**2** *Your riches*. The meaning may be
twofold: — that he ridicules their foolish confidence, because the
riches in which they placed their happiness, were wholly fading, yea,
that they could be reduced to nothing by one blast from God — or that he
condemns as their insatiable avarice, because they heaped together
wealth only for this, that they might perish without any benefit. This
latter meaning is the most suitable. It is, indeed, true that those rich
men are insane who glory in things so fading as garments, gold, silver,
and such things, since it is nothing else than to make their glory
subject to rust and moths; and well known is that saying “What is ill
got is soon lost;” because the curse of God consumes it all, for it is
not right that the ungodly or their heirs should enjoy riches which they
have snatched, as it were, by violence from the hand of God.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p24"></span>But as James enumerates the vices of which
the rich brought on themselves the calamity which he mentions, the
context requires, as I think, that we should say, that what he condemns
here is the extreme rapacity of the rich, in retaining everything they
could lay hold on, that it might rot uselessly in their chests. For thus
it was, that what God had created for the use of men, they destroyed, as
though they were the enemies of mankind.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)

<span id="vi.vi.i-p26"></span>But it must be observed, that the vices
which he mentions here do not belong to all the rich; for some of them
indulge themselves in luxury, some spend much in show and display, and
some pinch themselves, and live miserably in their own filth. Let us,
then, know that he here reproves some vices in some, and some vices in
others. However, all those are generally condemned who unjustly
accumulate riches, or who foolishly abuse them. But what James now says,
is not only suitable to the rich of extreme tenacity, (such as Euclio of
Plautus,) but to those also who delight in pomp and luxury, and yet
prefer to heap up riches rather than to employ them for necessary
purposes. For such is the malignity of some, that they grudge to others
the common sun and air.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p27"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p28"></span>**3** *A witness against you*. He confirms
the explanation I have already given. For God has not appointed gold for
rust, nor garments for moths; but, on the contrary, be has designed them
as aids and helps to human life. Therefore, even spending without
benefit is a witness of inhumanity. The rusting of gold and silver will
be, as it were, the occasion of inflaming the wrath of God, so that it
will, like fire, consume them.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p29"></span>*Ye have heaped treasure together*: These
words may also admit of two explanations: — that the rich, as they would
always live, are never satisfied, but weary themselves in heaping
together what may be sufficient to the end of the world, — or, that they
heap together the wrath and curse of God for the last day; and this
second view I embrace.  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137)

<span id="vi.vi.i-p31"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p32"></span>**4** *Behold, the hire*. He now condemns
cruelty, the invariable companion of avarice. But he refers only to one
kind, which, above all others, ought justly to be deemed odious. For if
a humane and a just man, as Solomon says in <span
id="vi.vi.i-p32.1"></span>[Pr
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.i-p32.1"></span>,
regards the life of his beast, it is a monstrous barbarity, when man
feels no pity towards the man whose sweat he has employed for his own
benefit. Hence the Lord has strictly forbidden, in the law, the hire of
the laborer to sleep with us (<span id="vi.vi.i-p32.2"></span>[De
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015)<span
id="vi.vi.i-p32.2"></span>). Besides, James does not refer to laborers
in common, but, for the sake of amplifying, he mentions husbandmen and
reapers. For what can be more base than that they, who supply us with
bread by their labor should be pined through want? And yet this
monstrous thing is common; for there are many of such a tyrannical
disposition, that they think that the rest of mankind live only for
their benefit alone.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p33"></span>But he says that this hire *crieth*, for
whatever men retain either by fraud or by violence, of what belongs to
another; it calls for vengeance as it were by a loud voice. We ought to
notice what he adds, that the *cries* of the poor come to the ears of
God, so that we may know that the wrong done to them shall not be
unpunished. They, therefore, who are oppressed by the unjust ought
resignedly to sustain their evils, because they will have God as their
defender. And they who have the power of doing wrong ought to abstain
from injustice, lest they provoke God against them, who is the protector
and patron of the poor. And for this reason also he calls God the Lord
of Sabaoth, or of hosts, intimating thereby his power and his might, by
which he renders his judgment more dreadful.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p34"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p35"></span>**5** *In pleasure*. He comes now to
another vice, even luxury and sinful gratifications; for they who abound
in wealth seldom keep within the bounds of moderation, but abuse their
abundance by extreme indulgences. There are, indeed, some rich men, as I
have said, who pine themselves in the midst of their abundance. For it
was not without reason that the poets have imagined Tantalus to be
hungry near a table well furnished. There have ever been Tantalians in
the world. But James, as it has been said, does not speak of all rich
men. It is enough that we see this vice commonly prevailing among the
rich, that they are given too much to luxuries, to pomps and
superfluities.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p36"></span>And though the Lord allows them to live
freely on what they have, yet profusion ought to be avoided and
frugality practiced. For it was not in vain that the Lord by his
prophets severely reproved those who slept on beds of ivory, who used
precious ointments, who delighted themselves at their feasts with the
sound of the harp, who were like fat cows in rich pastures. For all
these things have been said for this end, that we may know that
moderation ought to be observed, and that extravagance is displeasing to
God.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p37"></span>*Ye have nourished your hearts*. He means
that they indulged themselves, not only as far as to satisfy nature, but
as far as their cupidity led them. He adds a similitude, *as in a day of
slaughter*, because they were wont in their solemn sacrifices to eat
more freely than according to their daily habits. He then says, that the
rich feasted themselves every day of their life, because they immersed
themselves in perpetual indulgences.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p38"></span><span id="vi.vi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p39"></span>**6** *Ye have condemned*. Here follows
another kind of inhumanity, that the rich by their power oppressed and
destroyed the poor and weak. He says by a metaphor that the just were
condemned and killed; for when they did not kill them by their own hand,
or condemn them as judges, they yet employed the authority which they
had to do wrong, they corrupted judgments, and contrived various arts to
destroy the innocent, that is, really to condemn and kill them.  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138)

<span id="vi.vi.i-p45"></span>By adding that *the just did not resist
them*, he intimates that the audacity of the rich was greater; because
those whom they oppressed were without any protection. He, however,
reminds them that the more ready and prompt would be the vengeance of
God, when the poor have no protection from men. But though the just did
not resist, because he ought to have patiently endured wrongs, I yet
think that their weakness is at the same time referred to, that is he
did not resist, because he was unprotected and without any help from
men.

<span id="vi.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[James
5:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)<span id="vi.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p2"></span>**7** Be patient therefore, brethren, unto
the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman waiteth for the precious
fruit of the earth, and hath long patience for it, until he receive the
early and latter rain.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p3"></span>**7** Patienter ergo agite, fratres, usque
in adventum Domini. Ecce agricola expectat pretiosum fructum terrae,
patienter se gerens erga eum, donec recipiat pluvium matutinam et
vespertinam.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p4"></span>**8** Be ye also patient; stablish your
hearts: for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p5"></span>**8** Patienter ergo agite et vos;
confirmate corda vestra, quonim adventus Domini propinquus est.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p6"></span>**9** Grudge not one against another,
brethren, lest ye be condemned: behold, the judge standeth before the
door.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p7"></span>**9** Ne ingemiscatis alii in alios,
fratres, ne condemnemeni: ecce judex stat pro foribus.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p9"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p10"></span>**7** *Be patient therefore*. From this
inference it is evident that what has hitherto been said against the
rich, pertains to the consolation of those who seemed for a time to be
exposed to their wrongs with impunity. For after having mentioned the
causes of those calamities which were hanging over the rich, and having
stated this among others, that they proudly and cruelly ruled over the
poor, he immediately adds, that we who are unjustly oppressed, have this
reason to be patient, because God would become the judge. For this is
what he means when he says, *unto the coming of the Lord*, that is, that
the confusion of things which is now seen in the world will not be
perpetual, because the Lord at his coming will reduce things to order,
and that therefore our minds ought to entertain good hope; for it is not
without reason that the restoration of all things is promised to us at
that day. And though the day of the Lord is everywhere called in the
Scriptures a manifestation of his judgment and grace, when he succors
his people and chastises the ungodly, yet I prefer to regard the
expression here as referring to our final deliverance.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p11"></span>*Behold, the husbandman*. Paul briefly
refers to the same similitude in <span id="vi.vi.ii-p11.1"></span>[2Ti
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.ii-p11.1"></span>,
when he says that the husbandman ought to labor before he gathers the
fruit; but James more fully expresses the idea, for he mentions the
daily patience of the husbandman, who, after having committed the seed
to the earth, confidently, or at least patiently, waits until the time
of harvest comes; nor does he fret because the earth does not
immediately yield a ripe fruit. He hence concludes, that we ought not to
be immoderately anxious, if we must now labor and sow, until the harvest
as it were comes, even the day of the Lord.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p12"></span>*The precious fruit*. He calls it
*precious*, because it is the nourishment of life and the means of
sustaining it. And James intimates, that since the husbandman suffers
his life, so precious to him, to lie long deposited in the bosom of the
earth, and calmly suspends his desire to gather the fruit, we ought not
to be too hasty and fretful, but resignedly to wait for the day of our
redemption. It is not necessary to specify particularly the other parts
of the comparison.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p13"></span>*The early and the latter rains*. By the
two words, *early* and *latter*, two seasons are pointed out; the first
follows soon after sowing; and the other when the corn is ripening. So
the prophets spoke, when they intended to set forth the time for rain,
(<span id="vi.vi.ii-p13.1"></span>[De
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012)<span
id="vi.vi.ii-p13.1"></span>; <span id="vi.vi.ii-p13.2"></span>[Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi.ii-p13.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.vi.ii-p13.3"></span>[Ho
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003)<span id="vi.vi.ii-p13.3"></span>.)
And he has mentioned both times, in order more fully to shew that
husbandmen are not disheartened by the slow progress of time, but bear
with the delay.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p14"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p15"></span>**8** *Stablish your hearts*. Lest any
should object and say, that the time of deliverance was too long
delayed, he obviates this objection and says, that *the Lord was at
hand*, or (which is the same thing) that *his coming was drawing nigh*.
In the meantime, he bids us to correct the softness of the heart, which
weakens us, so as not to persevere in hope. And doubtless the time
appears long, because we are too tender and delicate. We ought, then, to
gather strength that we may become hardened and this cannot be better
attained than by hope, and as it were by a realizing view of the near
approach of our Lord.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p16"></span><span id="vi.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p17"></span>**9** *Grudge not,* or, *groan not.* As
the complaints of many were heard, that they were more severely treated
than others, this passage is so explained by some, as though James bade
each to be contented with his own lot, not to envy others, nor grudge if
the condition of others was more tolerable. But I take another view; for
after having spoken of the unhappiness of those who distress good and
quiet men by their tyranny, he now exhorts the faithful to be just
towards one another and ready to pass by offenses. That this is the real
meaning may be gathered from the reason that is added: Be not querulous
one against another; *lest ye be condemned*. We may, indeed, groan, when
any evil torments us; but he means an accusing groan, when one
expostulates with the Lord against another. And he declares that thus
they would all be condemned, because there is no one who does not offend
his brethren, and afford them an occasion of groaning. Now, if everyone
complained, they would all have accused one another; for no one was so
innocent, that he did not do some harm to others.

<span id="vi.vi.ii-p18"></span>God will be the common judge of all.
What, then, will be the case, but that every one who seeks to bring
judgment on others, must allow the same against himself; and thus all
will be given up to the same ruin. Let no one, then, ask for vengeance
on others, except he wishes to bring it on his own head. And lest they
should be hasty in making complaints of this kind, he declares that the
judge was at the door. For as our propensity is to profane the name of
God, in the slightest offenses we appeal to his judgment. Nothing is a
fitter bridle to check our rashness, than to consider that our
imprecations vanish not into air, because God’s judgment is at hand.

<span id="vi.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[James
5:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010)<span
id="vi.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p2"></span>**10** Take, my brethren, the prophets,
who have spoken in the name of the Lord, for an example of suffering
affliction, and of patience.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p3"></span>**10** Exemplum accipite afflictionis,
fratres mei, et tolerentiae, prophetas, qui loquuti sunt in nomine
Domini.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p4"></span>**11** Behold, we count them happy which
endure. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of
the Lord; that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p5"></span>**11** Ecce beatos esse ducimus eos qui
sustinent: patientiam Job audistis, et finem Domini vidistis, quod
multum sit misericors et commiserans.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p7"></span><span id="vi.vi.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p8"></span>**10** *Take, my brethren, the prophets*.
The comfort which he brings is not that which is according to the common
proverb, that the miserable hope for like companions in evils. That they
set before them associates, in whose number it was desirable to be
classed; and to have the same condition with them, was no misery. For as
we must necessarily feel extreme grief, when any evil happens to us
which the children of God have never experienced, so it is a singular
consolation when we know that we suffer nothing different from them;
nay, when we know that we have to sustain the same yoke with them.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p9"></span>When Job heard from his friends,

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p10"></span>“Turn to the saints, can you find any
like to thee?”  
(<span id="vi.vi.iii-p10.2"></span>[Job
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#001)<span
id="vi.vi.iii-p10.2"></span>,)

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p11"></span>it was the voice of Satan, because he
wished to drive him to despair. When, on the other hand, the Spirit by
the mouth of James designs to raise us up to a good hope, he shews to us
all the fore-going saints, who as it were stretch out their hand to us,
and by their example encourage us to undergo and to conquer afflictions.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p12"></span>The life of men is indeed
indiscriminately subject to troubles and adversities; but James did not
bring forward any kind of men for examples, for it would have availed
nothing to perish with the multitude; but he chose the prophets, a
fellowship with whom is blessed. Nothing so breaks us down and
disheartens us as the feeling of misery; it is therefore a real
consolation to know that those things commonly deemed evils are aids and
helps to our salvation. This is, indeed, what is far from being
understood by the flesh; yet the faithful ought to be convinced of this,
that they are happy when by various troubles they are proved by the
Lord. To convince us of this, James reminds us to consider the end or
design of the afflictions endured by the prophets; for as our own evils
we are without judgment, being influenced by grief, sorrow, or some
other immoderate feelings, as we see nothing under a foggy sky and in
the midst of storms, and being tossed here and there as it were by a
tempest, it is therefore necessary for us to cast our eyes to another
quarter, where the sky is in a manner serene and bright. When the
afflictions of the saints are related to us, there is no one who will
allow that they were miserable, but, on the contrary, that they were
happy.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p13"></span>Then James has done well for us; for he
has laid before our eyes a pattern, that we may learn to look at it
whenever we are tempted to impatience or to despair: and he takes this
principle as granted, that the prophets were blessed in their
afflictions, for they courageously sustained them. Since it was so, he
concludes that the same judgment ought to be formed of us when
afflicted.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p14"></span>And he says, *the prophets who have
spoken in the name of the Lord*; by which he intimates that they were
accepted and approved by God. If, then, it had been useful for them to
have been free from miseries, doubtless God would have kept them free.
But it was otherwise. It hence follows that afflictions are salutary to
the faithful. He, therefore, bids them to be taken as an example of
suffering affliction. But patience also must be added, which is a real
evidence of our obedience. Hence he has joined them both together.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p15"></span><span id="vi.vi.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p16"></span>**11** *The patience of Job*. Having
spoken generally of the prophets, he now refers to an example remarkable
above others; for no one, as far as we can learn from histories, has
ever been overwhelmed with troubles so hard and so various as Job; and
yet he emerged from so deep a gulf. Whosoever, then, will imitate his
patience, will no doubt find God’s hand, which at length delivered him,
to be the same. We see for what end his history has been written. God
suffered not his servant Job to sink, because he patiently endured his
afflictions. Then he will disappoint the patience of no one.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p17"></span>If, however, it be asked, Why does the
Apostle so much commend the patience of Job, as he had displayed many
signs of impatience, being carried away by a hasty spirit? To this I
reply, that though he sometimes failed through the infirmity of the
flesh, or murmured within himself, yet he ever surrendered himself to
God, and was ever willing to be restrained and ruled by him. Though,
then, his patience was somewhat deficient, it is yet deservedly
commended.

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p18"></span>*The end of the Lord.* By these words he
intimates that afflictions ought ever to be estimated by their end. For
at first God seems to be far away, and Satan in the meantime revels in
the confusion; the flesh suggests to us that we are forsaken of God and
lost. We ought, then, to extend our view farther, for near and around us
there appears no light. Moreover, he has called it the end of the Lord,
because it is his work to give a prosperous issue to adversities. If we
do our duty in bearing evils obediently, he will by no means be wanting
in performing his part. Hope directs us only to the end; God will then
shew himself very merciful, how ever rigid and severe he may seem to be
while afflicting us.  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

<span id="vi.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[James
5:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)<span
id="vi.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p2"></span>**12** But above all things, my brethren,
swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other
oath: but let your yea be yea; *and* your nay, nay; lest ye fall into
condemnation.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p3"></span>**12** Ante omnia vero, fratres mei, Ne
juretis, neque per coelum, neque per terram, neque aliud quodvis
jusjurandum; sit autem vestrum. Est, est; Non, non: ne in judicium
(*vel, simulationem*) incidatis.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p4"></span>**13** Is any among you afflicted? let him
pray. Is any merry? let him sing psalms.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p5"></span>**13** Afflgitur quis inter vos? oret:
hilari est animo? psallat.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p7"></span><span id="vi.vi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p8"></span>**12** *But above all things*. It has been
a common vice almost in all ages, to swear lightly and inconsiderately.
For so bad is our nature that we do not consider what an atrocious crime
it is to profane the name of God. For though the Lord strictly commands
us to reverence his name, yet men devise various subterfuges, and think
that they can swear with impunity. They imagine, then, that there is no
evil, provided they do not openly mention the name of God; and this is
an old gloss. So the Jews, when they swore by heaven or earth, thought
that they did not profane God’s name, because they did not mention it.
But while men seek to be ingenious in dissembling with God, they delude
themselves with the most frivolous evasions.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p9"></span>It was a vain excuse of this kind that
Christ condemned in <span id="vi.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>[Mt
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>.
James, now subscribing to the decree of his master, commands us to
abstain from these indirect forms of swearing: for whosoever swears in
vain and on frivolous occasions, profanes God’s name, whatever form he
may give to his words. Then the meaning is, that it is not more lawful
to swear by heaven or by the earth, than openly by the name of God. The
reason is mentioned by Christ — because the glory of God is everywhere
inscribed, and everywhere shines forth. Nay, men take the words, heaven
and earth, in their oaths, in no other sense and for no other purpose,
than if they named God himself; for by thus speaking they only designate
the Worker by his works.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p10"></span>But he says, *above all things*; because
the profanation of God’s name is not a slight offense. The Anabaptists,
building on this passage, condemn all oaths, but they only shew their
ignorance. For James does not speak of oaths in general, nor does Christ
in the passage to which I have referred; but both condemn that evasion
which had been devised, when men took the liberty to swear without
expressing the name of God, which was a liberty repugnant to the
prohibition of the law.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p11"></span>And this is what the words clearly mean,
*Neither by heaven, neither by the earth*. For, if the question had been
as to oaths in themselves, to what purpose were these forms mentioned?
It then appears evident that both by Christ and by James the puerile
astuteness of those is reproved who taught that they could swear with
impunity, provided they adopted some circuitous expressions. That we
may, then, understand the meaning of James, we must understand first the
precept of the law, “Thou shalt not take the name of God *in vain*.” It
hence appears clear, that there is a right and lawful use of God’s name.
Now, James condemns those who did not indeed dare in a direct way to
profane God’s name, but endeavored to evade the profanation which the
law condemns, by circumlocutions.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p12"></span>*But let your yea be yea*. He brings the
best remedy to correct the vice which he condemns, that is, that they
were habitually to keep themselves to truth and faithfulness in all
their sayings. For whence is the wicked habit of swearing, except that
such is the falsehood of men, that their words alone are not believed?
For, if they observed faithfulness, as they ought, in their words, there
would have been no necessity of so many superfluous oaths. As, then, the
perfidy or levity of men is the fountain from which the vice of swearing
flows, in order to take away the vice, James teaches us that the
fountain ought to be removed; for the right way of healing is to begin
with the cause of illness.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p13"></span>Some copies have, “Let your word (or
speech) be, yea, yea; no, no.” The true reading however, is what I have
given, and is commonly received; and what he means I have already
explained, that is, that we ought to tell the truth, and to be faithful
in our words. To the same purpose is what Paul says in <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>[2Co
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>,
that he was not in his preaching yea and nay, but pursued the same
course from the beginning.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p14"></span>*Lest ye fall into condemnation*. There
is a different reading, owing to the affinity of the words <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p14.1"></span>ὑπὸ κρίσιν and <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p14.2"></span>ὑπόκρισιν  <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) If you read, “into judgment” or
condemnation, the sense will clearly be, that to take God’s name in vain
will not be unpunished. But it is not unsuitable to say, “into
hypocrisy;” because when simplicity, as it has been already said,
prevails among us, the occasion for superfluous oaths is cut off. If,
then, fidelity appears in all we say, the dissimulation, which leads us
to swear rashly, will be removed.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p16"></span><span id="vi.vi.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p17"></span>**13** *Is any among you afflicted?* he
means that there is no time in which God does not invite us to himself.
For afflictions ought to stimulate us to pray; prosperity supplies us
with an occasion to praise God. But such is the perverseness of men,
that they cannot rejoice without forgetting God, and that when afflicted
they are disheartened and driven to despair. We ought, then, to keep
within due bounds, so that the joy, which usually makes us to forget
God, may induce us to set forth the goodness of God, and that our sorrow
may teach us to pray. For he has set the *singing of psalms* in
opposition to profane and unbridled joy; and thus they express their joy
who are led, as they ought to be, by prosperity to God.

<span id="vi.vi.v"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p1.1"></span>[James
5:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014)<span id="vi.vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p2"></span>**14** Is any sick among you? let him call
for the elders of the church; and let them pray over him, anointing him
with oil in the name of the Lord:

<span id="vi.vi.v-p3"></span>**14** Infirmatur quis inter vos? Advocet
presbyteros ecclesiae, et orent super eum, unguentes oleo in nomine
Domini:

<span id="vi.vi.v-p4"></span>**15** And the prayer of faith shall save
the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p5"></span>**15** Et oratio fidei servabit aegrotum,
et excitabit eum Dominus; et si peccata admiserit, remittentur illi.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.v-p7"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p8"></span>**14** *Is any sick among you*. As the gift
of healing as yet continued, he directs the sick to have recourse to
that remedy. It is, indeed, certain that they were not all healed; but
the Lord granted this favor as often and as far as he knew it would be
expedient; nor is it probable that the oil was indiscriminately applied,
but only when there was some hope of restoration. For, together with the
power there was given also discretion to the ministers, lest they should
by abuse profane the symbol. The design of James was no other than to
commend the grace of God which the faithful might then enjoy, lest the
benefit of it should be lost through contempt or neglect.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p9"></span>For this purpose he ordered the presbyters
to be sent for, but the use of the anointing must have been confined to
the power of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p10"></span>The Papists boast mightily of this
passage, when they seek to pass off their extreme unction. But how
different their corruption is from the ancient ordinance mentioned by
James I will not at present undertake to shew. Let readers learn this
from my Institutes. I will only say this, that this passage is wickedly
and ignorantly perverted; when extreme unction is established by it, and
is called a sacrament, to be perpetually observed in the Church. I
indeed allow that it was used as a sacrament by the disciples of Christ,
(for I cannot agree with those who think that it was medicine;) but as
the reality of this sign continued only for a time in the Church, the
symbol also must have been only for a time. And it is quite evident,
that nothing is more absurd than to call that a sacrament which is void
and does not really present to us that which it signifies. That the gift
of healing was temporary, all are constrained to allow, and events
clearly prove: then the sign of it ought not to be deemed perpetual. It
hence follows, that they who at this day set anointing among the
sacraments, are not the true followers, but the apes of the Apostles,
except they restore the effect produced by it, which God has taken away
from the world for more than fourteen hundred years. So we have no
dispute, whether anointing was once a sacrament; but whether it has been
given to be so perpetually. This latter we deny, because it is evident
that the thing signified has long ago ceased.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p11"></span>*The presbyters*, or *elders*, *of the
church*. I include here generally all those who presided over the
Church; for pastors were not alone called presbyters or elders, but also
those who were chosen from the people to be as it were censors to
protect discipline. For every Church had, as it were, its own senate,
chosen from men of weight and of proved integrity. But as it was
customary to choose especially those who were endued with gifts more
than ordinary, he ordered them to send for the elders, as being those in
whom the power and grace of the Holy Spirit more particularly appeared.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p12"></span>*Let them pray over him.* This custom of
praying over one was intended to shew, that they stood as it were before
God; for when we come as it were to the very scene itself, we utter
prayers with more feeling; and not only Elisha and Paul, but Christ
himself, roused the ardor of prayer and commended the grace of God by
thus praying over persons. (<span id="vi.vi.v-p12.1"></span>[2Ki
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032)<span id="vi.vi.v-p12.1"></span>;
<span id="vi.vi.v-p12.2"></span>[Ac
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.v-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="vi.vi.v-p12.3"></span>[Joh
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041)<span
id="vi.vi.v-p12.3"></span>.)

<span id="vi.vi.v-p13"></span><span id="vi.vi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.v-p14"></span>**15**. But it must be observed, that he
connects a promise with the prayer, lest it should be made without
faith. For he who doubts, as one who does not rightly call on God, is
unworthy to obtain anything, as we have seen in <span
id="vi.vi.v-p14.1"></span>[Jas
1:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.v-p14.1"></span>.
Whosoever then really seeks to be heard, must be fully persuaded that he
does not pray in vain.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p15"></span>As James brings before us this special
gift, to which the external rite was but an addition, we hence learn,
that the oil could not have been rightly used without faith. But since
it appears that the Papists have no certainty as to their anointing, as
it is manifest that they have not the gift, it is evident that their
anointing is spurious.

<span id="vi.vi.v-p16"></span>*And if he have committed sins*. This is
not added only for the sake of amplifying, as though he had said, that
God would give something more to the sick than health of body; but
because diseases were very often inflicted on account of sins; and by
speaking of their remission he intimates that the cause of the evil
would be removed. And we indeed see that David, when afflicted with
disease and seeking relief, was wholly engaged in seeking the pardon of
his sins. Why did he do this, except that while he acknowledged the
effect of his faults in his punishment, he deemed that there was no
other remedy, but that the Lord should cease to impute to him his sins?

<span id="vi.vi.v-p17"></span>The prophets are full of this doctrine,
that men are relieved from their evils when they are loosed from the
guilt of their iniquities. Let us then know that it is the only fit
remedy for our diseases and other calamities, when we carefully examine
ourselves, being solicitous to be reconciled to God, and to obtain the
pardon of our sins.

<span id="vi.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>[James
5:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span
id="vi.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p2"></span>**16** Confess *your* faults one to
another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed. The effectual
fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p3"></span>**16** Confitemini invicem peccata vestra,
et orate invicem alii pro aliis, ut salvemini: multum valet precatio
justi efficax.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p4"></span>**17** Elias was a man subject to like
passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and
it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p5"></span>**17** Elias homo erat passionibus
similiter obnoxius ut nos; et precatione precatus est, ne plueret; et
non pluit super terram annos tres et sex menses.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p6"></span>**18** And he prayed again, and the heaven
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p7"></span>**18** Et rursum oravit, et coelum dedit
pluviam, et terra protulit fructum suum.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p9"></span><span id="vi.vi.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p10"></span>**16** *Confess your faults one to
another*. In some copies the illative particle is given, nor is it
unsuitable; for though when not expressed, it must be understood. He had
said, that sins were remitted to the sick over whom the elders prayed:
he now reminds them how useful it is to discover our sins to our
brethren, even that we may obtain the pardon of them by their
intercession.  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141)

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p12"></span>This passage, I know, is explained by
many as referring to the reconciling of offenses; for they who wish to
return to favor must necessarily know first their own faults and confess
them. For hence it comes, that hatreds take root, yea, and increase and
become irreconcilable, because every one perniciously defends his own
cause. Many therefore think that James points out here the way of
brotherly reconciliation, that is, by mutual acknowledgment of sins. But
as it has been said, his object was different; for he connects mutual
prayer with mutual confession; by which he intimates that confession
avails for this end, that we may be helped as to God by the prayers of
our brethren; for they who know our necessities, are stimulated to pray
that they may assist us; but they to whom our diseases are unknown are
more tardy to bring us help.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p13"></span>Wonderful, indeed, is the folly or the
insincerity of the Papists, who strive to build their whispering
confession on this passage. For it would be easy to infer from the words
of James, that the priests alone ought to confess. For since a mutual,
or to speak more plainly, a reciprocal confession is demanded here, no
others are bidden to confess their own sins, but those who in their turn
are fit to hear the confession of others; but this the priests claim for
themselves alone. Then confession is required of them alone. But since
their puerilities do not deserve a refutation, let the true and genuine
explanation already given be deemed sufficient by us.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p14"></span>For the words clearly mean, that
confession is required for no other end, but that those who know our
evils may be more solicitous to bring us help.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p15"></span>*Availeth much.* That no one may think
that this is done without fruit, that is, when others pray for us, he
expressly mentions the benefit and the effect of prayer. But he names
expressly the *prayer of a righteous* or *just* *man;* because God does
not hear the ungodly; nor is access to God open, except through a good
conscience: not that our prayers are founded on our own worthiness, but
because the heart must be cleansed by faith before we can present
ourselves before God. Then James testifies that the righteous or the
faithful pray for us beneficially and not without fruit.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p16"></span>But what does he mean by adding
*effectual* or efficacious? For this seems superfluous; for if the
prayer avails much, it is doubtless effectual. The ancient interpreter
has rendered it “assiduous;” but this is too forced. For James uses the
Greek participle, <span id="vi.vi.vi-p16.1"></span>ἐνεργούμεναι, which
means “working.” And the sentence may be thus explained, “It avails
much, because it is effectual.”  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)
As it is an argument drawn from this principle, that God will not allow
the prayers of the faithful to be void or useless, he does not therefore
unjustly conclude that it *avails much*. But I would rather confine it
to the present case: for our prayers may properly be said to be <span
id="vi.vi.vi-p17.4"></span>ἐνεργούμεναι, *working*, when some necessity
meets us which excites in us earnest prayer. We pray daily for the whole
Church, that God may pardon its sins; but then only is our prayer really
in earnest, when we go forth to succor those who are in trouble. But
such efficacy cannot be in the prayers of our brethren, except they know
that we are in difficulties. Hence the reason given is not general, but
must be specially referred to the former sentence.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p18"></span><span id="vi.vi.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p19"></span>**17** *Elias was a man*. There are
innumerable instances in Scripture of what he meant to prove; but he
chose one that is remarkable above all others; for it was a great thing
that God should make heaven in a manner subject to the prayers of Elias,
so as to obey his wishes. Elias kept heaven shut by his prayers for
three years and a half; he again opened it, so that it poured down
abundance of rain. Hence appeared the wonderful power of prayer. Well
known is this remarkable history, and is found in <span
id="vi.vi.vi-p19.1"></span>[1Ki
17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#000)<span id="vi.vi.vi-p19.1"></span>
and <span id="vi.vi.vi-p19.2"></span>[1Ki
18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#000)<span id="vi.vi.vi-p19.2"></span>.
And though it is not there expressly said, that Elias prayed for
drought, it may yet be easily gathered, and that the rain also was given
to his prayers.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p20"></span>But we must notice the application of the
example. James does not say that drought ought to be sought from the
Lord, because Elias obtained it; for we may by inconsiderate zeal
presumptuously and foolishly imitate the Prophet. We must then observe
the rule of prayer, so that it may be by faith. He, therefore, thus
accommodates this example, — that if Elias was heard, so also we shall
be heard when we rightly pray. For as the command to pray is common, and
as the promise is common, it follows that the effect also will be
common.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p21"></span>Lest any one should object and say, that
we are far distant from the dignity of Elias, he places him in our own
rank, by saying, that he was a mortal *man* and *subject to the same
passions* with ourselves. For we profit less by the examples of saints,
because we imagine them to have been half gods or heroes, who had
peculiar intercourse with God; so that because they were heard, we
receive no confidence. In order to shake off this heathen and profane
superstition, James reminds us that the saints ought to be considered as
having the infirmity of the flesh; so that we may learn to ascribe what
they obtained from the Lord, not to their merits, but to the efficacy of
prayer.

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p22"></span>It hence appears how childish the Papists
are, who teach men to flee to the protection of saints, because they had
been heard by the Lord. For thus they reason, “Because he obtained what
he asked as long as he lived in the world, he will be now after death
our best patron.” This sort of subtle refinement was altogether unknown
to the Holy Spirit. For James on the contrary argues, that as their
prayers availed so much, so we ought in like manner to pray at this day
according to their example, and that we shall not do so in vain.

<span id="vi.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p1"></span><span id="vi.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>[James
5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019)<span
id="vi.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p2"></span>**19** Brethren, if any of you do err
from the truth, and one convert him;

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p3"></span>**19** Fratres mei, si quis inter vos
erraverit a veritate, et converterit quispiam eum;

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p4"></span>**20** Let him know, that he which
converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p5"></span>**20** Cognoscat quod qui converterit
peccatorem ab errore viae suae, servabit animam a morte, et multitudinem
operiet peccatorum.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p7"></span><span id="vi.vi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p8"></span>**20** *Let him know*. I doubt whether
this ought rather to have been written, <span
id="vi.vi.vii-p8.1"></span>γιςώσκετε, “know ye.” Both ways the meaning
however is the same. For James recommends to us the correction of our
brethren from the effect produced that we may more assiduously attend to
this duty. Nothing is better or more desirable than to deliver a soul
from eternal death; and this is what he does who restores an erring
brother to the right way: therefore a work so excellent ought by no
means to be neglected. To give food to the hungry, and drink to the
thirsty, we see how much Christ values such acts; but the salvation of
the soul is esteemed by him much more precious than the life of the
body. We must therefore take heed lest souls perish through our sloth,
whose salvation God puts in a manner in our hands. Not that we can
bestow salvation on them; but that God by our ministry delivers and
saves those who seem otherwise to be nigh destruction.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p9"></span>Some copies have *his soul*, which makes
no change in the sense. I, however, prefer the other reading, for it has
more force in it.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p10"></span>*And shall hide a multitude of sins*. He
makes an allusion to a saying of Solomon, rather than a quotation.
(<span id="vi.vi.vii-p10.1"></span>[Pr
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012)<span
id="vi.vi.vii-p10.1"></span>.) Solomon says that love covers sins, as
hatred proclaims them. For they who hate burn with the desire of mutual
slander; but they who love are disposed to exercise mutual forbearance.
Love, then, buries sins as to men. James teaches here something higher,
that is, that sins are blotted out before God; as though he had said,
Solomon has declared this as the fruit of love, that it covers sins; but
there is no better or more excellent way of covering them than when they
are wholly abolished before God. And this is done when the sinner is
brought by our admonition to the right way: we ought then especially and
more carefully to attend to this duty.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p11"></span>END OF THE EPISTLE OF JAMES

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc45023.htm#fr_135) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p17"></span> Many commentators, such as *Grotius*,
*Doddridge*, *Macknight*, and *Scott,* consider that the Apostle refers
at the beginning of this chapter, not to professing Christians, but to
unbelieving Jews. There is nothing said that can lead to such an
opinion: and if the two preceding chapters were addressed (as admitted
by all) to those who *professed* the faith, there is no reason why this
should not have been addressed to them; the sins here condemned are not
worse than those previously condemned. Indeed, we find by the Epistles
of Peter, and by that of Jude, that there were men professing religion
at that time, who were not a whit better (if not worse) than many who
profess religion in our age.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p18"></span>Besides, it was not unusual, in addresses
to Christians, to address unbelievers. Indeed, Paul expressly says,
“What have I to do to judge them that are without?”

<span id="vi.vi.i-p19"></span>That there were rich men professing the
gospel at that time, is evident from <span
id="vi.vi.i-p19.1"></span>[Jas
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#010)<span id="vi.vi.i-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc45023.htm#fr_136) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p25"></span> Reference is made here to three *sorts*
of riches, — stores of corn, which rotted, — garments, which were
moth-eaten, — and precious metals, money, and jewels, etc., which
rusted.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc45023.htm#fr_137) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p30"></span> By “last days” are commonly meant the
days of the gospel. The day of judgment is often called by John, in his
Gospel, “the last day;” and the same seems to be called here “the last
days.” The reference made by some, to the destruction of Jerusalem, has
nothing in the passage to favor it. To “heap treasure,” or to lay up a
store, has an evident reference to the day of judgment, as Paul makes
use of the same expression in <span id="vi.vi.i-p30.1"></span>[Ro
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi.i-p30.1"></span>,
only he adds “wrath” to it, which is also added here by the *Vulg.* The
whole verse is conminatory, and in this sentence the rich are reminded
of the issue, the final issue of their conduct. The character of the
store is to be learnt from the preceding part of the verse. In
treasuring dishonest wealth, they were treasuring wrath for themselves.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc45023.htm#fr_138) <span
id="vi.vi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.i-p40"></span> Many have thought that what is referred
to here is the condemnation of our Savior by the Jewish nation,
especially as he is called <span id="vi.vi.i-p40.1"></span>ὁ δίκαιος,
“the just one.” This is true, but the Christian is also called too, in
<span id="vi.vi.i-p40.2"></span>[1Pe
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi.i-p40.2"></span>.
James very frequently individualizes the faithful, using the singular
for the plural number. The whole context proves that he speaks here of
the poor faithful who suffered injustice from the rich, professing the
same faith. Besides, the death of Christ is not ascribed to the rich,
but to the elders and chief priests.

<span id="vi.vi.i-p41"></span>The two first verbs, being aorists, may be
rendered in the present tense, especially as the last verb is in that
tense. For in the very next verse, the 7th, the aorist is so used. We
may then give this version, —

<span id="vi.vi.i-p42"></span> 

<span id="vi.vi.i-p43"></span>**6**. “Ye condemn, ye kill the righteous;
he sets himself not in array against you.”

<span id="vi.vi.i-p44"></span>Probably the aorist is used, as it
expresses what was done habitually, or a continued act, like the future
tense often in Hebrew. The preceding verse, the 5th, where all the verbs
are aorists, would be better rendered in the same way, “Ye live in
pleasure,” etc.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc45023.htm#fr_139) <span
id="vi.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iii-p19"></span> “The end of the Lord” seems a singular
expression; but <span id="vi.vi.iii-p19.1"></span>τέλος, properly the
end, means also the issue, the upshot, the termination, the conclusion.
It is genitive of the efficient cause, “the end (or issue) given by the
Lord.” See <span id="vi.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>[Job
42:12](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#012)<span
id="vi.vi.iii-p19.2"></span>. According to *Griesbach* there are three
MSS which have <span id="vi.vi.iii-p19.3"></span>ἒλεος, “mercy;” which
would be very suitable, — “and ye have seen the mercy of the Lord, that
the Lord is very full of pity, and compassionate.” But the authority is
not sufficient.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc45023.htm#fr_140) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p15"></span> For <span id="vi.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>εἰς
ὑπόκρισιν there are several MSS., but for <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p15.2"></span>ὑπὸ κρίσιν there are not only several MSS.,
but the earliest versions, *Syr.* and *Vulg.*; so *Griesbach* takes the
latter as the true reading.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc45023.htm#fr_141) <span
id="vi.vi.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p11"></span> The illative <span
id="vi.vi.vi-p11.1"></span>οὖν, though found in some MSS., is not
introduced into the text by *Griesbach*, there being no sufficient
evidence in its favor. Nor does there appear a sufficient reason for the
connection mentioned by *Calvin*. The two cases seem to be different.
The elders of the church were in the previous instance to be called in,
who were to pray and anoint the sick, and it is said that the prayer of
faith (*i.e.* of miraculous faith) would save the sick, and that his
sins would be forgiven him. This was clearly a case of miraculous
healing. But what is spoken of in this verse seems to be quite
different. Prayer is alone mentioned, not by the elders, but by a
righteous man, not saving as in the former case, but availing much. It
seems probable then that the sins of the sick miraculously healed were
more especially against God; and that the sins which they were to
confess to one another were against the brethren, also visited with
judgment and the remedy for them was mutual confession, and mutual
prayer; but the success in this case was not as sure or as certain as in
the former, only we are told that an earnest prayer avails much. Then,
to encourage this earnest or fervent prayer, the case of Elias is
adduced; but it had nothing to do with miraculous healing.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc45023.htm#fr_142) <span
id="vi.vi.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vi-p17"></span> This can hardly be admitted. The word
expresses what sort of prayer is that which avails much. Besides, to
avail much, and to be effectual, are two distinct things. The word as a
verb and as a participle had commonly an active sense. *Schleusner*
gives only one instance in which it has a passive meaning, <span
id="vi.vi.vi-p17.1"></span>[2Co
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#006)<span id="vi.vi.vi-p17.1"></span>;
to which may be added <span id="vi.vi.vi-p17.2"></span>[2Co
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#012)<span id="vi.vi.vi-p17.2"></span>.
If taken passively, it may be rendered, “inwrought,” that is, by the
Spirit, according to *Macknight*. But it has been most commonly taken
actively, and in the sense of the verbal adjective <span
id="vi.vi.vi-p17.3"></span>ἐνεργὴς, energetic, powerful, ardent,
fervent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Second Peter](cc45024)
