[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt402)  [Next](pt404) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# POSTSCRIPT.

A WORKMAN has reason to be grateful to any one who will give him an
honest opinion of his work; and he is fortunate if he has many able
advisers, for when a number of independent opinions are brought to bear
upon any one subject, a new light is thrown upon it. One critic may be a
kindly, good-natured man, who wishes well to the work and its author,
but knows little of the subject. Such a man will praise the work, and
agree with the conclusions and arguments contained in it, and there is
not much to be learned directly from him: but every man has a subject of
which he knows more than his neighbours, and is apt to bring his special
knowledge to bear upon other things, so it is a marvel if something is
not learned from the criticism of any clever man.

Another may be more skilful, though new to the subject. He will take the
arguments and make them his own, and use the information which he
acquires, and draw his own conclusions; such a man sheds a new light on
the matter, and there is much to be learned from him.

A third may have a theory of his own, by the light of which he peeps
about, and pokes into holes and

corners to pick out that which suits his own purpose, and nothing else.
From new materials so gathered, such a man will build up a structure of
his own, and there is much to be learned from one who so treats
another's work.

Then comes one with more extended views, who has studied the question,
and knows a great deal about it, and is conscious of power, and who
views the new work all round and round, and turns it upside down and
inside out, and throws a new light upon it--the electric light of
superior knowledge. But the eyes of such men are apt to be dazzled by
excess of light; they have looked at so many large objects that they
overlook the small; their vision is telescopic, they can see microscopic
details; and a short-sighted theorist, with his dim lamp, will poke out
many things which he of the great light and the strong eyes will never
see. But whoever reviews a book fairly, teaches something to its author,
and he who knows most about the subject teaches most.

Then come friends--one with pleasant praise, which, if he be a wise man,
is a valued reward and a wholesome cordial; then one with unpleasant
dispraise, which, if wisely administered and well taken, may be a useful
tonic; then one who picks out the worst bit, for which no one has a good
word, and says it is the very thing which he should have expected, and
he shakes hands and departs radiant with the consciousness of a
compliment well turned. One says the work is learned, perhaps because he
has not tried to understand it; another more truly says that it is not.
One says that it is too long, another that it is too short; one, that it
should all be written over again, another, that it

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

never should have been written at all; and so by degrees the workman
gets to know his errors.

But at last there may come a great giant of a critic, armed with a
brilliant intellectual sword of light, which makes smaller men quake; an
author in his clutches feels that be is a small mortal in the presence
of a very big one, that he must resign himself to his fate, and prepare
for the worst. He may be cut up into little bits or eaten alive, and, if
so, he is quite sure to disagree with the great man, but he must submit.
He may hope to be as indigestible as Tom Thumb, who survived being eaten
many times; but he may also hope to be raised up on the giant's
shoulder, thence to see the world, or to be placed in the rim of his
great hat, like Grimm's tailor, there to walk about in the sunshine, and
admire the prospect. He may be crushed under the giant's great splay
feet, or helped on his journey by his long legs, but unless some other
giant interferes, or a dwarf shews him a mouse-hole to creep into, he
cannot escape.

But when all is done, giants and great men, purblind and keen-sighted,
Grudgeon, Strongback, Bolagum Mor, and the rest of the gifted men and
genii, friends and foes, are all working for good, and bringing stores
of knowledge. If they are friendly, the mortal has need of friends; if
unfriendly, be will, at all events, learn to keep out of their way; and
if by any chance they should happen to go by the ears, and fight over
his contemptible little body, he is not worthy to be the cause of such a
fight who cannot pick up something worth having on the field of battle
when the fight is done.

It would be ungracious not to thank those who have done me good service,
so I thank my reviewers

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

here for much valuable information. My work has been treated as an
honest attempt to place what I found amongst Highland peasants within
the reach of English readers; and if I have got an occasional buffet,
such pain does but enhance the pleasure of being patted on the back.
Some have added praise which I can hardly think my due, and of which I
would willingly transfer a large share to those who have really earned
it. The real workmen are the old Highland bodies, with their
extraordinary power of memory, who told Gaelic stories, and the men who
wrote them down--men who have shown an amount of industry, talent, and
fidelity, in carrying out their work, of which I cannot speak too
highly, and whose genuine, kindly, generous, clannish nature, has made
it a real pleasure to work with them. "Sir," said one of them, "I send
you the story of ------, which I wrote from the dictation of ------. I
am paid enough already." And yet these are the people of whom one of a
different stamp lately said that they were barbarians to be civilized, a
people whose language should be rooted out as the worst of all the
jargons inflicted upon the human race as a curse at the tower of Babel.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Points for Argument, Statement of the Case, Current
Opinions](pt404)
