[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt409)  [Next](pt411) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ON THE GAELIC POETRY OF KNOWN AND UNKNOWN BARDS, PUBLISHED AND TRADITIONAL. (H. MACLEAN.)

"The Gaelic poems which were published in 1807, from a manuscript in the
handwriting of James MacPherson, differ very widely indeed from those
which are handed down by tradition; very widely indeed from all known
traditions about the Fenian heroes current in the Highlands. The kingdom
of Morven is unknown either in traditional poems or stories. These do
not represent the Fenian heroes drinking on all occasions out of shells,
they frequently drink out of vessels of gold or silver, as the case may
be. The traditional

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Fionn is not that grave, stately, Solemn,
ostentatious, old monarch which he is in the Ossian published by
MacPherson; but a being of more human sympathies, possessed of strong
feelings and passions-a hero that might have been a brave, generous,
chieftain, who was not entirely free from the frailties that flesh is
heir to. Popular poetry or tradition never describes him as a venerable
old monarch, with hoary locks, nor does it allude to his being aged, or
weakened by old age. The death of all the other Fenian heroes is
recorded, but there is not the least hint given of Fionn's death.

He is said to have been occasionally seen in Eilean na h-oige, the
island of youth, also called *An t-Eilean uaine*, the green isle--an
island which Hebrideans believe to be located somewhere west, and which
many of them believe to have seen. The people of Islay believe it to be
situated west of Islay of course; the people of Barra, west of Barra;
the people of Uist, west of Uist; and the people of Harris, west of
Harris; many are they who have had the good fortune to see this blessed
island. I conversed in youth myself with old people. who did see it off
from Portnahaven, in Islay, on a fine evening; but I have never yet had
the good fortune to see it myself, though I have often seen the evening
clouds piled up like hills on the horizon.

It is told that a Jura man, who owned a small vessel, once met a man on
the pier at Greenock, who engaged the ship at a certain freight, to
carry him and a cargo to the westward of Islay. The bargain was struck,
and the cargo put on board, and they sailed round the Mull of Cantire,
and through the Sound of Islay, where a thick fog came on. They got
through the Sound and bore away to the westward, and, after a few days,
they

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

found themselves one morning close to land. They cast anchor and went to
sleep, and when they awoke the man and his cargo were gone. The Jura
skipper did not like to lose his freight, landed, and walked up to a
large house, where he found "*sean duine mor cròsgach*"--a large,
big-boned old man-seated in an arm-chair, who offered him a drink. The
drinking vessels were so large that the skipper could not lift them, so
the big man called his daughter to give him a draught, and a girl came
in and raised the vessel ("soitheach"), and he took a long drink of
*beer*. He told his story, and the big man asked him if he could
recognise the man who had engaged the ship. He said he could, and a
number of people were sent for, and passed in review before him. At last
the delinquent appeared, and was recognised, and made to pay the
freight, upon which he thrust his finger into the skipper's eye, and put
it out, saying, "If I had done that to thee before, thou wouldst not
have known me." <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14)

The inhabitants then made the Jura men brush every particle of the dust
of the island from their feet, and sent them away with their money; and
when they sailed, the island seemed to disappear in a mist. This Jura
man, it is said, was well known afterwards, and was blind of an eye, and
the big man is supposed to be "FIONN."

In Berneray, near Harris, a similar story is told of men still alive,
but it wants much of the marvellous element. The men, as it is said,
took a cargo from

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Stornoway to an island, supposed to be *Eilean
uaine*, the green isle. They sailed westwards, and left the cargo, part
of which was salt, got their money, and returned, after being required
by the inhabitants to shake off every particle of the dust of the island
which stuck to them.

There are many other stories current relative to these islands, "*Eilean
na h-oige*," and "*An t-Eilean uaine*," the island of youth, and the
green island, wherein Fionn is supposed still to dwell with his
warriors. <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)

Blessed were they who could get to this Celtic paradise; for were they
to land they would become as young as they were at twenty; fresh and
blooming, and without gray hairs, or wrinkles, or ailments. A more
comfortable and cheery habitation certainly this would be than the
MacPherson "Ossian's" cloud palaces and mist promenades; his railways of
moonshine rivalling Mahomet's narrow bridge across the gulf to

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

paradise, which, though not broader than a needle, the faithful trip
over safely. Although the ancient Hebrideans, subsequent to Norwegian
sway, were very good sailors, and sometimes very good pirates also, as
ransacked towns and villages on the mainland could well testify, they do
not seem to have been over fond of aerial voyages; but preferred to
stick to salt-water sailing, and chose rather to hope for a retreat in
some pretty green mythical western island than for lofty habitations in
the cold frosty regions of the upper air.

The traditional Fenian poems consist of pieces of various length,
[interspersed](errata.htm#5) through prose narration; both poems and
narration constituting what is usually Called "Eachdraidh na Feinne,"
the history of the Feinne. The prose narrative is varied, and consists,
at one time, of common conversational language, at another of measured
prose, a species of composition midway between prose and verse.
Explanations and genealogies are given in ordinary conversational
language, as well as other minor details; exciting circumstances are
delineated in a more rhetorical style, while the most momentous events,
such as are mainly connected with a great and important action, are
given in verse. The verse itself varies widely, and as the subject is
more elevated, it becomes more musical and metrical. The terms "*duan*,"
"*dan*," and "*laoidh*," are employed to distinguish the various kinds
from each other. The *laoidh* (lay) is the most musical, and is
generally sung to a simple, plaintive air. In the greatest number of
cases it describes a tragic event, the death of a hero, or some other
serious calamity. These poems are connected with each other by prose
narrative, and stories, so as to make something like one united whole of
the Fenian traditions. All these poems are of a narrative character,
dwelling almost entirely either on

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

human or superhuman action, and never referring either to animal or
inanimate nature further than it is connected with human passion,
sympathy, or interest. There are no long addresses to inanimate objects
of nature; neither are there any refined speculations on human life and
existence; there are no sentimental speeches on fame or glory. The men
of the ballads fight not for glory, but in defence of some disputed
right, or to avenge an insult, or to resist oppression, or to protect a
woman in distress.

In these lays, similes and metaphors are very sparingly used; but this
appears to result more from the intensity of interest belonging to the
subject, than the want of power on the part of the poet; as similes and
metaphors are very plentiful in these long epic tales which treat of
like subjects. This will appear readily on looking over "The Knight of
the Red Shield," No. LII., and "The Slim Swarthy Champion," No. XVII. C,
in the West Highland Tales. The language of the old ballads is exceeding
choice Gaelic, pure, idiomatic, chaste. There is no trace of Anglicism,
or of classic idiom; it is the Gaelic of the people, but still purer and
more elevated than that of common conversation, and with obsolete words
interspersed. Clearness and conciseness distinguish these from the great
mass of published Gaelic poems and songs; which bear evident marks of
belonging to more modern periods, both in language and matter, and whose
authors are known; very few of the more modern poems being at all
comparable to the ballads in these qualities. These later compositions
are frequently tautological, and profuse in epithets, abounding
sometimes in long tedious lists of adjectives or adverbs, which make
them look more like a vocabulary than a regular poem This is the case
with regard to the war song of

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the battle of Harlaw, composed about 1411; much of *Coire an easain*,
composed by the *Piobaire dall*, or blind piper; some of MacDonald's
Song to Summer; a large portion of his Moladh Moraig; much of Coire
Cheathaich by MacIntyre, and a large portion of his Beinn Dorain. In
these poems there are scarcely any words to be found borrowed from
English, and in this respect they form a strong contrast to all that has
been published of the works of Scoto-Gaelic poets who flourished from
the fifteenth century down to the present day. We find the word
*puthar*, power, in the songs of MacMhuirich, Clanranald's bard, who
lived in the seventeenth century. In the songs of Mari, nighean Alastair
Ruaidh (Mary, daughter of Alexander Roy) MacLeod of MacLeod's bard, we
find the English corruptions, *purpas*, purpose; *subsaint*, substance;
and yet her songs are, and justly, allowed to be written in very pure
Gaelic. The peacock figures as a simile also in one of her songs. In the
poems of John MacDonald, usually styled *Iain lom* (bare-faced John,
from his beardless face and impudence), who lived in the time of
Montrose in the seventeenth century, we meet with the words Lieutenant,
Lady Murray, Whitehall, adbhansa, *advance*; geard, *guard*. In the
songs of MacMhaighstir Alastair, who took an active part on the side of
Prince Charles in 1745, we find the words standard--moision, *motion*;
canain, *cannon*. In MacIntyre, who lived at the same time with
MacDonald, we meet with the words coitseachan, *coaches*; deasput,
*dispute*; phairti, *party*. Such words are not to be found in the
traditional poems ascribed to Ossian, or in those other pieces which
belong to the same class. But yet in every-day conversation nowadays, we
find such words as *chorner*, corner; *ghig*, gig; *dhisturbadh*,
disturbing; *phortmnanteau*, *trunk*,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

steamboat, *railroad*, *story*, *confoundadh*, *drainadh*,
*chaidsigeadh*, catching, and hundreds of other distorted English words
which hardly ever find their way into the old ballads, though constantly
used by the people who repeat them. Here then is a strong contrast
between these ancient poems, and the works of those who have been
considered the best bards of the Highlands for the last three
centuries. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

In comparing these ballads with the compositions of the more modern
bards, the dignified simplicity of the language of the former becomes
quickly apparent. Although their language, so far as regards inflection
and structure, is modern, yet there are words and phrases which appear
to be more ancient, and which are now obsolete, and these, as well as
the absence of English corruptions, distinguish them from all other
Scoto-Gaelic poetry; and with regard to peculiar phrases, and curious
antiquated words and expressions, they strongly resemble the popular
Gaelic tales.

The offensive weapons described are spears, "cranntabhaill" swords, and
darts; there is hardly an allusion to bows and arrows; few to
agriculture, to bread, corn, or to any kind of food, connected with an
agricultural life. The food described is the produce of the chase. Deer
and boars, and some species of deer which does not now exist, and which
is supposed to be the elk, "Lon," are the animals generally hunted; and
dogs are the only domestic animals frequently mentioned. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17)

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

These are mentioned with as much affection as Byron's dog--that animal,
so faithful and so true to man, which has never been convicted either of
treachery, insincerity, or ingratitude. Byron, Campbell, and the
traditional Ossian agree in this. The events related are at times
probable, at others improbable or impossible;

<span id="img_15500"></span>

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><img src="img/15500.jpg" alt="The ELK (Norse, ELG; Lapp, SARV), copied from &#39;&#39;The Natural History of Norway,&#39;&#39; by Pontoppidan, Bishop of Bergen. Gaelic, according to Armstrong, LON.&lt;/P&gt; &lt;P&gt;EILID, according to translators of the Bible, &#39;&#39;Ossian,&#39;&#39; and modern poets, means a hind or roe. " />
<br />
The ELK (Norse, ELG; Lapp, SARV), copied from ''The Natural History of Norway,'' by Pontoppidan, Bishop of Bergen. Gaelic, according to Armstrong, LON.
<p>EILID, according to translators of the Bible, ''Ossian,'' and modern poets, means a hind or roe.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

at times superhuman, at others human, which evidently tends to shew that
these poems unite many periods, and that probably they have embodied the
substance of more ancient poems. At times huge giants and weapons are
mentioned, such as--

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Bha seachd troidhean arm air liad,  
’S ochd troidhe diag air fad ann.

Seven feet was he in breadth,  
And in length he was eighteen feet.

A remarkable feature in these poems is the magnanimity and gallantry
which distinguish their heroes, though mixed with much barbarism and
fierceness. There is fair play given to the enemy; and when he is not
fighting with them, he is invited to their feast; if he falls in battle
he is honourably buried, and receives credit for his bravery; his memory
is cherished, esteemed, and loved, for his valorous deeds. Women are
always protected and treated with courtesy; nor is there the least hint
given that they were either kept in bondage, or doomed to slavery; on
the contrary, their wishes seem to have been considered as something to
be gratified, but never to be contradicted; and yet some of the women
who repeat such poems work hard as field labourers, and the men are of
the poorest classes.

In their ballads the incidents are few, but elevated, and the narration
flows along in an easy, simple, but dignified strain. No tedious
verbosity mars or interrupts the vigorous character of the poetic
stream. Rapidity seems to have been the chief aim of the ancient bards,
and the action rolls along like the impetuous torrents of their own
mountain country. There is no vagueness, no mistiness, no obscurity; the
action is as vividly clear to the mind's eye as the landscape is to the
eye itself on a bright summer day. The introduction is always abrupt and
simple, and this is the character of mostly all Scoto-Gaelic poetry; for
in this manner all known Gaelic bards, learned and unlearned,

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

begin their songs and lays. They invoke neither spirits or muses, but
begin at once. If these ballads do not abound in long sentimental
speeches, still genuine touches of true feeling are to be found most
exquisitely and tersely expressed. In a warlike age the passions are
strong, and not often under proper restraint. Strong attachments and
resentments belong to the men of such an age. They are by turns fiercely
cruel and nobly generous, but both their cruelty and their generosity
are manifested in acts rather than in words. That sentimentalism which
is rich in words and poor in deeds was but little known in those days.
There is a sentimentalism which is after all but a poor shadowy
substitute for genuine feeling. It showers oceans of tears on distress,
but will not move a hand to relieve it; it gives soft and commiserating
words to the needful, but clings firmly to its gold and silver; it
pities in sighs, but not in sovereigns. Sterne wrote the *Sentimental
Journey*, and lamented in dolorous strain over a dead ass, but he
allowed his poor old mother to pine away in prison, and advanced not a
stiver to procure her liberty. Though these lays are void of this
tinsel, they possess what is really more valuable--truthful delineation
of human nature, of lofty bravery, and of true and real feeling. Popular
poetry has no morbid sentiment, and the people are kind to each other.

Besides the ballads, which form part of what is usually called
"*Eachdraidh na Féinne*," the, history of the Feinn, there are numerous
traditional ballads and scraps of poetry similar to them in character,
which treat of giants, enchantments, and supernatural deeds; some which
treat of fairies, and fairy lovers; some of the loves of men and women.
Short passages, stanzas,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

and lines of poetry, ascribed to Ossian, are even still recited through
a great many parts of the Highlands, and tales about the Feinn,
interspersed with verse, are yet to be heard in many districts from old
men. There are very few old Highlanders that cannot even now say
something about Fionn and his heroes; how they fought and died.
Proverbs, old sayings, and puzzles, are connected with their names. A
proverb, which is heard at almost all convivial Highland meetings, is
"*Cha do dhi-chuimhnich Fionn fear a dheas laimh riamh*," Fionn never
forgot his right hand man. Rocks, hills, streams, and places are called
after the Feinne. Surnames are derived from them; such as MacDhiarmaid,
the son of Diarmaid; MacGhill Fhaolan, the son of the servant of Faolan
(MacLellan); MacGhill Earragain, the son of the servant of Earragan
(MacLergan); MacOisean, the son of Oisean; MacCuinn, the son of Conn
(MacQueen); and generally the Feinne and their exploits pervade all
Celtic Scotland and all Gaelic tradition.

If these poems be not ancient in substance, how is it that they differ
so widely from the works of the best of the modern Scoto-Gaelic bards?
How is it that they have not mixed up with other songs and poems? How is
it that guns, powder, and modern dresses have not crept in? How is it
that we have no lieutenants, captains, and colonels, dukes, marquises,
and earls amongst the Feinn? How is it that we have none of the
scriptural allusions and quotations which are scattered so plentifully
through the works of Gaelic poets in general? How is it that we have
nothing new in the ballads, while prose tales have altered with the age?
We might expect that modern poets would have armed Fionn with a musket,
or culverin; or even have made

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

him and his followers use cannon. I heard a story told of Fergus the
First, king of Scotland, in Barra, in which that ancient monarch was
armed with a gun; strange that the Barra people never thought of arming
Fionn and Diarmaid with one a-piece, more especially as these warriors
are much more popular in that island than Fergus the First.

Much of the groundwork of these ballads, as well as the substance of
many Fenian tales and traditions, are embodied in the Gaelic Ossian
published from MacPherson's manuscript, but there everything has
undergone an entire change. We have no longer the simplicity of the
traditional poems; smoothness of versification is almost entirely
wanting, and the idiom of the language is every now and then violated.
Inversions abound, such as we find in learned English poetry, and words
are so wrenched out of their general meaning, as to be unintelligible to
the generality of Highlanders; but while this is the case, there are but
few ancient or obsolete words. In this respect this Gaelic contrasts
with that of traditional ballads. The difficulty of understanding the
epic poems does not lie in ancient forms of speech, or in old obsolete
words, but in the strange liberty that is taken with words by using them
in quite a new way, and in arranging them in a manner that is
incomprehensible to those whose native language the Gaelic is, unless
they happen to know English, or some classical tongue. In many lines the
words only are Gaelic; the structure has nothing to do with that
language. The sentences may be English, or Latin, or Greek, may, in
fact, be specimens of a new universal language, but they are not Gaelic.
Vagueness and obscurity abound everywhere, and like the darkness of
night which makes hills and dales appear

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

like lofty mountains and deep ravines, these poems impress a person,
before he has examined what he has been reading, with something akin to
sublimity. Some lines prove to be nonsense when closely examined. Bad
grammar and violated idiom abound everywhere. Adjectives of more than
one syllable are placed before substantives, which is much the same as
if we were to say in English, "There is a horse beautiful; O what a
house elegant!"

Heroes always drink out of shells, lead a hunting life, and address one
another more like modern sages than barbarians. A teacher of ethics
could not be more sententious or moralizing than they are.

"Màile" for mail is a frequent term, but it is a mere English
corruption; *luireach* is the Gaelic word. On reading a line, containing
this word, to an acquaintance, he understood it to mean *màl*, the bag
of the bagpipes. This word does not occur in the popular poems, and is
hardly known to Highlanders in general, in the sense in which it is used
here. Endless passages might be quoted to illustrate the preceding
statements.

In Carthonn, page 55, occurs the line--

"Tri giubhais ag aomadh o'n torr."

This is exactly what might occur to a person translating the English
expression "three firs," but no name of any species of wood is ever used
in Gaelic to designate a tree; we must say--

"Tri craobha giubhais," three fir trees, and so with other trees. It is
bad Gaelic to say--

"An cluaran glas air chrom. nan càrn."

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

The green thistle on the bend of the cairns; for "crom" is never used as
a substantive, and means "bent."

"Mall ag aomadh mu uaigh an t-seòid."

(Slow inclining about the grave of the hero) is bad Gaelic. "*Mall*" in
this line would require "*gu*" before it to make it an adverb, and good
Gaelic.

"Tha mo chlaidheamh crith mhosgladh gu cheann."

My sword is shaking waking to its hilt. This line, as printed, is
nonsense, but the idea of a sword quivering and awaking is good, and a
small change would make the line Gaelic.

In "*Gaol nan daoine*," page 75, the following line occurs:--

"Gu Selma nan lan-bhroilleach òigh."

"Lan-bhroilleach" is here placed before the substantive, which is
incorrect, and very bad Gaelic; the term is altogether very awkward, for
were we to say, "nan òigh làn-bhroilleach," it might convey the meaning
of a maiden full of breasts, instead of full-breasted; but there is a
Gaelic expression commonly used to convey the idea intended.

"Dh' aom a shleagh ri carraig nan cos" is bad.

"Aom" implies motion into an inclined position, and this line means "his
spear toppled towards the rock of crannies," not "his spear leant
against a mossy rock," which the context shews was the intended meaning.

In p. 108 of Fingal occurs the line--

"Cuchullin nan gorm-bhallach sgiath."

Cuchullin of the shields blue spotted, which arrangement of words
violates Gaelic idiom.

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

Duan 4th, p. 264 of Tighmora--

"Thainig i le suilibh caoin,  
A measg chiabh a bha taomadh gu trom."

"She came with mild eyes among locks that were pouring out heavily."
These lines make no sense either in English or in Gaelic, but they are
intended to describe mild eyes amongst *flowing* locks.

Tighmora Duan 7, p. 507-

"Tha 'n speur an losgadh nan reul," means--

"The sky is in the burning of the stars," but is probably intended to
mean that the sky is *in a blaze* with stars.

Carthonn, p. 63.

"Chunnaic oigh Dan uchd glana na tréin," means--

"The maiden of the clean chests saw the heroes."

"Thaom iadsa' chéile 's a' bhlàr," means, to a modern Highland ear,
"They poured themselves out into each other in the battle."

These are a few examples of passages which seem to me obscure, improper,
or nonsensical; they might be multiplied considerably.

The language of the printed Ossian of 1807 differs entirely from that of
the traditional ballads now ascribed to Ossian; it differs entirely from
that of other published Scoto-Gaelic poetry, except Dr. Smith's Sean
Dana, Mordubh, and a few other pieces published by Gillies, Stewart,
MacCallum, etc., and the language appears to be more tinged with foreign
idioms even than Sean Dana, or any other Gaelic publication which I have
read, Mordubh and some modern translations from English only excepted;
it differs entirely from Gaelic as spoken at present in the Highlands;
and it differs entirely from that of the Irish Ossianic poems

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

which have been published by the Irish Ossianic Society. All these have
a common bond, a common idiom, a common structure, though they differ in
minutiae, and the common general idiom is seldom violated by any of
these.

Lastly, the Gaelic of 1807 differs from any specimens of ancient Gaelic
which I have seen, but, there are some passages in it which strike me as
good specimens of Gaelic and of poetry.

On examining other Gaelic poetry which has been published, it will be
observed that it undergoes a gradual change in character from the more
modern to the more ancient. The style and language alter as poems recede
from the present day, and as it may be of some interest to the English
reader to know something of this class of Gaelic poetry, it may not be
out of place to give a short account of some few of the best known
bards, and of a few of their works which bear upon Ossian.

We have Gaelic bards even in our. own day, and these describe the life
and manners which they observe around them-the dress, arms, food, drink
and habits of the day. Peasant bards are by no means extinct in the
Highlands, and if their composition be not poetry of any great merit,
they generally contain good sense and sprightly humour couched in pretty
smooth verse. Almost every Highland district has even yet a bard who
enjoys a fair amount of renown in his own neighbourhood, and among his
own class. Hector Boyd, who narrated to me so many tales, is reputed a
bard in Barra; in North Uist, Christian Macdonald, of whom I received
several tales, is highly esteemed as a poetess. I was recommended to
call on a man near Stornoway who is rather famous in Lewis, and whose

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

name reached me even in Barra, a hundred miles away I know some even in
my own neighbourhood in Islay though I have been told somewhere that
Islay never produced a bard. To this I replied, that probably that was
because the calling was not now respected there; as a proverb current in
the island would lead us to infer:--

"Bàrd, a's ceàrd, a's filidh."

A bard, a tinker, and a musician, which is the meaning of these words in
Islay now.

In examining the works of modern Gaelic bards, we find that figures and
phrases, nay entire verses, have been, considered common property. The
same similes and phrases are used by all; and sometimes a new song is
but an old one with new names and a few alterations. An old song seems
to have been considered good material for a new one, exactly as the
stones of an old house are taken to erect another, and Druidical circles
are broken up to make farm-steadings.

It was quite a custom in the Highlands, and that not long ago, to meet
for the purpose of composing, verses. These were often satirical, and
any one who, happened not to be popular, was fixed upon for a subject.
Each was to contribute his stanza, and whoever failed to do his part was
fined. Whenever a verse happened to be composed that was pretty smooth
and smart, it took well, as might be expected, and spread far and wide
like ill-natured satire elsewhere. An exact counterpart of this custom
prevailed among the ancient Icelanders, many of whom were descended from
men: who emigrated from the islands where the custom still survives. The
Burning of "Njal," whose name is now a common one in the Highlands, and
is pronounced

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

nearly according to the English value of these letters, took place in
1011, and many of the tragical events recorded in the "Njal Saga" grew
out of a ballad composed and sung at a meeting of neighbours in the
house of Gunnar of Litherende. <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)

Stanzas were at times added to old songs, and others were altered, but
such alterations were not often successful, as old men and knowing
critics objected. It was only when they possessed superior merit that
they passed current; but as the Highlanders have a great veneration for
their old ballads, any alterations made upon *them* gave offence, and
were rejected with indignation. This spirit must have helped to preserve
these.

Recent Gaelic songs describe the manners of our own times, the dresses,
arms, and professions of the day, but allude to past ages, and often
mention the Feinne as well-known heroes.

Among the latest bards, some of whose work have been published in the
"Beauties of Gaelic Poetry," is DONALD MACDONALD, who was born in
Strathmore, Ross-shire, in the year 1780, and who died of cholera in
1832. Two of his songs only are published, one to Napoleon Buonaparte,
and another to his sweetheart. In the song to his sweetheart, figure the
words *parson* and *seisoin*. It is full of amorous sentiment; he must
die without his sweetheart; the silver of Europe and the gold of Egypt
would not avail without her.

The song to Buonaparte begins in rather a lofty strain; the bard stands
on the pavement of Edinburgh and sees the banners flaming in the sun; he
hears the guns, and he stays listening to them; he hears the echo of the
rocks replying to them with joy; he hears music

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

in every house; he sees bonfires on the hills. It is heard from the
*gasaidean* (gazettes), read everywhere, that Buonaparte had to fly.
Righ Deorsa, Cæsar and his legions, the most of the Highland clans, the
ten plagues of Egypt, Fontenoi, Morair Hundaidh, Diuc Earraghael, Diuc
Mhontrose, Hanobher, chomannda (command), retreat, are names and words
that embellish this modern Gaelic lay.

ALEXANDER MACKINNON is another bard that was nearly contemporary with
the preceding. He was born in Morar, Arisaig, in the year 1770, served
in the 92d regiment, and fought in the battle of Alexandria, where he
received three severe wounds, which disabled him for any future service.
He died at Fort-William in 1814, at the age of 44. His songs are
composed on the army, and on the battles fought between the French and
British. He is extremely fluent in language, and his verse is very
smooth. He seems to have been desirous of writing pure Gaelic, and
avoiding English words; for Sydney Smith is called Mac a Ghobha, Smith's
son; but for all that we have *comisari*. He compares Abercrombie to
Fionn--not Fingal:

"Mar Fhionn a' mosgladh sluaigh,"  
Like Fionn arousing hosts.

The names Alexandria, Aboukir, Abercrombie, occur. Sasunn, England, is
mentioned as a place,

"Far am faigh sin leann am pailteas."  
Where we shall get ale in plenty.

The poet describes the shock of battle with graphic vividness, and
speaks like an eye-witness.

The style of EWAN MACLACHLIN, though he was classically educated, and
composed in four languages,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

does not differ much from that of the other Gaelic bards; whom he seems
to imitate closely. Though he helped to prepare the Gaelic Ossian for
the press, and transcribed many old manuscripts into the Roman hand, he
has taken very good care, not to imitate the Gaelic of the Ossian of
1807, in the least, in his songs. These are composed in pure and
beautiful Gaelic; though, like the most of the Gaelic bards, he indulges
in excess of epithets, many of his lines consisting of strings of
adjectives or adverbs. *Phœbus*, *Bhenus* and Eolus lent their aid to
the well-instructed classical Gaelic bards, as they do to the classical
bards of other countries. Though the poet apparently has endeavoured to
keep English out as much as possible, still he has failed, for a few
English words have entered, such as *pacar*, will be packed; *sign*, for
one of the signs of the Zodiac.

JOHN SHAW, Loch Nell's bard, was born 1758, and died 1828. Among his
songs is one to Fionnla Marsanta, Finlay the merchant, who seems to have
had some antiquarian taste and who dug up some old Druidical burying
places, Carn nan Druidhneach, the Druid's Cairn. Of this act the poet
expresses his disapprobation, and denounces Finlay for his conduct in
very bitter words. There is a song to Buonaparte, whom the bard defies
in strong language, enumerating the brave soldiers that were to meet him
on British ground, and telling the hero of Marengo how he was to be
treated; by--

"Na shracas t-eanchainn agus t-fheoil,"  
Those who will rend thy brain and thy flesh.

A very pretty love song is also amongst his compositions.

We have in the song of Finlay a description of blasting

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

rocks with gunpowder, which seems to have a double meaning.

"Bhi cuir fudair anns na creagan,  
Chuireadh e eagal air bòcain  
Bhi gan tolladh leis an tora,  
’S bhi gan sparradh leis na h-òrdan."

"Putting powder into rocks,  
It would terrify the bogles  
To bore them with the jumper,  
To be driving them with hammers."

Tobacco comes in also--

"Tha Dughall trom air an tombaca."  
Dugald is heavy on the tobacco.

The narrators of stories and reciters of verses in the Highlands are
generally fond of the weed; one storyteller makes a raven chew tobacco;
but no reciter of Fenian poetry ever makes Fionn, Diarmaid, or Goll use
the weed in any shape. The following English corruptions occur in the
songs of this bard--bhaigeir (beggar); bhlastidh (blasting), fudair
(powder), reisimeid (regiment), volunteers; and the dress of the
volunteers of that period is concisely and graphically described.
Boinneidean, bonnets; cotaichean sgarlaid, scarlet coats; suaicheantas
an righ, the king's arms; cocard de dh' ite 'n eoin, cockade of the
bird's feather; and this is a true description of the dress of that
period.

There is an allusion to a well-known weapon of a preceding age which had
fallen into disuse, to the poet's regret;--for he says--

"’S na 'm biodh againn mar bu dual duinn,  
Lann chinn Ilich air ar cruachain, <span id="page_169">p. 169</span>  
A sgoltadh an ceann gan guaillean,  
Ga 'm bualadh le smuais nan dorn."

O had we as we ought to have  
Islay-hilted blades upon our thighs,  
Could cleave their heads down to the chin,  
To smite them with the pith of fists.

ALLAN MACDOUGALL, Ailean dall, was born 1750, and died 1829. One of his
songs is to Glengary, "Luchd bhreacan an fheilidh." Those of the tartan
dresses (now called belted plaids) are mentioned as those that would
rise with Glengary their chief. "Fuaim fheadan," the sound of chanters,
and "binneas theud," the melody of strings, are mentioned as pleasing to
the chief, who therefore enjoyed pipe music, and that of stringed
instruments. In his songs to the shepherds, who were not favourites with
the poet, he says of them that they have a Lowland screech in their
throats crying after their dogs, and earnestly desires to keep them out,
and not let their nose in, the reason being given in the following
lines:--

Bho nach cluinnear aca *stori*,  
Ach craicinn agus cloimh ga reic,  
Cunntadh na h-aimsir, 's gach uair  
Ceannach nan uan mu 'n teid am breith."

Since no tale is heard with them,  
But of skins and wool to sell,  
Telling the seasons and every weather,  
Buying the lambs before they are born.

\[paragraph continues\] This, then, was not an age of pastoral Gaelic
poetry, and the poet seems to have foreseen what has happened.

The poet has a song to whisky also, in which he

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

dwells on the wonderful virtues of that drink like a man who likes it.
"It is delightful music to hear its murmur coming out of the stoup,
heaping the cuach; excellent to excite to dancing in the winter time; it
would make an old man hold up his head; it will make a soldier of the
coward; it will bring out conversation at meeting and assembling; it is
an unblundering physician; the children of the Gael have no disease or
ailment that it will not heal." But there is another song composed to
drunkenness, in which the serious effects of the favourite cordial are
very feelingly expressed. The whole drinking bout is delineated with
great animation. The man loses his strength; his sight fails; coming
home in the dark he falls on his back in the midden. Morning brings
disgrace; his breast is in flames, the rest carrying him home, believing
all the time he was strong; till at last he had lost his wits. After
this come reflections on the folly of drinking and of emptying the
purse. So modern Gaelic bards have been given to moralizing, and
jollity, war, and love-making, but so far there is nothing in their
compositions like the Fenian ballads, or the sentimental poems
concerning their heroes whose authors are unknown.

WILLIAM ROSS was born in- Broadford, parish of Strath, Isle of Skye,
1762; and died in 1790. He was grandson, by the mother's side, to
another celebrated bard, known as the blind piper. At school he studied
the classical languages, and in his songs the polish of the man of
education may be traced, as his style is refined and cultivated, though
remarkably natural and easy. The reader may perceive, without much
difficulty, that he exerted his utmost endeavour to write his native
language with purity and elegance. In his poetry we trace something like
the gay, amorous strain of Moore,

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

though not his richness of fancy; the spirit of the classical poets may
be readily traced in his verses. Some passages in his love songs are
real gems, the force of the following lines could not easily be rendered
in translation:--

Tha deirge 's gile,  
Co-mhire gleachdanaich,  
Na gnùis ghil éibhinn  
Rinn ceudan airtneulach."

The following gives the idea, but the spirit is gone:--

"In her fair blythesome face, which has made hundreds long and grieve
for love, the red and white are sporting with each other, and gently
struggling for mastery."

The Gaelic diminutives, which make this verse so pretty, have no English
equivalents.

He composed an elegy on the death of Prince Charles, whom he calls "An
suaithneas bàn," the white badge. This elegy shows how deep the feeling
of attachment to that unfortunate scion of an unfortunate house, had
sunk into the hearts of the poet and his countrymen. The following are a
couple of stanzas from this pathetic poem:--

Nis cromaidh na cruitearan grinn  
Am barraibh dhos fo sprochd an cinn;  
Gach beò bhiodh ann an strath na 'm beinn  
A’ caoidh an co'-dhosgainn leinn.  
Tha gach beinn gach cnoc, 's gach sliabh,  
Air am faca sinn thu triall,  
Nis air call an dreach 's am fiamh,  
O nach tig thu chaoidh nan cian."

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

Now the sweet lyrists will bow  
Their heads on the tree-tops in woe;  
All that live on hill or plain  
Their common loss with us bewail.  
Every hill, and mount, and moor,  
Upon which we saw thee move,  
Now have lost their sheen and beauty,  
For thou wilt not come back for aye.

This differs widely from the spirit and metre of Ossian, both
traditional and published.

The Highland dress is a favourite theme with Ross, as with other Gaelic
bards. In a song, which fits the music of a reel, he rejoices over the
Act of Parliament which repealed the Act forbidding the national
costume, and gives a glimpse of Highland manufactures, which still
survive in spite of spinning jennies. He says-

Thainig fasan anns an Achd  
A dh' ordaich pailt am féileadh;  
Tha éridh air na breacanan  
Le farum treun neo-lapanach.  
Bidh oighean thapaidh sniomh 's a dath,  
Gu h-éibhinn ait le uaill;  
Gach aon diu 'g eideadh a gaoil fein  
Mar 's réidh le' anns gach uair."

A fashion has come with the Act  
That ordered kilts in plenty;  
There's raising of the tartan plaid  
With dexterous busy noise.  
Smart maidens now will spin and dye,  
With mirth and fun and pride;  
Each one adorning her own true love  
As always is her joy.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

This bard has also a song to whisky, and another to "Macnabracha," the
son of malt. Whisky is drink, par excellence, which would raise the mind
to politeness; and not "druaib na Frainge," the trash of France, by
which he means wine; it will make the maidens speak, however modest; it
will put gentleness in the boy; it will make the carl amorous. An t-Olla
MacIain, Dr. Johnson, according to the bard, took a glass of it himself,
notwithstanding his Greek and Latin, and thereby impaired the power of
his tongue.

"Dh' fhàg mac na bracha e gun lide,  
Na amadan liotach dall."

Mac malt has made him speechless,  
A thick-speaking blinded fool.

Classical names are interspersed through all his compositions, while
Greek and Roman deities are favourites. Phœbus gilds the mountains,
Flora covers each hill and dale with flowers; his sweethearts have all
the qualities of Diana; Cupid throws his arrows with a lavish hand, the
flames excited by the love-god are to be quenched only by yielding to
Venus and Apollo; and the nine play their part. But English corruptions
are not to be found, and the Gaelic is very pure and correct. Ross is
not so profuse in epithets as the other poets, but he has enough to be
in character with them.

DUNCAN MACINTYRE was born in Glenorchy 1724, and died in Edinburgh in
1812. The first of his ballads is composed to the battle of Falkirk,
fought between the royal forces and the Highlanders who joined Prince
Charles. The battle is described with very great graphic power; and
though the bard fought upon the royal side,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

it is evident, from his song, that the Prince, and those who followed
him, had a warm corner in his heart. His own flight, and that of his
party, is told so as to lead us to think that he was not at all
displeased with the result. "As a dog," he tells us, "chases sheep while
they are running down the face of a glen, <span
id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19) so were they scattered on our side;" the
horse of the enemy were well shod, well bridled, and marked out for
murder. Moreover, be tells us also--

"Bha ratreud air luchd na Beurla;  
’S ann daibh fein a b' éiginn teicheadh."

The outlandish speakers retreated;  
It was they who had to flee.

Another song of his is composed to the musket, in which he personifies
that weapon, calling it his sweetheart, and enumerating all its good
qualities. "Seonaid" (Janet) is her name, and "George" is her
grandfather. In Gaelic there are but two genders, so that every
inanimate object is personified in ordinary speech, hence formal
personification is seldom found in the poetry of the language. The poet
tells that he scours his musket himself, and puts oil on it; that he
puts it to his eye, and that it will not miss fire; it will keep him in
drink in the alehouses, and it will pay each stoup that he buys; it will
keep him in clothes and linen; so that he may lay the cares of the world
aside.

One of the longest of his pieces is "Beinn Dorain," which is very much
admired. It imitates a pibroch, and the stanzas vary exactly as the
pibroch does; some of them being in a slow, and others in a quick

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

measure. The poet is very happy in his verse, which is exceedingly
smooth and fluent. This poem is entirely descriptive. Whatever is
interesting about this mountain, which gained so much of his admiration,
is given with great minuteness. The wood, the deer, the hunt, the wild
flowers, and herbs, are portrayed with great vividness; still there is
an excess of epithets, which is tedious. MacDonald composed a piece of
the same kind previous to this, which Macintyre has imitated; but, in
fact, the measure is but a mere extension of the poetical parts of the
long heroic tales which were in those days, and still are, so abundant
in every district of the Highlands. The measured prose of those tales
resembles a pibroch, as may be seen by glancing at the tale of "The Slim
Swarthy Champion," W. H. Tales, vol. i. "Coire cheathaich" is a
beautiful descriptive poem, full and circumstantial, but less tedious
than Beinn Dorain.

The following specimen will give an idea of this species of poetry,
though translation cannot convey the original vigour of the reader:--

"Tha bradan tarra-gheal 's a' choire gharbhlaich,  
Tha tigh'n o'n fhairge bu ghailbheach tonn;  
Le luinneis mheamnach a' ceapadh mheanbh-chuileag,  
Gu neo-chearbach le cham-ghob crom;  
Air bhuinne borb, is e leum gu foirmeil;  
'Na eideadh colgail bu ghorm-glas druim;  
Le shoillsean airgid, gu h-iteach, meana-bhreac  
Gu lannach, dearg-bhallach, earr-gheal sliom."

There's a white-bellied salmon in the rough grassy corry,  
Coming from the sea of the wild raging waves; <span id="page_176">p.
176</span>  
With stalwart leapings catching the little flies,  
Unfailingly, with his bent crook'd nose.  
In the raging current as he leaps so cheerily,  
In his gallant array of the blue-gray back,  
With his silvery spangles well finned, and fine spotted,  
Scale-i-ly, red-spotted, white-tailed, and slim.

This is genuine Gaelic poetry of a man who could read nature, though he
could not read books; and his countrymen have done well to erect a
monument to Duncan Macintyre near his favourite glens, at the head of
Loch Awe.

In one of his love songs is the expression "Deud gheal *iobhraidh*,"
white ivory teeth; while his own occupation of huntsman is portrayed for
us in the following lines:--

"Mharbhainn duit geòidh,  
A's ròin, a's eala,  
’S na h-eòin air bharraibh nan geug."

I'd kill for thee geese,  
And seals, and the swan,  
And the birds on the tops of the twigs.

In his song to the Black Highland Watch, in which the bard beautifully
delineates the exploits of that regiment, they are mentioned as dressed-

"Le 'n osanan breaca  
’S le 'm breacana 'n fhéil,"

with chequered hose and with belted plaids; armed with "glas lann," gray
blade; "’s an dag," and the pistol,

"Gan tearmunn nan sgéith,"  
Without protection of shields, <span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

"Le 'n gunnacha glana,"  
With their glancing guns,

"Spoir ur air an teannadh  
Gu daingeann nan gleus,"

new flints tightened firmly in their locks; biodagach, daggered;
fudarach, supplied with powder; adharcach, supplied with
powder-horns; <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) so he describes the
dresses which he saw; but, yet, in a song composed in praise of the
Marquis of Breadalbane, occur the lines--

"’S tu thog na ciadan  
A shliochd nam Fianntan;"

It is thou who hast raised hundreds  
Of the offspring of the Fenians;

from which it appears that the poet considered his countrymen to be the
descendants of the Ossianic heroes.

He has a song to breeches, in which he complains sadly of being obliged
to wear them; the tightness about the knees he considers extremely
inconvenient.

"Putanan na glùinean,  
As bucalan gan dùnadh,"

Buttons in its knees,  
And buckles enclosing them.

Like Ross, Macintyre rejoiced at having the dress of his country
restored, and at being no longer obliged to wear-

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

Cota ruigeadh an t-sàil,  
Cha tigeadh e daicheil duinn."

A coat that would reach the heel  
It would not become us well.

Chuir sinn a' bhrigis air làr,  
’S cha d' thig i gu bràth a cùil."

We have laid down the "breegis" on earth,  
She will never come out of the nook.

Then comes something more agreeable--

"Osan nach ceangail ar ceum,  
’S nach ruigeadh mar reis an glùn."

Hose that bind not our stride,  
That reach not the knee by a span.

The Highland dress is a principal theme with all the bards that
flourished at the same period with Macintyre. They grieve deeply for
being deprived of it; praise it as the finest, the most becoming, and
the most convenient of all garbs. Breeches, black hats, and long coats,
are made the subjects of keen satire; and the bard taxes all his wits to
make the lowland dress the most ludicrous and the most contemptible that
can be conceived. Like other poets of the same period Macintyre composed
bacchanalian songs, mostly in praise of whisky, but there is one to
brandy, from which it appears that the Gaelic poet by no means coincided
with Burns in his opinion of this drink, for he does not call it burning
trash, but praises it.

In his "Moladh Dhun-Eideann," the praise of Edinburgh, the appearance of
the city, and the dress of the period, are described by the poet in his
happiest manner,--

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

"’S iomadh fleasgach nasal ann  
A bha gu suairce, grinn:  
Fudar air an gruagan," etc.

Of the ladies he says--

"*Stoise* air na h-ainnirean  
Gan teannachadh gu h-ard."

"Buill mhais air eudainn bhoidheach."

"Brog bhiorach, dhionach, chothromach,  
’S bu chorrach leam a sàil."

Many a gentle youth was there  
That was polite and kind,  
Powder upon their hair, etc.  
           \_\_\_\_\_

Stays upon the demoiselles,  
To tighten them above.  
           \_\_\_\_\_

Beauty spots on pretty faces.  
           \_\_\_\_\_

Shoe pointed, tight and elegant,  
And tottering seemed the heel.

There is no gas mentioned, for there was none; but what there was the
bard tells--

"Bidh lochrainn ann de ghloineachan,  
A 's coinneal anns gach ait."

There will be lanterns of glasses there,  
And a candle in every place.

"Clous na Parlamaid"--the Parliament Close--occurs.

So Macintyre described what he saw, in good Gaelic verse, which fits the
music of his time, and alluded to

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

the Ossianic heroes as to something well known to everything, though of
a past age.

ROBERT MACKAY, a native of Sutherland, usually called *Rob donn*,
Brown-haired Robert, was born in the year 1714, and died 1778. His
Gaelic is full of English words, but there is no trace of English idiom.
Among his songs is one in praise of Prince Charles, in which the prince
is compared to Solomon in wisdom, to Samson in strength of hands, and to
Absalom in beauty. There is a song, but not one of praise, to long black
coats, "Oran nan casagan dubha." Mackay is one of the keenest of Gaelic
satirical poets. The following English corruptions are found in his
songs--*line*, parlamaid (parliament), pension, sergent, *chomision*
(commission), *choilair* (collar), gabharment
([government](errata.htm#6)), *prise* (prize), *strainsearan*
(strangers), *tric* (trick), *ranc* (rank), *fhine* (fine), bhataillean
(battalion), election, *chomrad* (comrade). While all these English
words have crept into this bard's composition, his Gaelic is, at the
same time, strictly grammatical and idiomatic. The only allusion to the
Feinn in his songs, is in the case of a servant whom he has nick-named
Faolan, but that is enough to shew that he knew about the Feinne.

LACHLAN MACPHERSON of STRATHMASIE, was born in the year 1723, and died
in the latter end of the eighteenth century. Four songs of his are
published in the "Beauties of Gaelic Poetry," and some are in Gillies.
One is a lament for Hugh MacPherson of Cluny; one is a coarse satire on
drunkenness; another, called "A' Bhanais Bhàn, " the white wedding, is a
very humorous song, in which a newly-married couple, well advanced in
years, are the subject; another to breeches, is rather indelicate. The
language of MacPherson is entirely free from English words or
corruptions; it is

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

pure, grammatical, and idiomatic, whatever the ideas may be. The
character of his poetry is that of the other popular bards, and bears
not the least resemblance to that of the Ossian of 1807. In his lament,
to Cluny he introduces the nine muses. The following is a specimen of
his verse, from the White Wedding--

Labhair fear na bainse féin,  
Tha dath airgeid oirnn gu léir;  
Ciod an cron tha oirnn fo'n ghréin  
Mar dean fear beurra rann oirnn?"

The bridegroom he spoke up himself,  
We are all of a silvery hue;  
What ails us beneath the sun,  
Unless a ribald rhyme us?

It is said that a copy of the seventh book of Temora, in Gaelic, still
exists in the handwriting of this bard, with all manner of corrections
written in. The Gaelic of the seventh book, as published, is very
different indeed from Strathmashie's songs, and it is hard to believe
that he was the author of Ossian. There is no peculiarity in the idiom
of the songs to countenance this theory, which has been adopted by many.

JOHN MACCODRUM was noted in his day for his knowledge of the Fenian
poems. Sir James MacDonald of Sleat, in a letter to Dr. Blair of
Edinburgh, dated Isle of Skye, 10th October 1763, says of him., "I have
heard him repeat, for hours together, poems which seemed to me to be the
same with MacPherson's translations."

MacPherson met him on his way to Benbecula, and asked him, "Am bheil dad
agad air an Fheinn?" This mode of putting the question is fully as
ambiguous as

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

many passages of the Gaelic Ossian of 1807, for it may mean either, Do
the Feinn owe thee anything? or, Dost thou know anything about them? The
bard considered. it a fit subject for his humour, and replied, "Cha'n
'eil, is ged do bhitheadh cha ruiginn a leas iarraidh nis." "No; and
though they did (owe me anything) it would be vain to ask it now." The
poet's banter rather wounded MacPherson's dignity, so he cut short the
conversation and proceeded. If the people of Uist were the same race
then that they are now, a collector of MacPherson's temper would have
very little chance of obtaining either poems or stories, though they
were as, "plentiful as blackberries in August;" for whoever expects to
be, successful in getting stories there, must cultivate patience and
good humour, take a joke and make one; and, if he does that, he may be
assured that he can get plenty of fun, as well as wit as brilliant and
sparkling as he could meet with in Green Erin, *provided he understands
Gaelic*. There is a lampoon composed by this bard to the bagpipe of one
Domhnull bàn, Fair-haired Donald, which is exceedingly humorous, and in
which he says--

"Shearg i le tabhunn  
Seachd cathan nam Fiantan."

It withered with yelping  
The seven Fenian battalions.

But he says, that the Gael loved the pipes as Edinburgh people ti (tea),
though this old and execrable pipe had weakened for the first time--

"Neart Dhiarmaid a's Ghuill."  
The strength of Diarmaid and of Goll.

Turcaich, Turks, *Gearmailtich*, Germans, *Frangaich*,

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Frenchmen, figure in this bard's verses.
Scripture names are frequent. The names, Righ Phrussia, King of Prussia;
Troidhe, Troy; Roimhe, Rome, are also found.

So this bard noticed the small circumstances which mark the manners of
his own time, such as the tea-drinking of Edinburgh, and referred to the
national music of the Highlands; and to the old heroes as equally well
known.

ALEXANDER MACDONALD was born in the beginning of the eighteenth century.
He joined Prince Charles in 1745, and many of his songs are composed in
praise of the prince and of his cause. His language is exceedingly
vigorous, and his poetry is impassioned. Classical names, as well as
English words, are freely used, but there is not the least trace of
classical imitation in his style, which is as characteristically Gaelic
as can be. His songs begin in the same abrupt, simple manner, as those
of the most illiterate bards do; and, like the most illiterate of them,
he is guilty of an excess of epithets. His pieces composed to nature are
purely descriptive. There is one long poem, composed to a ship,
remarkable for the manner in which it brings out the power of the poet,
and the conspicuousness of the language. Much of this bears a strong
resemblance to the description of the sailing of boats in Gaelic tales.
The bagpipe he prefers to the harp, which he calls *Ceol nionag*,
maiden's music. Whisky and the national garb have received his greatest
attention.

Phœbus does good work for the bard, Eolus will send good strong winds,
and Neptune will smooth the ocean. Mars is also busy. Venus and Dido are
equalled by his beauties. Telesgop (telescope), sign Chancer, sign
Thaurus, Thropic, Chapricorn, Gemini, Mars, *puimp* (pomp), are terms
that occur. Bacchus does not pass

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

without notice either, for mention is made of "Altair Bhachuis," the
altar of Bacchus. Scripture names are frequent. In this respect this
bard differs from those who composed the Ossianic poems.

JOHN MACKAY, usually called "Am Piobaire dall, "the Blind Piper, native
of Gairloch, Ross-shire, was born in the year 1666, and died in 1754.
His versification differs considerably from that of the bards of the
eighteenth century being a good shade nearer to that of the Fenian
poems. The language also seems to be a good deal older than that of
MacDonald or his contemporaries. He makes several allusions to the
Ossianic heroes

"Mar Oisian an deigh nam Fiann,"  
Like Oisian after the Fiann.

"Mac righ Sorcha, sgiath nan arm,  
Gur h-e b' ainm dha Maighre borb."

King of Sorcha's son, shield of the arms,  
That his name was Maighre borb--

which-is a quotation from an old ballad which is still repeated.

"’S dh' imich o Fhionn a bhean fhéin; "  
And his own wife went off from Fhionn;

which alludes to the story of Graidhne.

Scripture words abound, such as "Gu'm beannaiche Dia," may God bless;
"beannachd Dhé," the blessing of God.

The Gaelic of this bard is idiomatic, and not a single English word is
to be found in his poems. In his "Coire an Easain," are strings of
epithets, which peculiarity, as has been already observed, pervades the
compositions of all the known modern Gaelic bards,

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

The drinking vessel mentioned is *corn*, a horn, and the drink, wine,
not whisky.

RODERICK MORISON, commonly called "An Clarsair dall," the Blind Harper,
a native of Lewis, was born in the year 1646, and died at an advanced
age. His Gaelic is altogether free from English words and idioms, but is
less ancient in structure than that of Mackay, the blind piper. Drinking
is mentioned, but the kind of drink is not named. The word *stóp*,
stoup, occurs. The following terms relating to the Christian religion
are found:--*La Caisge*, Easter Day; "*Seachduin na Ceusda*," the week
of the Crucifixion; "*Dhireadh a' Charbhais*," the end of Lent; and
these mark the existence of Catholicism.

LACHLAN MACKINNON, native of Skye, flourished in the middle of the
seventeenth century. His language is remarkably pure, and without the
least trace of foreign idiom; nor is there an English word to be met
with in his verses. In a song composed in praise of a young lady,
"Diarmaid" is alluded to--

"Fhuair thu 'n iosad buaidh o Dhiarmaid,  
Tha cuir ciad an geall ort."

Thou gotst in loan a gift from Diarmaid,  
That puts a hundred in pledge to thee.

\[paragraph continues\] This alludes to the beauty spot on Diarmaid's
brow, which no woman could see without loving him.

In a satirical song on a certain dagger, the following reference is made
to the enchantment of the Feen, W. H. Tales (XXXVI.):--

"Bu mhath 's a' bhruthainn chaorainn i,  
'S an coannag nam, fear mor;  
'S e Fionn thug dh' i an latha sin,  
At t-ath-bualadh na dhorn."

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

Good was it in the Rowan burg,  
And in the big men's strife;  
It was Fionn who gave it on that day,  
The next stroke in his fist.

The next stanza tells how many men Fionn slew on the occasion; so the
poet implies that the dirk in question was a weapon of the time of the
Feinne. "Breacan" and "Feíle," tartan plaid and kilt, are mentioned as
the dress worn by the Highland chiefs of the poet's time.

NEIL CURRIE, native of South Uist, was born in the beginning of the
seventeenth century, and was an old man in the year 1717. In the few
pieces of his which are published, we have an insight into the manners
of the time. There is the word "*puthar*," from the English word power.
Brandy, French wines, and wax candles, are spoken of as luxuries with
which the bard was familiar at the house of his chief. Among the musical
instruments mentioned, are the bagpipes and the fiddle. No allusion is
made to beer or whisky.

JOHN MACDONALD, usually called Iain Lom, lived in the reigns of Charles
I. and II. and died at an advanced age, about the year 1710. His
language is full of English corruptions, but is fairly grammatical; yet,
upon the whole, in smoothness and elegance of expression be falls far
short of a great number of the other bards. As a satirist he has no
rival. Scripture names are very frequent in his pieces.

MARY MACLEOD, native of Harris, was born in the year 1569, and died at
the advanced age of 105. Her language and verse are remarkably fluent
and easy. English words abound, but the idiom is very pure. The harp,
chess, and the tales of the Feinne, are mentioned as amusements common
in MacLeod's castle. The bow

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

is spoken of as an offensive weapon then in use, while fire-arms,
targets, and swords, meet with their due meed of praise. Scripture names
abound.

Many old songs, by known and unknown authors, describe battle-axes and
bows, and these may be referred to a period later than the Fenian
period, and earlier than that of the bow. Bows and spears are mentioned
together in some ballads; spears drop out, and bows are named along with
battle-axes; in others, and further on, bows, battle-axes, and firearms,
are mixed up together.

The following are lines recited in Islay, and assigned by tradition to
the time of the battle of Traigh Ghruineart, fought between MacLean and
MacDonald in the reign of James the Sixth:--

Fhir na feusaige ruaidhe,  
Gur trom do bhuille 's gur cruaidh e  
Bhris thu leithcheannach mo thuaighe  
’S gad rinn thu sin 's math leam buan thu."

Man of the russet beard,  
Heavy is thy blow and hard;  
Thou hast broken the broad side of my axe;  
And though thou hast, long mayst thou live.

How the old Highlanders fought with axes we learn from Barbour's Bruce,
book second, in which the following expressive lines occur:--

"But the folk of the other party  
Fought with axes fellyly;  
For thai on fute war ever ilkane,  
Thait feile off their horss has slain,  
And till some guiff they wounds wid."

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

An old war song exists, styled, "Prosnacha catha Chloinn Domhnuill le
Lachunn, mor MacMhuirich Albanaich, la Catha Harla," "Battle incitement
of the MacDonalds, by big Lachunn, son of Albanian Muireach."
MacMhuirich or Currie was Clanranald's bard, and this song is said to
have been sung by him at the battle of Harlaw. It consists of seventeen
stanzas of unequal length, and every word in each stanza begins with the
same letter of the Gaelic alphabet, which has but seventeen letters. The
particle *gu* is prefixed to every word, which makes them all adverbs,
and so every line of the song begins with g. The Roman order of the
letters is followed; that is, a, b, c, etc., which is not the same as
the Oghum, or old Gaelic alphabet. The whole is a list of adverbs,
excepting two lines at the beginning, and eleven at the end, expressive
of various military virtues, all set to a lively quick measure. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) The number of lines is 336.

The following is the last stanza of this curious old song:--

Gu urlamhach, gu urmhaiseach,  
Gu urranta, gu uraluinn,  
Gu urchleasach, gu uaibhreach,  
Gu uilfheargach, gu uaillfheartach,  
Gu urchoideach, gu uabhasach,  
Gu urrasach, gu urramach,  
Gu urloisgeach, gu uaimhshlochdach,  
Gu uachdarach, gu uallach,  
Gu ullamh, gu usgarach,  
Gu urmhailleach, gu uchdardach, <span id="page_189">p. 189</span>  
Gu uidhirnichte, gu ughdarach,  
Gu upagach, gu uilefhradharcach,  
Gu upairneach, gu urghleusach,  
Gu urbhuilleach, gu urspealach,  
Gu urlabhrach, urlamhach, urneartmhor,  
Gu coisneadh na cathlarach,  
Ri bruidh'ne ur biughi,  
A Chlanna Chuinn cheudchathaich,  
’Si nis uair ur n' aithneacha,  
A chuileanan confhadhach,  
A bheirichean bunanta,  
A leoghuinan langhasda,  
Onnchonaibh iorghuileach,  
Do laochraidh chrodha, churanta,  
Do chlannaibh Chuinn cheudchathaich,  
A chlannaibh Chuinn cuimhnichibh,  
Cruas an am na h-iorghuil."

So dexterously, so gracefully,  
Intrepidly, audaciously,  
So actively, so haughtily,  
All-wrathfully, so yellingly,  
So hurtfully, so dreadfully,  
Trustworthily, honourably,  
So zealously, so grave-pit-ly,  
Superiorly, cheerfully,  
So readily, so jewelled,  
Well-mailed-ly, high-breasted-ly,  
Preparedly, authoritatively,  
Pushingly, all-seeing-ly,  
Bustlingly, right trimmed-ly,  
Well-striking-ly, well-mowing-ly,  
Eloquently, dexterously, all-powerfully,  
To win the field of battle, <span id="page_190">p. 190</span>  
For the telling of your glory,  
Children of Conn of a hundred fights,  
This now is the hour to know you,  
Ye furious whelps,  
Ye stout dragons,  
Ye splendid lions,  
Ye standards of stout battle  
Of brave gallant warriors,  
Of the children of Conn of the hundred fights,  
Children of Conn remember  
In the time of battle hardihood.

The arms used at the battle are indicated in various lines throughout
the piece. It is worth remark that no fire-arms are mentioned in the
Owl, which is supposed to be still older than the Battle Ode.

"Gu cuilbhaireach, gu cruaidhlannach,  
Gu sgabullach, gu srolbhratach,  
Gu reimeil, gu ughfheinneach,  
Gu suilfhurachair, gu saighid gheur,  
Gu scianach, gu spionach,  
Gu scaiteach, gu sciathach,  
Gu tuadhbhuilleach gu tarbhach."

So culverined, so steel bladed,  
So scabbarded, so silk bannered,  
So powerfully, so Feinne king like,  
So knife armed, so pullingly,  
So choppingly, so shieldly,  
So axe blow-ly, so bull-like,  
So eye-watchingly, so arrow sharp-ly.

A "CHOMHACHAG," the Owl, is an ancient piece, published in Gillies, and
also in the "Beauties of Gaelic Poetry." It is attributed to one DONALD
MACDONALD,

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

a celebrated hunter, who lived before the invention of fire-arms. This
piece approaches nearer to the Fenian poems in character than anything
to be found in the compositions of the above-mentioned bards. In one of
the stanzas, there is an allusion to the confessional

"Deansa t-fhaosaid ris an t-shagart."  
Make thy confession to the priest.

The erection of a mill is spoken of as something notable:--

"’S rinn e muillean air Allt-Larach."  
And he made a mill on Allt-Larach.

The hunting life is delineated with glowing enthusiasm, and the various
animals of the chase, as well as domestic animals, are
enumerated--"eilid," the hind; "*feidh*," deer; *laogh*, calf; *meann*,
kid; *earb*, roe; *lach*, duck; *gadhair*, hounds. *Bogha*, bow, is
frequently named, but no other offensive weapon. The Fenians are
introduced in one line--

"Chi mi Strath-Oisein nam Fiann."  
I see the Strath of Oisean of the Fiann.

Though there is a reference to drinking, no special drink is named.
Among the animals, there is no mention of "*lon*," which so frequently
occurs in the Fenian ballads, and which is supposed to be the elk.

In this poem we meet with much of the poetry of nature, but it is very
different from that which is found in the Ossian of 1807, or in Dr.
Smith's "Seann Dana" (old poems), but it is similar in kind to that
which is found in the compositions of the bards already quoted, to that
of the Blind Piper, of MacDonald, and of Macintyre. It is descriptive,
but neither philosophical nor

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

contemplative. Natural objects are not so much matter of speculation as
of feeling. The poet speaks of them as something that he strongly loves;
something to which he is strongly attached; and which he praises as he
does his friends, his home, or his country. When this Gaelic bard speaks
of inanimate objects, he does it like those above named, he speaks as if
they were his familiar friends-we think they live, and that they are in
his mind by the fireside along with him. He enumerates every beauty and
excellency connected with them; not so much because he admires the
beauties that he finds in them, but because he loves them. This is the
species of poetry which proceeds from the Celt's strong attachment to
home and country-from that feeling which makes him sigh for his native
home in a foreign land, though successful in life, and surrounded with
comforts-that feeling which inclines him to prefer the barren heaths,
foaming cataracts, and rugged mountains of the Highlands to the fairest
lands on which the sun shines.

In following the long list of Scoto-Gaelic bards from the present day to
the author of "A Chomhachag" (The Owl), we find the spirit of this
poetry uniform and unaltered. From Macintyre's "Coire cheathaich" (the
Corrie of Mist), to "A Chomhachag" (The Owl), it is very much the same
in character. The following quotation from "The Owl" will illustrate
what has been said:--

"Creag mo chridhe 's a' chreag ghuanach,  
Chreag an d' fhuair mi greis de m' àrach;  
Creag nan aighean 's nan damh siubhlach;  
A' chreag urail, aighearach, ianach.

Chreag mu'n iathadh an fhaoghait;  
Bu mhiann leam a bhi ga taghal, <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>  
Nuair bu bhinn guth gallain gaodbair  
A' cur gràidh gu gabhail chumhainn.

’S binn na h-iolairean mu 'bruachan;  
’S binn a cuachan, 's binn a h-eala;  
A's binne na sin am blaoghan  
Ni an laoghan meana-bhreac, ballach."

Crag of my heart, the lightsome rock,  
The rock where I was partly reared;  
Rock of the hinds and roving stags;  
Rock that is verdant, and gay with birds.

The rock which the hunting shout encircles  
To haunt it would be my joy,  
When the voice of the baying hounds was sweet,  
Urging the herds to a narrow pass.

Sweet sound the eagles in its braes;  
Sweet are its cuckoos, and sweet its swan  
Sweeter than all is the bleating  
Of the spotted, fine-speckled fawn.

How different is this from the address to the sun and similar poetry in
Ossian; yet it will be found to be the same in character with
MacDonald's, Macintyre's, and all other modern Gaelic bards. The germ of
it is to be found in the Fenian ballads, as, for instance, that line in
the Lay of Diarmaid-

"’S gur truagh m' aghaidh ri Beinn Ghulbann."

From the traces of this style to be found in these old poems, it has
expanded into its more modern form.

In the works of all these bards, which extend over a period of several
centuries; for one piece, composed as a war-song for the Highlanders who
fought at Harlaw,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

is referred to the same date, 1411, the manners of each age are
delineated. There is a difference in the language corresponding to each
period, but that difference is inconsiderable. The bards belong to
different parts of the Highlands, but no marked difference of dialect
appears in their compositions, and this agrees with the prevalent
opinion among Highlanders that good Gaelic is something definite, though
they are not unanimous with regard to the district where good Gaelic is
to be found. The difference in spoken dialects is more in pronunciation,
accent, and the use of certain words in one place rather than another,
than in grammatical structure or idiom. In reviewing the compositions of
these known bards, we observe that, as a rule, the earlier the period
the purer is the language, and the freer from English words. The idiom
of the language found in this poetry is very far removed from English,
and, on that account, it is very difficult to transfer the meaning of a
passage accurately into English, and much more so to give its force and
spirit. Though the works of these modern bards differ in language from
the Fenian ballads, they vary in words rather than in idiom. The
versification differs, but the songs approach the ballads nearer, the
older they are; almost all these modern poems contain allusions to
Christianity and scripture names. No superhuman deeds are mentioned, nor
anything out of the range of probability; but when we look at "Mordubh,"
and the other poems of the same class, we perceive a style that stands
far apart from all these, and from the Fenian ballads. Between the
language of the Fenian poems, that of the works of the known bards, and
that of spoken Gaelic, there is a common bond of union that is easily
discovered; the others are something apart.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

The preservation of these Fenian ballads for many ages may, at first
sight, appear incredible, more especially when successive generations of
poetry relating to historical events have died out, and when we have so
little concerning the chiefs and warriors that flourished in Scotland
during the seventh, eighth, ninth, and successive centuries, down to the
fifteenth. We have no traditional ballads that refer to the wars of
Wallace and Bruce, hardly a tradition relating to them. All these great
men have passed away from the Highland popular mind as if they had no
existence, and yet these prehistoric traditions remain. How is it that
no succeeding poetry, no national history, has been able to supplant
them? If they kept their ground in the midst of the compositions of
successive ages, we must surely admit that they possessed a peculiar
merit suiting those times, that they were superior to anything new that
was produced, or at least that they were more fitted to take hold of the
feelings of all periods. It may be asked were they not the compositions
of modern bards? Those bards, so far as we know their history, quote
them as something older than their own times. Granting that they are not
the compositions of any known bard, may they not have been the
compositions of bards previous to those, but still of a period not very
remote--of the monks of a certain period? Had they been the compositions
and inventions of such men, was it likely that there should be so little
reference to religion, and to known general history, in the ballads
which give the history of the Feinne, as told by Oisein amongst his
dialogues with St. Patrick on religious matters, or as they are more
commonly now sung, without these pagan polemics. In monkish
compositions, Greek and Roman history are often present, and there is
much in these

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

poems which we can hardly think monks would be inclined to encourage.
When then was this poetry composed? Was it in the tenth century? If so,
what was the poetry of the Gael previous to that century? Had they any?
Roman writers answer--"The Caledonians went to fight the Romans singing
war songs;" but we are not informed what they sang, though we may
surmise. Did Fenians or Fenian traditions exist in the time of the
Caledonians? If so, probably there were Fenian ballads then also, and
these may be the old ballads of the Caledonians modified, developed, and
altered, but preserved from undergoing any radical change by popular
veneration down to our own day.

Why these have been so well preserved, and have outlived so many
historical periods, may be accounted for by their universality. Highland
chiefs were at war with each other, and lasting animosities subsisted
between them. A song in praise of a certain chief was not likely to be
acceptable to an inimical clan. A ballad in praise of clan Chattan would
not please the clan Kay. A poem that extolled the exploits of Robert
Bruce, would meet with but a cold reception among the Macdougalls of
Lorn, or among the dependants of the Comyns of Badenoch. The bard that
would run the risk of praising the merits of James the First among the
Grahams, or among the dependents of those relatives of his own whom he
had so cruelly executed, might risk having his tongue cut out, but the
Fenian ballads could be sung anywhere. They were not likely to excite
any feud, or awaken any old grudge, or recall any former disgrace. They
were not calculated to wound either a reigning dynasty, or the partizans
of a fallen one; and, indeed, during those wild times, when every man's
hand was against his brother, what better code of honour

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

could have existed among such fiery elements. When chiefs violated the
principles of chivalry, and honour, and fair play, what better check
could we conceive as a moral restraint upon their wild passions from the
traditions of the Feinne, whose name is still the watchword for fair
play. "COTHROM NA FEINNE," "Fenian's advantage," a fair field and no
favour.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

To the list of modern bards who refer to the Feinne, may be added the
name of Evan MacColl, the Lochfine-side bard, who published a volume of
very creditable English and Gaelic Poetry in 1836. At page 94 is a
Gaelic stanza, which may be thus closely translated:--

And thou there standing all lonely,  
As Oisian after the Feinne;  
Small time, and thou followest kindred,  
Oh Dun! death's strong hand is upon thee.

The Dun meant is "Castail Donnain," in Loch Dubhaich in Ross-shire.
Other references also occur, and it may be generally said that there is
hardly a Gaelic book that does not contain such references. William
Livingstone, the Islay bard, who published clever poems in 1858, often
mentions the Feinne.--J. F. C.

To this let me add the letter of a labourer, who has a good head and
small learning, but knows his own language well.

Douchlais, 28*th* *October* 1861.

Sir,--I received your letter of the 24th Saturday last.

There is a good many words in Ossian's poems that is not common in
modern Gaelic. I have Dr. Smith's Gaelic book, and I got it from a man
because that there was so many words in it which he did not know the
meaning of, and I understand them.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

Them (the poem) that I heard repeated corresponds with those that is in
the book.

I am quite convinced that the English was taken from the Gaelic, and not
the Gaelic from the English.

It would be quite absurd to think that a man would spend his time
studying old Gaelic for to translate English prose, and put it in Gaelic
verse, and choose the words as they were spoken about seventeen hundred
years ago: it would be a very laborious task; and if the publication was
printed, the publisher would be a great loser by it, as so few would buy
it, because they did not understand it; and none would be able to do it,
unless he was a first-class Gaelic scholar, and a good poet; and also he
would have to read some other poems, as old as Ossian's for to find the
measure of the metre, as some of them is composed to a measure that is
not used in modern poetry. I understand the Gaelic of the published
books. I understand the words separately.--

Yours truly,                              
JOHN DEWAR. <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

To this let me add a letter from Mr. Torrie, now a student at Edinburgh
College, who has collected stories for me, and lives in Benbecula.

BENBECULA, SOUTH UIST,  
19*th* *October* 1861.      

MY DEAR SIR,--As I have conversed with almost all those from whom POEMS
have been collected in this quarter, I flatter myself that I am now in a
position to furnish you with my quota of information on this interesting
subject.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

Besides these POEMS which have been collected, the proof sheets of which
I have perused, a great variety of other poems, which go under the name
of "Ossian's Poems," are commonly recited by the people. A few of these
I have already sent you; and I have still in my possession two long
ones, called respectively--"*Teanntachd mhor na Feinne*," and "*Cath mac
Righ na Sorcha*." "*Laoidh Dhiarmid*," "*Laoidh Fhraoich*," "*Laoidh an
Amadain Mhoir*," "*Mhuileartach Bhuidhe*," and "*Laoidh a Choin duibh*,"
are, however, the most common. Fragmentary pieces of these I have heard
recited by some of our highest class; but those who have them most
entire, are, comparatively speaking, the poorest and most illiterate in
the land--those from whom they might be the least expected--so
circumstanced that they have had no access to books, and even should
they have, the most of them could not make any use of them. Neither were
they in a position to mingle among those who could read, and had books.
Books, however, which contain collections of Ossian's Poems, are not so
common here as might be expected. None of the reciters that I have met,
ever heard of Gillies', MacCallum's, or Stewart's. I have never seen any
of these in the islands; and if they are to be found at all, it is with
those who prize them too much to lend to such of the poorer classes as
could read, to run the risk of being disfigured with black drops, and
sure to have the not very agreeable odour of peat-reek. Donald
Macintyre, Aird, Benbecula, the best reciter of poems that I have met,
and who can read Gaelic well, never saw any book of the kind until I
shewed him Dr. Smith's collection. I have traced out another copy of Dr.
Smith's at Iochdar, which was presented to one Peter M‘Pherson, a bit of
a poet, by the Reverend Duncan M‘Lean, now Free Church

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Minister at Glenorchy, when missionary here
about thirty-five years ago. Every person with whom I have conversed
about Ossian's Poems, and who knows anything about them, admires them
very much, and believes them to be the genuine composition of Ossian, as
pure as might be expected, considering that they were handed down by
tradition, and consequently lost a great deal of their pristine
splendour; and received additions which, instead of adding, detracted
considerably from their original merit. I believe there are very few in
the Highlands, especially adults, but know something of Ossian's Poems.
Like the "Popular Tales," which are universally found throughout the
Highlands, Ossian's Poems have formed a very important part of the
Highlanders' pastime through the long winter nights. When on my way home
from Edinburgh last spring, I read "Laoidh Dhiarmid" to a few in Skye.
They remembered to have heard it before; and some old men remarked that,
when they were young, tales and poems were very common, and regretted
very much that they were so much out of vogue with the present
generation. I never met with any of Ossian books there but one, the Rev.
Mr. MacLauchlan's "Gleanings," presented to a "guide" by an English
tourist. I never heard of any Irish book containing these pieces in the
islands, nor have I ever seen any myself. As I have not MacPherson's,
which is the best known of them all, nor Gillies', nor Stewart's, I
cannot say whether those who repeat, recite passages *a la* MacPherson,
*a la* Stewart, or *a la* Gillies. Donald Macintyre recited to me a poem
entitled "Cath MacRigh na Sorcha," which I find in Dr. Smith's
collection, note page 176. They resemble each other very much; in some
passages the language is the same; Macintyre's version, however, is
longer, though Dr. Smith's, upon the whole,

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

is more beautiful. In the course of a conversation lately with a
gentleman of no mean authority, on the Ossianic controversy, be
expressed his surprise that the anti-Ossianics would use such futile
arguments as that MacPherson was the author of these poems, or that the
people get them from books, while he himself had a distinct recollection
of bearing one Rory M‘Queen, commonly called Ruairi Ruadh, who was a
catechist in this parish, recite poems which can be found in
MacPherson's. This M'Queen died about thirty years ago at the advanced
age of eighty. He had a great many of Ossian's poems which he learned
when a boy by hearsay, and with which he afterwards used to entertain
his hosts when travelling from village to village on his catechetical
visits. A niece of his, who now resides at Paible, North Uist, has the
same hereditary talent which procured her uncle more celebrity than his
catechetical acumen. This MacQueen was no less than fifty years of age
when MacPherson's Gaelic was published, and fifty-seven before
Stewart's, or M‘Callum's appeared. In whatever way, therefore, people
came to have these poems, it is a well-known fact that they never got
them from books, for nothing can be more patent than the fact that these
poems existed long before MacPherson's, or Stewart's, or M‘Callum's, or
Gillies', or Miss Brookes' came into existence. Nor is it consistent to
suppose that MacPherson, were he *really* the author of the poems, would
give them unto the world as the composition of Ossian, while they were
of themselves sufficient to raise him to the pinnacle of fame, and
establish his name as the greatest poet that Scotland ever produced. I
do not believe, however, that these minor pieces are the composition of
Ossian. They differ as much from them a school-boy's attempts at
painting do from the

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

sublime efforts of Raphael or Michael Angelo. As to the question whether
these are Irish or Scotch, I cannot give a definite answer. After some
reflection, however, my opinion preponderates to the latter, for though
there are some words and phrases which to me were unintelligible until
the reciters explained them, and which they considered Irish, still I
would not be justified in calling such ballads as contain them Irish, on
the slender ground of this more "ipse dixit," for they may have retained
that much of the language in which they were originally composed, and
which may have been the dialect common in Scotland at that time. They
are apparently very old, and it is possible at the time they were
composed the language of both countries was the same, considering they
had one common origin. By whom they were composed, or at what time they
were composed, cannot, with any decree of certainty be determined, They
stretch back into a period of whose history I know very little, and,
consequently I am precluded from adding more.--Meanwhile, I remain,
yours very faithfully,

D. K. TORRIE.          

J. F. Campbell, Esq., etc., etc.

To this let me add the opinion of a Highlander, who had had much to do
with the publication of Gaelic books, and lives in a city.

62 ARGYLE STREET, GLASGOW,  
*November*, 9, 1861.     

My DEAR SIR,--In compliance with your request, I will now proceed
briefly to give you my opinion of the poems attributed to Ossian and
other ancient Celtic bards. Although a doubt never crossed my mind
regarding

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the genuineness of these productions, yet after a careful investigation
of the subject, I have now a more definite and satisfactory impression
of the matter than I had heretofore. I believe that, "Fingal fought, and
that Ossian sang," as firmly as I believe any other historical fact. I
have now the same opinion of them that I had thirty years ago, when I
first began to take an interest in these matters, namely, that such
individuals lived many centuries ago, and composed poems that have been
handed down from generation to generation by oral recitation, and that
many of these fragments have been collected and translated into English,
and published by Mr. James MacPherson of Badenoch, exactly a hundred
years ago, and by others since, such as Dr. John Smith of Campbeltown,
Duncan Kennedy, Hugh and John M‘Callum, etc. I believe all that is truly
poetical and ennobling in MacPherson's translation are the productions
of Ossian and other great bards of the same era; but while I believe and
maintain all this, I gave it as my humble conviction that MacPherson
used unwarrantable liberties with his originals. Ossian never composed
"Fingal " and "Temora" as they are given by him, and it would be much
more to the credit of our country had he given these fragments just as
he collected them, without linking them together as he has done, and
called them "Epic Poems." I also complain of MacPherson for excluding
passages which accorded not with the theory which he wished to
establish, and thus endeavoured to fix the Fingalian era according to
his own fancy; but this is not the worst--I have a graver charge than
any of these to bring against him. I have no hesitation in affirming
that a considerable portion of the Gaelic which is published as the
original of his translation is actually translated back from the
English. I

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

have discovered this by the aid of fragments (no doubt genuine)
published in the Highland Society's Report. These fragments begin at
page 192, and end at page 260. A literal translation is inserted on
opposite pages, with MacPherson's translation in foot-notes.
MacPherson's translation is pretty faithful, with the exception of
omitted passages, which under other circumstances might be supposed to
have been translated from a different version; but when we are presented
with the Gaelic, purporting to be the original, the deception is too
transparent to pass undetected. I am aware that this assertion is
detrimental to the honesty and veracity of Mr. MacPherson, and perhaps
to the character of those who superintended the publishing of the Gaelic
after his death, but I affirm this as my honest conviction of the
matter; and any Highlander of ordinary intelligence may satisfy himself
on this point by comparing the Report and MacPherson's Gaelic. From
this, and other circumstances, it is evident that MacPherson determined
to appropriate to himself the literary glory of these productions. If
not, why bequeath in his "last will and testament" £1000 to defray the
expenses of publishing Ossian's poems in Gaelic, English, and Latin?
This fact, I think, ought to exonerate those superintending the Gaelic,
as they were merely carrying out his request as his executors.

But, notwithstanding all I have mentioned, we are indebted to Mr.
MacPherson for what he had done. He was the first to draw the attention
of foreigners to those wonderful compositions, and others following his
example, matter has been collected and preserved that would have been
for ever lost. Mr. MacPherson's translation, in my opinion, is superior
to the paraphrase of Dr. Smith; but the Gaelic of Dr. Smith is genuine,

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

with the exception of his emendations and occasional interpolations,
where he thought the sense required it, and which he candidly
acknowledged. Dr. Smith being a ready poet, and a thorough Gaelic
scholar, spared no pains in making his "Seann Dàna" worthy of the
patronage of his countrymen; and no wonder although he was disappointed
when his labours were not sufficiently appreciated.

There are other parties who have done some harm, alleging that they were
the authors of some of the compositions which passed as Ossian's. Mr.
Kennedy claimed some of his collection as his own. Mr. M'Callum of
Arisaig published a volume of Gaelic poems and songs in 1821, in which
he gives a "*Seann Dàn*" under the designation of "*Collath*," which in
course of time was honoured by a place in "The Beauties of Gaelic
Poetry," the editor endorsing it as an ancient poem; but in 1840 Mr.
M‘Callum published a new edition of his poems, and very coolly "removes
the deception," using his own words, and avows himself the author of
"Collath," and very *modestly* retains the fulsome notes which he
himself appended to it on its first appearance. It is doubtful if the
author would have been so ready to remove the deception had "*Collath*"
not been so highly honoured by the editor of the "Beauties." Mr.
M‘Callum added a third part to "*Mordubh*," and 259 lines to the second
part more than is given in Gillies' collection. He does not say that the
supplement to "*Mordubh*" is his, neither do I charge him with imposing
on the reader by this; but I am not satisfied that either the first, or
last, or any part of "*Mordubh*" is genuine.

I have mentioned these circumstances in order to remove, so far as I
can, all that has the appearance of suspicion or doubt about the matter;
but all the deceptions

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

that have been practised do not affect the sterling worth of the poems
of Ossian any more than the base coin affects the value of the real one.
It will only make those into whose hands it may come try it and make
sure that it is genuine.

It may be objected, "How could so much matter be preserved on the
memories of the people without the aid of letters?" Those who have lived
in the Highlands for any length of time know well how these productions
have been preserved. In former times Highlanders bad very little else to
remember; or, rather, they did not remember much else. Socially
disposed, they spent much time together; on the long winter evenings
they assembled in a certain house, rehearsed and listened to these
records of Fingalian achievements which were thus interwoven with their
mental development. Hence the continual opposition manifested by the
religious instructors of the Highlanders to "*Sgeulachdan*" and Ossianic
poetry. These teachers had serious difficulties in getting the attention
of the people, in consequence of their minds being pre-occupied and
absorbed by this ancient lore.

Bishop Carswell, in 1567, complains of those who spent their time and
intellect in perpetuating the records "concerning *Tuath de dannan,
Fionn MacCumhail* and his heroes, rather than write and teach and
maintain the faithful words of God, and of the perfect way of truth."
But Mr. Robert Kirk, of Balquhidder, who published the first metrical
Gaelic version of the Psalms in 1684, is more charitably disposed
towards the Fingalians. (See page [71](pt405.htm#page_71).)

The assertions of Bishop Carswell are fully borne out by the well-known
Christian poet, Peter Grant of Strathspey,

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

who composed about forty years ago. He says in *Gearan nan Gaidheal*:"--

"An t-Sàbaid ghlòrmhor bu chòir a naomhadh,  
’S tric chaith sinn faoin i o cheann gu ceann,  
Le cainnt ro dhiomhain mu thiomchioll Fhianntaibh,  
’S gach gnothach tiomal a bhiodh 'n ar ceann ;  
Air cnuic 's air sléibhtean, 's na tighean céilidh  
Bhiodh-mid le chéile a' tional ann,  
Ach cha b'e 'm Bìobal a bhiodh 'ga leughadh  
Ach faoin sgeul air nach tigeadh ceann."

The glorious Sabbath that should be hallowed,  
Oft spent we in trifling from end to end  
With useless chattering about the Feeantain,  
And each timely matter that was in our mind.  
On knolls or hillsides, or in visiting houses,  
We would be together all gathering there;  
But 'twas not the Bible that was read there,  
But a silly tale told without an end.

I think these quotations prove two things; first, that Ossian's Poems
are *older* than James MacPherson; and second, that it is not a matter
of astonishment that Highlanders could preserve so much of the poetry of
former ages, seeing that they applied all their mental powers in
remembering and perpetuating it. I cannot, indeed, wonder at the clergy,
teachers, and catechists opposing the "conventicles" (to use an
ecclesiastical term) for rehearsing and hearing Fingalian lore, as the
practice interfered so much with their usefulness. But these traditions
served a purpose, and accomplished their mission; and like other
dispensations of antiquity they passed away. They were the "elementary
schoolbooks" of the Celts in bygone ages; they helped to

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

strengthen and expand their memories, and to sharpen their intellects;
and the morals inculcated by them were generally sound. Those who are
familiar with our national proverbs and maxims, must acknowledge that
the men who first uttered them, and those who gave them currency,
studied human nature deeply. The Highlanders had also many, problems and
riddles, as you are well aware, that required much ingenuity and
application to solve. I will refer you to one of these as a specimen; it
goes under the designation of "*Aireamh Fir Dhubhain*." You will find
it, I think, in Stewart's collection. There is much truth in what Dr.
M‘Leod of St. Columba, Glasgow, uttered on one occasion, although he was
laughed and sneered at by some for it:--"Even the superstition of the
Highlanders, dark and wild as it may appear, had a happy tendency in
forming the character of the Gael." Undoubtedly it had; and while I am
anxious that my countrymen should possess knowledge that will be more
serviceable to them in time, and shall make them happy in eternity, I am
ready to pay my tribute of gratitude to the memories of the teachers of
former generations, for inculcating a sense of the instability of
everything in this world, and the folly of expecting much from creature
comforts--for the love of country and kindred, and for the noble,
generous, and hospitable spirit they infused into society--the fruit of
which I, in common with my countrymen, am reaping in the latter half of
the nineteenth century.

It is evident that the learned pride of many of our Anglo-Saxon
neighbours was roused on the appearance of the Ossianic fragments. They
could not conceive how an unlettered people could produce such poetry;
but they ought to have remembered that the knowledge of letters is but
one avenue for conveying knowledge to

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

the human mind. I have met and associated with individuals who had "book
knowledge" in abundance, but yet had neither the sense or the wit of
some who knew not the letters of the alphabet, and could not be
consulted with equal advantage in a case of emergency. A knowledge of
letters, and of the English language, is the essence of all knowledge
and wisdom in the estimation of the "*Gall*." These two items are
certainly requisites in our education; but it is doing the Celt great
injustice to conclude that because he is ignorant of these he must be
very stupid and ignorant of everything. Highlanders have serious
difficulties to contend with, which require indomitable courage and
perseverance to overcome. A young Celt leaves his native hills with
scarcely a word of English "in his head," and comes to the Lowlands. In
course of time he masters the language of the "*Gall*," competes with
him, and often beats him on his own soil. There is no evidence of
inferiority of intellect in this.

Fearing that I have done more than what you wished me to do, I remain,
my dear Sir, yours faithfully,

ARCHIBALD SINCLAIR.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

To this let me add the opinion of a Highlander who has been stationed in
many districts of the country as an excise officer; a gentleman of good
education, and well able to write Gaelic and English, who has been kind
enough to collect stories, etc. for me.

 

"It is well known that, in the absence of literature, men supply the
deficiency by tales, which may be of their own creation, or that of ages
long gone by. It were strange if the imaginative, the sensitive, the
enthusiastic

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

Gael were without his. Strange it were if the children of the mist
themselves were without this poetic element in their constitution. But
it is not so. In all ages the Celtic tribes have been noted for their
tales, poetry, and music, and all these are characteristic. They breathe
the same melancholy sadness, the same enthusiastic wildness, and the
same daring chivalry. Their tales are pure and simple, their poetry is
assuredly that of nature. It is wild and romantic, sensitive and sad,
affectionate and kind. Their music is known and admired all over the
world.

There are all sorts of Highland tales--fabulous, and romantic; fairy
tales, and tales of superstition, family tales, tales of gallant deeds,
and, I regret to say, tales of deadly feud.

The Highlanders distinguish between all these. To the fabulous tales
they give no credence, but merely repeat them because they are curious.
The romantic tales they do not exactly believe, but think they might
possibly be true. Fairy and superstitious tales are not now generally
believed. But family tales, feudal tales, and tales of other years form
the history of the Highlanders. These they believe, and repeat with
pride. A Highlander always takes pride and pleasure in the noble actions
and gallant deeds of his country. His own clan is a special pride to
him. It is his standard of honour, and he would as soon tell of anything
disreputable to his own family as he would to his clan. His clan may be
few now, its members may be scattered to all ends of the earth, but he
speaks of it when it was a clan, and he recounts its fall with sorrow
and regret. These tales are generally to be found amongst the poor and
unlettered people. They cherish the memory of their fathers; they tell
their tales, recite their poems, and

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

sing their songs; they have the pride and generosity of their fathers,
and, alas! the penury consequent on their fathers' misfortunes. These
tales are to be found amongst the old. For obvious reasons, the young do
not take the same interest in them. Consequently these relies of
antiquity must necessarily be lost, and scarce a trace of them be found
in another generation or two.

These old men and women are, indeed, generally poor, but they have
generally seen more comfortable circumstances. Their houses may not be
perfect specimens of architecture, but they are of kindness and
hospitality. Their furniture may not be comfortable, according to the
modern acceptation of the term, but it suffices for their use, and every
article is endeared by family associations. Their dress may be humble,
but it can boast of having been teazed, carded, and spun by a wife or a
daughter. It may not be fine, but it is comfortable, and it is,
notwithstanding, pleasant enough to look upon. Their fare may not be
over plentiful, but the stranger is always welcome to a share of it.

They are never rude, boorish, or vulgar, uncivil, disrespectful, or
insolent. On the contrary, they are naturally civil and deferential, but
they are naturally reserved. This I have experienced. I have often gone
to old men, and although I was told they had the greatest stock of old
lore of any in the place, yet they would either equivocate, or maintain
the most provoking silence. They would much rather know who I was, if
they did not know me, and why I was so desirous to get *sgeulachdan
faoin sheana bhan*--old wives' silly tales. I had always to wait till I
had gained their confidence. To shew them that I was interested in their
tales, I have often told them one myself--perhaps one I had got a few
days before? If they knew of any expressions

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

belonging to the tale which I had not, they would repeat them at my
request. Thus I have often got many valuable additions.

Fabulous tales are the most difficult to get, not because they are the
rarest, but because they are unwilling to tell them to strangers.
Historical tales are the easiest to get. They are known everywhere, and,
more or less, by every person. "*Sgeulachdan na Feinn*," or the
Fingalian tales, are very common. Clan or historical tales, and those of
the Fingalians, are the most admired. These are believed in, and
consequently talked of seriously. Many of these correspond to a nicety
with Ossian's poems. But many more have no coincidence with them.

I met an English tourist in summer, and we had occasion to speak of
Fingal's Cave in Staffa. He said very authoritatively that Fingal,
Ossian, and his compeers must have been all fiction--in short, mere
creations of MacPherson's own fancy; that no person ever heard of Ossian
till MacPherson's days; that no MSS. of Ossian's poems were ever seen;
and, finally, that they were never known to exist amongst the people.
This was certainly a new theory to me, but, like many others, I saw that
the gentleman who felt himself at liberty to speak thus freely of
Ossian's poems, did not take the trouble to examine for himself. That he
heard or read of this, and believed it. I told him that hundreds of
years before MacPherson existed, the poems of Ossian were well known,
and alluded to in writing; that MacPherson stood exactly in the same
relation to Ossian as Pope did to Homer, or Dryden to Virgil; that MSS.
of Ossian's poems were well known to exist in the Highlands long before
MacPherson's time. That some of those MSS. were to be seen at an eminent
London publisher's

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

at the very time Dr. Samuel Johnson was declaiming against the
authenticity of Ossian's poems; and, lastly, I told him that, so far
from it being at all true that Ossian's poems were not known amongst the
people, if he would have the goodness to accompany me, and in less than
five minutes' time I would bring him to a man who could repeat hundreds
of lines of Ossian's poems.

While speaking of MacPherson, I may state that many Gaelic scholars
think he might have done greater justice to their darling Ossian.
Without averring that MacPherson might not have rendered Ossian much
more effective, I think he has done remarkably well. He has deserved the
gratitude of every Highland heart, and of every man of taste.

Ever since I remember myself I remember hearing of the Fingalians. Who
that has lived in the Highlands but must necessarily have heard the
same. Their exploits, bravery, and battles have been the theme and
admiration of Highland *seanachaidhean* from time immemorial. That these
may have been exaggerated is possible, that they had a foundation in
fact is unquestionable.

I have frequently questioned old men concerning the Fingalians in almost
all parts of the Highlands, from Cape Wrath to the Mull of Cantyre. If
they had heard of them--what they heard of them--and if they believed in
them? I have never in *one single* instance met a negative. All had
heard of them, and all firmly believed in their existence. Some could
give me anecdotes of them, some tales, some their poems, and all could
give me something. I could mention scores, but I must necessarily
confine myself to a few examples.

1\. Dugald Bàn Mac a Chombaich, *i.e.*, Colquhoun, Port-Appin, is, I
should think, somewhat over seventy

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

years of age. He is a most decent old man. He could tell me lots about
the Feinn. He heard much about them when a boy. They were believed in,
and their memory honoured by his fathers, and he could see no reason why
he should not do the same. I took down a few tales from him. One of them
I had taken down previously from a decent old man in Islay, who lives at
Cultorsay. Another was about Diarmad, how he killed the wild boar, and
how he was killed in turn.

Diarmad was a nephew of Fingal, and one of the handsomest men amongst
the Fingalians. He had a "Ballseirc," or a "Gràdh-seirc"--a beauty-spot
on his forehead. To conceal this he was obliged to wear a vizer.
Otherwise be was in danger of committing sad havoc amongst the tender
hearts of the Fingalian fair. This is alluded to by one of our Gaelic
poets. The passage may be thus translated--

Thou hast from Diarmad got a charm,  
  And beauty rare, divine;  
A hundred souls are bound to thee--  
  A hundred hearts are thine.

This is a very common tradition that the Campbells are descended from
Diarmad, and hence their crest--the wild boar's bead.

2\. Alexander Macdonald, Portrigh, Skye, is eighty-four years old. Heard
a great deal about the Feinn when young. Ossian's poems were quite
common in his day. Had lots of them himself, and even yet can repeat a
good deal. I took down some from him. Amongst other things, part of
"*Laoidh na Nighin*." This old man was serving with the Rev. Mr.
Stewart, who kept, he said (if I remember right), two clerks employed
collecting the poems of Ossian throughout the country.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

3\. Donald Stewart, Ardfhraic, Skye, is ninety-two years of age. He is
still hale and cheerful, and his faculties quite unimpaired. He is a
quiet unassuming man, and is altogether a fine specimen of a fine old
Highlander. He remembers well the days of his youth. Great and sad
changes have come over the country since then. He heard much about the
Feinn. Heard often the poems of Ossian. They were quite common in his
day. Every person knew them, most could recite them, and all admired
them. As long ago as he can remember anything, he remembers distinctly
how the people used to collect to each other's houses in the long winter
nights. They used to tell tales of all descriptions, sing the songs of
their fathers, and recite the poetry . of Ossian. The old men recited
while the young listened. Those who were the best recited, and all
endeavoured to excel. They took a special pleasure in this, and in
impressing the memory of the young with what they were reciting. Some of
the men were very old. They said they got them from their fathers when
they were young. That their fathers--that is, the old men of their
day--told them they had those tales, traditions, and poems, from their
own fathers. That Ossian's poems were then as well known and as much
admired as anything at all could possibly be.

Assuming, then, that some of these men were as old as Donald Stewart is
to-day, when he was a boy, we have thus direct and truthful evidence of
the authenticity of the *Poems of Ossian* for the last one hundred and
eighty-four years. What more need be said!

From Donald Stewart, of whom I have often heard, but whom I have only
once seen, I got some curious old things. I shall endeavour to see him
again ere

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

long, when I have no doubt I shall get extracts from him of Ossian, in
all his purity.

4\. Kenneth Morrison, Trithean, Skye, is old and blind. I need scarcely
mention that he heard much of Ossian in his young days. A very decent
old man, John Macdonald, lain MacIain Eoghain, Talamhsgeir, Skye, used
to come to Kenneth Morrison's house. This John Macdonald died more than
twenty years ago. He was about eighty when he died. He was a very good
poet, as were his fathers before him, and so are his sons. One of his
sons, who composed some very popular songs, died some years ago.

4 *a*. John Macdonald was a passionate admirer of Ossian. He had a great
many of his poems, and could recite them most beautifully. Wherever he
went he was welcome, and every person was delighted to get hold of him.
He was a very pleasant old man, but his recitals of his darling Ossian
fascinated all. His own house was full every night, and whenever he
visited any of his friends he was literally besieged. He oftentimes came
to see Kenneth Morrison, and when he did, Kenneth Morrison's house was
sure to be crowded--literally crammed. From him he learned the most of
what he has of Ossian's. He has forgotten the most, but he has a good
many pieces yet. Amongst other pieces, I have got from him "The Death of
Oscar," "Ossian's Address to the Sun," "Fingal," the beginning of Duan
iv. Also, "The Arms," and "*Laoidh an Amadain mhoir*," as in Smith's
"*Sean Dana*." I have got another piece from him, entitled "*Bàs
Chaoiril*"--Caorreal's death. Caorreal was a son of Fingal and brother
of Ossian. He and Gaul, the son of Morni, disputed. They fought, and
Caorreal fell. <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

5\. An old man, whose name I cannot just now recollect, and who is now
dead, lived at Toat, opposite Airdeilbh, Lochalsh; he was very old, and
died some years ago; he had known almost incredible quantities of
Ossianic poetry. I have been assured by more than one who knew him
intimately, that this old man had as much Ossianic poetry as would take
him whole days in the recital; yet he could recite for whole nights
together without the slightest hesitation, with as much ease as he could
pronounce his own name. Like all the rest of his class, he used to say
that he heard Ossian's poems from old men when he was a boy; that they
were perfectly common, and much admired in his day; that every person
knew them; that most recited, and many sung them. This old man is
understood to have given a great deal of Ossianic poetry to MacPherson's
followers.

6\. I have the pleasure of knowing a much respected, enthusiastic
Highlander, a member of the Glasgow Ossianic Society, and a clergyman,
who has many Fingallian airs; he is himself an accomplished musician,
and a fond admirer of the airs and poems of Ossian.

Although I have frequently heard the poems of Ossian half-recited,
half-sung, I never heard them before set to music. I can, however,
assure those who have not had this privilege of hearing them, that the
Ossianic airs are wild, melodious, and altogether most beautiful; they
are typical of the poems.

7\. Mr. Donald Nicolson, parochial schoolmaster, Kilmuir, Skye, had a
great deal of Ossian's poems; his father, he assured me, had more
Ossianic poetry than all ever MacPherson translated; and even he
himself, when a boy, could repeat what would form a tolerable sized
volume. These he heard from old men in the long winter nights; he
personally was acquainted with

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

many old men who could repeat lots of Ossian's poetry. These old men
declared that Ossian's poems, in their day, were known by every person,
and by every person admired. Mr. Nicolson says that much, and
deservedly, as Ossian's poems, as given to the world, are admired, they
are much inferior to the versions he was in the habit of hearing in
boyhood; that he is of opinion MacPherson must have got his versions,
generally speaking, from different reciters; I have heard others say the
same. I believe those collected by Smith and some others, are generally
thought to be purer versions than those collected by MacPherson.

Thus I have given the names of many unquestionable witnesses to the
authenticity of Ossian's poems. Did necessity require it, I could easily
give ten, aye, twenty times more. <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)

If the ancient Highlanders had not their gods and goddesses like the
Greeks of old, they had what was much more natural, their heroes and
heroines. If they had not an invulnerable Achilles, they bad their
magnanimous Fingal; if not their bewitching Juno, they bad their
Dearsagrena, whose resplendent beauty was like that of the sun. If they
had not their Apollo, they had their venerable Ossian, "the sweet voice
of Cona," the darling of Highland hearts.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

If it should be said that Ossian exaggerates the gallantry, the bravery,
the magnanimity of his heroes, why, Homer does the same. If there is
poetic license, why should it be denied to those who knew no restraint
but that of nature. "Saul slew his thousands, and David his tens of
thousands;" and why should not their enemies fall before Ossian's
heroes, "like reeds of the lake of Lego," and their strength be
terrible.

We have not only their names accurately handed down to us, but the names
of many places were derived from those of the Fingalian heroes. There is
*Gleann Chonnain*, Connan's vale; and *Amhain Chonnain*, Connan's river,
in Ross-shire; and even Gleann Bhrain, Bran's-vale, in honour of
Fingal's celebrated dog Bran. There is a Dun-Fionn, Fingal's height or
hill, on Lochlomond. There is *Sliabh nam ban Fionn*, the Fingalian fair
women's hill, in Liosmor.

Liosmor, it is said, was a favourite hunting place of the Fingalians;
and there is even a tradition amongst the people, that here they had
some of the very best sport they ever had. There is nothing improbable
in this. Game must have been once very abundant in Liosmor; there are
traces still to be found; antlers of the deer, the bison, and the elk,
have been found in the bogs; these were of immense size. There is in
Liosmor a place called *Larach tigh nam Fiann*, the site of the
Fingalian's house; it is a large circular mound, of perhaps eighty yards
diameter, and surrounded by a deep foss. There is a deep well inside,
possibly it may have been used for the purpose of entrapping game. Dr.
Livingstone, Gordon-Cumming, MacKenzie, all Highlanders by the by; and,
if I remember right, Park, give a description of similarly constructed
places amongst the Africans. Perthshire is replete with

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

reminiscences of the Fingalians; there is Cill Fhinn, pronounced in
Gaelic and written in English, Killin, "Fingal's tomb", here, tradition
says, Fingal is buried. In the neighbourhood is *Sornach-coir-Fhinn*,
"the concavity for Fingal's boiler." Sornach means thin oblong stones
raised on end in the form of a triangle; a fire is placed between, and
here the culinary operations are carried on.

In Strathearn is the village of *Fianntach*, of or belonging to the
Fingalians; in the neighbourhood are numberless cairns raised to the
memory of Fingalian heroes. These cairns are the "gray mossy stones" of
Ossian.

"Carn Chumhail," CUVAL'S cairn, was opened some years ago and found to
contain an immense stone coffin; near this was "Ossian's tomb." In 1746,
when General Wade formed the road through the county, it came across
this spot. A deputation waited on the General, asking if he would take
the road to a side so as not to disturb the last repose of "the first
bard of antiquity." The General, however, did not find it convenient to
comply with this very reasonable desire. Perhaps the engineering would
not admit of it; and perhaps he had a secret desire to put the merit of
the tradition to the test. Certain it is that the inhabitants of the
surrounding country collected; they opened the grave, and there, sure
enough, found the mortal remains of their loved Ossian. The coffin was
composed of four large flag stones set on edge, covered over by another
large massy stone. They lifted all with religious care and veneration,
and with pipers playing the wail of the coranich they marched in solemn
silence to the top of a neighbouring hill. There, on the top of that
green heathery hill, they dug a grave, and there laid the last

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

mortal remains of Ossian, the sweet voice of Cona, the first bard of
antiquity; and there they are likely to rest! no rude hand will touch
them, no desecration reach them there.

There is a place in Glenelg called "*Iomaire nam-fearmor*," the tall or
big men's ridge. Tradition says that two of the Fingalians were drowned
whilst crossing Caol-reathain, and that they are interred here. A
gentleman, an English gentleman I believe, who was travelling in the
Highlands, heard of this tradition; he hinted that the tradition had no
foundation, and, it is said, made many gratuitous remarks on Highland
traditions in general, and those of the Fingalians in particular. To
refute their "idle tradition," as he chose to term it, he insisted that
one of the supposed graves should be opened. The people have a religious
veneration for the dead, and perhaps a latent superstition against
disturbing the grave, and consequently they were very much averse to
opening the mound. Rather, however, than that their venerated tradition
should be termed a fable, they agreed to open one of the graves, and the
grave was opened. It was very deep; first there was the gravelly soil
common to the place, and then a thick layer of moss; after that the
gravelly soil, when they came upon another bed of moss, in which was a
skeleton. Moss preserves, and it was for that purpose the body was
placed in it. The bones were found to be quite fresh and of an
extraordinary size. No person ever saw anything to compare with them
before, and it is said no person could at all credit or even imagine the
size of them but those who saw them. One gentleman who was present, the
late excellent Rev. Mr. MacIver of Glenelg, and father of the much
respected present minister of Kilmuir, Skye, stood six

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

feet two inches high; he was very Stout ill proportion, and was
altogether allowed to be one of the handsomest men of his day. Every one
was wonder-struck at the immensity of the bones; he took the lower
jaw-bone and easily put his head through it.

It is added that it was a beautiful day; but all of a sudden there came
on thunder and lightning, wind, and deluging rain, the like of which no
man ever heard or saw. The people thought judgment had come upon them
for desecrating the bones of the dead, and interfering with what they
had no right, so they closed the grave and desisted. Possibly some may
think this bordering on the marvellous; but let no one gainsay the truth
of it. There are many yet living who were present, all of whom declare
that they "shall never forget the day and the scene till the day of
their death." There were a number of people present, gentlemen from
Skye, and many from the mainland.

I have never heard who the gentleman was whose scepticism caused the
opening of the grave, but the incident took place about sixty years
ago. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25)

Gleann-comhan--Glencoe, that is, the narrow glen--is said by tradition
to be the birth-place of Ossian.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

\[paragraph continues\] If there is in Scotland one spot more than
another from which such magnificent creations as Ossian's poems could be
expected to emanate, that Spot is Glencoe. Nothing can be more
terrifically sublime than Glencoe during a storm. "Their sound was like
a thousand streams that meet in Cona's vale, when after a stormy night
they turn their dark eddies beneath the pale light of the morning." . .
. "The gloomy ranks of Lochlin fell like banks of the roaring Cona." "If
he overcomes, I shall rush in my strength like the roaring stream of
Cona."

Ossian himself is frequently called "the voice of Cona." "Why bends the
bard of Cona," said Fingal, "over his secret stream? Is this a time for
sorrow, father of low-laid Oscar?" . . . "Such were the words of the
bards in the days of song; when the king heard the music of harps-the
tales of other times! The chiefs gathered from all the hills and heard
the lovely sound. They heard and praised the voice of Cona, the first
among a thousand bards!"

In *Eadarloch*--"’twixt lochs "--Benderloch is the Selma of Ossian. It
is still called Selma. It is also called *Bail-an-righ*--the king's
house or town; and Dun-MacSntheachain--MacSniachain's hill. Here also is
the Beregonium of ancient writers. There are yet many traces that Selma
was once the residence of regal splendour. There is a vitrified fort, in
which are found "swimming-stones." There were found, some years ago, in
a moss close by, some pieces of a wooden pipe. This pipe is supposed to
have been used for the purpose of bringing water to the fort or castle
from the hill hard by. It is said that *Garbh-MacStairn* set Fingal's
castle on fire, after which Fingal left the place, and resided at
Fianntach, already alluded to. This tradition seems

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

very probable. The marks of some great calamity are yet to be seen.

In the neighbourhood of Selma are a great number of those stones that
are supposed by some to have been Druidical temples. I think they are
more likely to be stones erected to the memory of fallen warriors--"the
dark gray stones" of Ossian. The Fall of Connel--Ossian's "roaring
Lora"--is only about three miles from Selma. Not far from Connel is the
"Luath," one of Ossian's streams. "Dwells there no joy in song, with
hand of the harp of Luath?" Opposite Selma, on the other side of
Loch-Etive, is Dunstaffnage Castle, the residence of Sir Angus Campbell,
Bart., and the Dun-Lora of Ossian. The Lora-Loch-Etive-washes its base.
The Gaelic name for it is Dun-sta-innis, but more properly Dun da-innis,
from two islands near by. The noise of the roaring Lora is certainly
awful during flood-tides. In a calm summer evening it is heard in the
island of Liosmor, distant at least ten or twelve miles. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26)

After what has been said, I do not think it is necessary to say more.
That there was a race of people called the Feinn or Fingalians, I think
no unprejudiced mind can question. That these Fingalians were
traditionally remembered through-out the Highlands is perfectly certain,
and that much of their poetry has been plentifully scattered and is well
known there still, is equally true.

I have given the names of some from whom I myself have got Ossianic
poetry, and I could give the

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

names of ten times more from whom I could get it. I know where and with
whom it is to be got in abundance, and, did necessity require it, I
could easily procure it. Some, I believe, imagine, in the simplicity of
their heart, that MacPherson, the translator, was the author of Ossian's
poems. Perhaps it was MacPherson that also composed the thousand and one
Fingalian tales that are floating throughout the Highlands? and all the
anecdotes of the Fingalians? Well, if so, I can only say that MacPherson
must have been very busy in his day.

Why should not Ossian's poetry be handed down from generation to
generation like the rest of the Fingalian tales? I do not think that any
can be found bold enough to question the authenticity of the tales. I do
not believe that any person doubts the antiquity of the Celtic fables
and romances. It is more than probable they were composed at least three
thousand years ago, and brought by the Celtic nations in their
migrations from the East. If, therefore, the Celtae have preserved their
fabulous tales and romances for the long period of three thousand years
or more, and repeat them still, why not, on the same principle, preserve
amongst them the magnificent creations of Ossian for, at least, half the
time?

Homer flourished more than nine hundred years B.C., and his poems
floated amongst the Greeks for more than five hundred years, till the
Greek historian collected them. Yet their authenticity was never
questioned. Were the ancient Greeks more addicted to poetry, and
consequently more capable of preserving the creations of Homer than the
Celtae those of Ossian? I can hardly believe so. There is a very strong
resemblance betwixt Homer and Ossian. Both flourished in a primitive
state of society, and both are equally

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

the poets of nature and of nature's laws. If there is an analogy betwixt
Homer and Ossian, why not betwixt the preservation of their works?

That poetry of the most magnificent description has been common
throughout the Highlands from ages immemorial is unquestionable; that
much of that poetry has always been ascribed to Ossian is equally
certain; and that he was the author of much of it is more than probable.
The ancient Highlanders never for a single moment doubted the
authenticity of Ossian's poems. The modern Highlanders believe in those
which they know and repeat as certainly and as implicitly as they do in
the Song of Solomon or the Psalms of David. This I can testify to from
personal observation. I believe in them myself-fully believe. I am
literally convinced that Fingal lived and that Ossian sang.

ALEXANDER A. CARMICHAEL.

SKYE, 28*th* *November* 1861.

 

Mr. Carmichael has also referred to many of the printed authorities
quoted by me above, to prove that, shortly before MacPherson's time,
collections of poetry attributed to Ossian had been made in the
Highlands of Scotland.

In a letter dated December 9th, the writer of the above able paper gives
an amusing account of a walk through rain and storm to visit an old
dame, Catrina nic Mhathain, who is seventy-six, and fully confirms what
has been said above. She is a capital *singer* of Ossianic lays, and
praises the singing of a certain catechist, Donald MacIain ic Eoghain,
of whom frequent mention is made, and who died many years ago. It was
his wont to gather crowds of people by chanting these old lays. I have
heard the same account of a

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sutherland reciter. It seems that preachers and
missionaries did not formerly condemn Gaelic poetry, and the minority
who do so now are not of the best educated, so far as my experience
goes.

The old dame was asked if she had ever heard tell of Osein. "Who, my
dear?" she said in surprise. "Osein and the Fein; did you ever hear tell
of them?" "Lord bless us!" said the old lady, "who has not heard tell of
Osein! gentle Osein, the son of Fionn--Osein after the Feinne?"

I agree with Mr. Carmichael that this exclamation is worth volumes of
argument.

 

And now, having given all the evidence which I have, let me give my own
opinion on this much vexed question.

I hold that there is nothing to prove that MacPherson, Ossian, or any
other individual, composed the Gaelic poems of 1807--or that they are
older than MacPherson's time as a whole--but there is a mass of evidence
to prove that he had genuine materials, some of which we also have got
for ourselves, and there is a strong presumption that he had something
which we have not. Nothing was forthcoming after MacPherson's death
except his manuscript which was published; so that is one "fact," at all
events.

When it is considered how much old poetry rests upon the existence of
single manuscripts in other [languages](errata.htm#8), and that
MacPherson certainly had a mass of materials, it is possible that there
may have been some compounder of poems far older than the man who gets
the credit and discredit of "Ossian;" still there is nothing but
"Ossian's Poems" to *prove* that their composer lived anywhere at any
time. It is certain

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

that the heroes have been Celtic worthies for centuries, and that their
exploits have been celebrated in Gaelic verse ever since the ninth
century, if not the seventh: but of the published Gaelic Ossian as an
entire work there is not a trace before MacPherson's time. I have no
doubt that the work is founded upon genuine old popular materials, and I
would rank it for originality with Tennyson's "Idylls of the King," or
"Homer," if the Greek poems were floating ballads before they were made
into epic poems. But till the author is discovered, MacPherson's name
must be associated with his publication. That must rank as a
Scoto-Gaelic work at least a hundred years old, and till the contrary is
proved, Ireland has not a ghost of a claim to it.

"MacPherson's Ossian" is, as I conceive, without doubt a composite work,
to be ranked in the class which I have numbered 5th or 6th; poetry made
up of various materials, ancient and modern, like houses which I have
seen in ancient Greece. There, an old Corinthian capital is placed
upside down in one corner, its graceful acanthus leaves drooping
upwards, and beside it lies a fluted shaft, with boulders and turf
resting upon it,--sculptured white marble is mingled with ordinary
stones of the roughest description, and the whole is bound together with
lime and cement, overgrown with weeds, and, it may be, daubed with
ignoble mud; but MacPherson's Ossian, like the Greek hut, is, in the
main, composed of genuine materials, and a clever antiquary, or a good
critic, might yet pick out all the old fragments, and mayhap arrange
them more scientifically. To do so would be loss of labour, for we have
a mass of similar materials, Scotch and Irish. The Greek hut, with all
its incongruities, dirt, and discomfort, with its dress of shrubs and
lichens, and utter

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

disregard of the rules of architecture, is more likely to attract a
painter's eye than the most symmetrical museum of antiquities, geology,
and botany, or the most luxurious brick palace in London; and so Ossian
has attracted the notice and the admiration of famous men, who would not
have bestowed a thought upon popular tales and ballads separately
arranged, and classed in due order, as I have striven to do with my
stores.

Ossian is a fiction, but a structure founded upon facts, a work built
mainly of Scotch materials, worked by Scotch minds long ago--a very
famous work a century old, which is known far and wide, while that of
honest John Gillies is almost quite unknown. But the fame of the
architect is not to be coveted, for the stigma of dishonesty rests upon
his name. MacPherson undoubtedly tried to deceive, and especially when
he denied to Ireland all share in the heroes of Ossian, or seemed to
claim the entire work as his own invention.

If this be correct; if such was the real nature of the work; when the
author held his peace and refused any explanation; when party spirit ran
high, and Scotch were rebels, there was room for controversy.
Antiquaries might fall upon the traditional and genuine, because it
seemed modern, and deny the antiquity of the whole. Irishmen might
recognise bits of their property, and claim the entire work. Indignant
Scotchmen, knowing their own, might fret and fume and plead possession,
and defend the right and the wrong; and the "Gall," the stranger,
knowing nothing of the case, hearing the din, and called on to accept
the whole as historically true, and a genuine work, complete, and
completely preserved by tradition alone, for some fifteen centuries,
might well indignantly reject the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

whole as a set of impudent forgeries and fictions. John Bull is "not
going to be gulled," and "he will not believe anything of a man who
tries to do him once," and so everything Gaelic is suspected to this
day. In this battle of the inky plumes all sides might well lose their
tempers, or spoil them. But, for all that, truth may now be found
amongst the relies of the strife, amongst wasted ink and spoilt paper;
and the truth, as I imagine, lies as usual somewhere in the middle. She
may be enticed out of her well by coaxing, patience, and perseverance,
but she is only driven deeper, and far out of sight, by wrangling
critics, who fight for her favours as men have fought, and are still
fighting, for the truth of this Ossianic controversy.

When "Flosi (in the Njal Saga) undertook to tell the story of the
burning, he was fair to all; and therefore what he said was believed." I
have tried to tell my story fairly, and if any one holds a different
opinion, let him not quarrel with mine.

"Cogadh na sith," strife or peace, is an old Gaelic watchword, We have
tried the first for a century, and made very little by it, except bad
blood; let Celts try a turn on the other road, and, at all events, let
us give up fighting amongst ourselves.

There is an old monkey of my acquaintance whose wont it is to hoist his
hind leg over his shoulder, and lean his head confidingly on the sole of
his foot, and caress his cars with his toes, till his toes, in some
strange unaccountable manner, excite his wrath; then he seizes the
offending foot in both hands, and grins defiance at it, and cuffs it and
bites it, till a new freak comes over him, and he sits down upon his
heels, and goes to sleep again, at peace with himself and the rest of
the world.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

I never see this venerable pug without thinking that he must be the
embodied spirit of the Ossianic controversy, which it is my ambition to
lull fast asleep for good and all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[149:1](pt410.htm#fr_14) There is a popular tale
known all over Europe, in which a mortal acquires the power of seeing
immortals, betrays the power by speaking to one, and is deprived of one
eye. I have got the story in many shapes from the Highlands--J. F. C.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[150:1](pt410.htm#fr_15) This legend is very
like that of Arthur, who, when he was sore wounded, sailed of in a boat
to the "Island of Avalon" (Gaelic, "avlan," apples), where he is
supposed still to live.

The curious ceremonies performed by the Hebrideans when they visited the
Flannen islands, according to Martin, probably have to do with this old
world belief. Flath-innis is one of the words still used for heaven. It
means the hero's island, and Flath-innis-ean might easily be contracted
to Flannen. There is a chapel on these uninhabited, westernmost of
western islands which is of great and unknown antiquity; and there is a
chapel on nearly every western island in Scotland and Ireland; and it
may be that the first Christian missionaries planted their churches in
these remote corners as the very strongholds of Paganism. There is a
chapel in the Shiant islands, which I take to be a corruption of
Eileanan nan sithichean, the islands of the fairies or peaceful people,
and almost every small island to which a legend is attached, such as the
haunted island, of the Rhinns of Islay, has its Christian chapel as
well.--J. F. C.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[154:1](pt410.htm#fr_16) It is to be remarked
that the published Ossian, and the whole of the suspected class, are
also entirely free from any such words, though the construction of the
language is different from that of the ballads.--J. F. C.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[154:2](pt410.htm#fr_17) In this, the suspected
Ossian resembles the traditional ballads from which it is supposed to
have been taken.--J. F. C.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[165:1](pt410.htm#fr_18) Story of Burnt Njal,
vol. i., 136.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[174:1](pt410.htm#fr_19) This idea also occurs
in measured prose in the tale of Murdoch MacBrian.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[177:1](pt410.htm#fr_20) These words made into
English of the same construction, do not convey the meaning. "Daggery,
powdery, horny," would be absurd in English poetry, but they are the
words in Gaelic.--J. F. C.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[188:1](pt410.htm#fr_21) The measure is exactly
that of the quick part of a piobaireachd, or pipering, called "pibroch"
in English. The conclusion fits the slow ending of such pieces.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[198:1](pt410.htm#fr_22) It is to be observed
that this witness says nothing of the Gaelic Ossian of 1807.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[216:1](pt410.htm#fr_23) The poems in question
have been sent to me, and are preserved with the rest. See list at the
end.--J. F. C.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[218:1](pt410.htm#fr_24) January 1862. Mr.
Carmichael has sent me the names of several other persons who can repeat
traditional Ossianic lays, and specimens of these compositions, taken
down from dictation. Many of these closely resemble ballads which I had
got elsewhere, and prove to demonstration that these are very commonly
known in all parts of the Highlands. Others resemble parts of the Ossian
of 1807-such as "Cuchullin in his Car"--which I believe to be an old
passage, and which has been found in Ireland also.--J. F. C.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[222:1](pt410.htm#fr_25) I cannot answer for
these facts, but I can vouch for the currency of this story in the
district; it is fully believed there. Unless the people stumbled upon
the grave of a real giant, they must have got hold of the bones of some
antediluvian creature. A grave marked by two large stones, some ten feet
apart, was once opened by a relation of mine elsewhere, and was found to
contain large bones and coarse hair "like horse hair." It is asserted
that the skeleton of a fossil man has lately been found, and that
several "fossil" skeletons were found in France some time ago, and
buried by order of a priest, The learned are engaged upon the discovery.
One skull is said to be *small*, and of a low type; but there are giant
Lapps now.-J. F. C.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[224:1](pt410.htm#fr_26) All this is very strong
internal evidence that the poems [published](errata.htm#7) by MacPherson
were composed by some bard well acquainted with the west of
Scotland.--J. F. C.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs](pt411)
