[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040180)  [Next](2040182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span
id="xii.ii.v-Page_95"></span>§5. *Retirement of Athanasius, and tyranny
of Gregory and Philagrius.*

<span id="xii.ii.v-p2"></span>When all this was done, they did not stop
even here; but consulted how they might act the same part in the other
church <span id="fr_462"></span>[463](#fn_462) , where I was mostly
living during those days; and they were eager to extend their fury to
this church also, in order that they might hunt out and dispatch me. And
this would have been my fate, had not the grace of Christ assisted me,
if it were only that I might escape to relate these few particulars
concerning their conduct. For seeing that they were exceedingly mad
against me, and being anxious that the church should not be injured, nor
the virgins that were in it suffer, nor additional murders be committed,
nor the people again outraged, I withdrew myself from among them,
remembering the words of our Saviour, ‘If they persecute you in this
city, flee ye into another <span id="fr_463"></span>[464](#fn_463) .’
For I knew, from the evil they had done against the first-named church,
that they would forbear no outrage against the other also. And there in
fact they reverenced not even the Lord’s day <span
id="fr_464"></span>[465](#fn_464) of the holy Feast, but in that church
also they imprisoned the persons who belonged to it, at a time when the
Lord delivered all from the bonds of death, whereas Gregory and his
associates, as if fighting against our Saviour, and depending upon the
patronage of the Governor, have turned into mourning this day of liberty
to the servants of Christ. The heathens were rejoicing to do this, for
they abhor that day; and Gregory perhaps did but fulfil the commands of
Eusebius and his fellows in forcing the Christians to mourn under the
infliction of bonds.

<span id="xii.ii.v-p6"></span>With these acts of violence has the
Governor seized upon the churches, and has given them up to Gregory and
the Arian madmen. Thus, those persons who were excommunicated by us for
their impiety, now glory in the plunder of our churches; while the
people of God, and the Clergy of the Catholic Church are compelled
either to have communion with the impiety of the Arian heretics, or else
to forbear entering into them. Moreover, by means of the Governor,
Gregory has exercised no small violence towards the captains of ships
and others who pass over sea, torturing and scourging some, putting
others in bonds, and casting them into prison, in order to oblige them
not to resist his iniquities, and to take letters <span
id="fr_465"></span>[466](#fn_465) from him. And not satisfied with all
this, that he may glut himself with our blood, he has caused his savage
associate, the Governor, to prefer an indictment against me, as in the
name of the people, before the most religious Emperor Constantius, which
contains odious charges, from which one may expect not only to be
banished, but even ten thousand deaths. The person who drew it up is an
apostate from Christianity, and a shameless worshipper of idols, and
they who subscribed it are heathens, and keepers of idol temples, and
others of them Arians. In short, not to make my letter tedious to you, a
persecution rages here, and such a persecution as was never before
raised against the Church. For in former instances a man at least might
pray while he fled from his persecutors, and be baptized while he lay in
concealment. But now their extreme cruelty has imitated the godless
conduct of the Babylonians. For as they falsely accused Daniel <span
id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) , so does the notable Gregory now
accuse before the Governor those who pray in their houses, and watches
every opportunity to insult their ministers, so that through his violent
conduct, many are endangered from missing baptism, and many who are in
sickness and sorrow have no one to visit them, a calamity which they
bitterly lament, accounting it worse than their sickness. For while the
ministers of the Church are under persecution, the people who condemn
the impiety of the Arian heretics choose rather thus to be sick and to
run the risk, than that a hand of the Arians should come upon their
heads.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_462"></span>[95:463](2040181.htm#fr_462) <span
id="xii.ii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.v-p3"></span> \[On the difficulties of this part of the
history, see Prolegg. ch. ii. §6 (1) ad fin., and ch. v. §3, c. It must
be noted that according to the following passage Ath. had left the
‘other church’ before Easter Day. It was probably that of ‘Quirinus,’
*Hist. Ar.* 10.\]

<span id="fn_463"></span>[95:464](2040181.htm#fr_463) <span
id="xii.ii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.v-p4"></span> Cf. *Ap. Fug.* 11, and [Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="xii.ii.v-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[95:465](2040181.htm#fr_464) <span
id="xii.ii.v-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.v-p5"></span> Easter Day \[Apr. 15\].

<span id="fn_465"></span>[95:466](2040181.htm#fr_465) <span
id="xii.ii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.v-p7"></span> i.e. letters of communion.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[95:467](2040181.htm#fr_466) <span
id="xii.ii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii.v-p8"></span> [Dan. vi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#013)<span id="xii.ii.v-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: All the above illegalities were carried on in the interest of
Arianism.](2040182)
