[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040007)  [Next](2040009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.iii"></span>

<span id="v.i.iii-p1"></span> §3. <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p1.1"></span>Biographies</span>. (a.) *Ancient*. The
writings of Athanasius himself, while seldom furnishing precise
chronological data, furnish almost all the primary information as to the
facts of his eventful life. The earliest ‘Life’ is the panegyric of
<span class="c10"><span id="v.i.iii-p1.2"></span>Gregory</span> of
Nazianzus (Or. 21), delivered at CP. 379 or 380, rich in praises, but
less so in historical material. More important in the latter respect is
the *Historia Acephala* (probably earlier than 390) printed in this
volume, pp. 496, *sqq*. (The Edition by <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p1.3"></span>Sievers</span> in *Ztschr. für Hist. Theol*.
for 1868 is referred to in this volume as ‘Sievers’ simply.) It is a
priceless source of chronological information, especially where it
coincides with and confirms the data of the *Festal Index* (pp. 503,
sqq.), a document probably earlier than 400. A secondary place is
occupied by the Church historians, especially Socrates, Sozomen, and
Theodoret, who draw largely from Athanasius himself, and from Rufinus,
also in part from the *Hist. Aceph*. (especially Sozomen), and from
Arian sources, which are mainly used by Philostorgius. More scattered
notices in later ecclesiastical writers of the fourth century,
especially Epiphanius; also Synesius, Jerome, Basil, &c., in the
documents of the Councils, &c., and in the Life of Pachomius and other
early documents relating to Egyptian Monasticism (see below, Introd. to
*Vit. Anton*. and Appendix, pp. 188, 487).

<span id="v.i.iii-p2"></span>(b) *Medieval*. Under this head we may
notice the Lives printed by Montfaucon among his Prolegomena. The first,
‘Incerto Auctore<span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p2.1"></span>,’</span> is dependent on the fifth-century
historians and of no value. A second, preserved by Photius (c. 840) is
in the judgment of that scholar, which Montfaucon endorses ‘unparalleled
rubbish.’ That by the Metaphrast †967) is a patchwork from earlier
writers made with little skill, and not of use to the historian. An
Arabic Life current in the Coptic Church, communicated to Montf. by
Renandot, is given by Montf., as he says, that his readers may
appreciate the ‘stupendous ignorance and triviality’ of that nation.
Montf. mentions Latin ‘Lives’ compiled from Rufinus and from the *Hist.
Tripartita*, ‘of no value whatever.’ Of the Life of Athanasius ‘by
Pachomius,’ mentioned by Archd. Farrar (*infra*), I can obtain no
particulars.

<span id="v.i.iii-p3"></span>(c) *Modern*. The first was that by
Tortelius prefixed to the edition of 1520 (§1 (2)), but compiled in the
previous century and dedicated to Pope Eugenius IV. (‘good for its
time,’ M.). Montf. mentions a valueless life by Lipomanus and a worse
one of unknown origin prefixed to other early editions. In 1671 <span
class="c10"><span id="v.i.iii-p3.1"></span>Hermant</span> made the first
attempt at a critical biography (Paris); in 1664 an English work,
“History of the Life and Actions of St. Athanasius by N.B. *P.C*.
Catholick,” with the *imprimatur* of Abp. Sheldon, had been published at
London, in 1677 the biography in Cave, *Lives of the Fathers*, and in
1686–1704 du Pin, *Nouvelle Bibliothèque*. About the same date appeared
the first volume of the Acta SS. for May, which contains a careful life
by <span class="c10"><span id="v.i.iii-p3.2"></span>Paperbroch</span>
(1685; ded. to Innocent XI.). But all previous (to say nothing of
subsequent) labours were cast into the shade by the appearance of the
‘Vita’ of <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p3.3"></span>Montfaucon</span> (Prolegg. to Tom. 1) in 1698,
in which the chronology was reduced to order, and every particle of
information lucidly digested; and by the ‘Memoires’ of ‘M. Lenain de
<span class="c10"><span id="v.i.iii-p3.4"></span>Tillemont</span>’ (vol.
viii. in 1702), which go over the ground with quite equal thoroughness,
and on many points traverse the conclusions of Montfaucon, whose work
came into Tillemont’s hands only when the latter was on his death-bed
(1698). The ground was once more traversed with some fulness and with
special attention to the literary and doctrinal work of Athan. by Remy
<span class="c10"><span id="v.i.iii-p3.5"></span>Ceillier</span>, (*Aut.
Sacrés*, vol. v. 1735). After this nothing remained to be done until the
revival of interest in patristic studies during the present century. In
1827 appeared the monograph of <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p3.6"></span>Möhler</span> ‘Ath. der Grösse’ (Mainz), a
dogmatic (R.C.) rather than a historical study: in 1862 <span
class="c10"><span id="v.i.iii-p3.7"></span>Stanley</span> (‘Eastern
Church,’ Lect. vii.). <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p3.8"></span>Böhringer’s</span> life (in vol. 6 of
*Kirchengesch. in Biographien*, 1860–1879) is praised as ‘thoroughly
good and nearly exhaustive.’ <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p3.9"></span>Fialon</span> *St. Athanase*, Paris, 1877, is a
most interesting and suggestive, though rather sketchy, treatment from
an unusual point of view. P. <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p3.10"></span>Barbier</span> *Vie de St. A*. (Tours, 1888) I
have not seen. The best English life is that of Dr. <span
class="c10"><span id="v.i.iii-p3.11"></span>Bright</span>, first in the
Introd. to the ‘Orations’ (*supra*, d. 26), but rewritten for the
Dictionary of Christ. Biography. The same writer’s Introd. to the *Hist.
Writings* (*supra ib*.) is equally good and should also be consulted. A
lucid and able sketch by Dr. <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p3.12"></span>Reynolds</span> has been published by the
Religious Tract Society, 1889, and Archd. <span class="c10"><span
id="v.i.iii-p3.13"></span>Farrar</span>, *Lives of the Fathers*, 1, pp.
445–571, is eloquent and sympathetic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: History of the Period, and of the Arian Controversy.](2040009)
