[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040202)  [Next](2040204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p1.2"></span>Defence of the Council’s Phrases, “from the
essence,” And “one in essence.”</span> *Objection that the phrases are
not scriptural; we ought to look at the sense more than the wording;
evasion of the Arians as to the phrase “of God” which is in Scripture;
their evasion of all explanations but those which the Council selected,
which were intended to negative the Arian formulæ; protest against their
conveying any material sense.*

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p2"></span>18. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p2.1"></span>Now</span> Eusebius and his fellows were at
the former period examined at great length, and convicted themselves, as
I said before; on this they subscribed; and after this change of mind
they kept in quiet and retirement <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) ; but since the present party, in the
fresh arrogance of irreligion, and in dizziness about the truth, are
full set upon accusing the Council, let them tell us what are the sort
of Scriptures from which they have learned, or who is the Saint <span
id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) by whom they have been taught, that
they have heaped together the phrases, ‘out of nothing <span
id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875) ,’ and ‘He was not before His
generation,’ and ‘once He was not,’ and ‘alterable,’ and
‘pre-existence,’ and ‘at the will;’ which are their fables in mockery of
the Lord. For the blessed Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews says, ‘By
faith we understand that the ages were framed by the Word of God, so
that that which is seen was not made of things which do appear <span
id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876) .’ But nothing is common to the Word
with the ages <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) ; for He it is who
is in existence before <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="xiv.ii.v-Page_162"></span>the ages, by whom also the ages came to
be. And in the Shepherd <span id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) it is
written (since they allege this book also, though it is not of the
Canon <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) ), ‘First of all believe,
that God is one, who created all things, and arranged them, and brought
all things from nothing into being;’ but this again does not relate to
the Son, for it speaks concerning all things which came to be through
Him, from whom He is distinct; for it is not possible to reckon the
Framer of all with the things made by Him, unless a man is so beside
himself as to say that the architect also is the same as the buildings
which he rears.

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p10"></span>Why then, when they have invented on
their part unscriptural phrases, for the purposes of irreligion, do they
accuse those who are religious in their use of them <span
id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) ? For irreligiousness is utterly
forbidden, though it be attempted to disguise it with artful expressions
and plausible sophisms; but religiousness is confessed by all to be
lawful, even though presented in strange phrases <span
id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881) , provided only they are used with a
religious view, and a wish to make them the expression of religious
thoughts. Now the aforesaid grovelling phrases of Christ’s enemies have
been shewn in these remarks to be both formerly and now replete with
irreligion; whereas the definition of the Council against them, if
accurately examined, will be found to be altogether a representation of
the truth, and especially if diligent attention be paid to the occasion
which gave rise to these expressions, which was reasonable, and was as
follows:—

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p13"></span>19. The Council <span
id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) wishing to do away with the
irreligious phrases of the Arians, and to use instead the acknowledged
words of the Scriptures, that the Son is not from nothing but ‘from
God,’ and is ‘Word’ and ‘Wisdom,’ and not creature or work, but a proper
offspring from the Father, Eusebius and his fellows, led by their
inveterate heterodoxy, understood the phrase ‘from God’ as belonging to
us, as if in respect to it the Word of God differed nothing from us, and
that because it is written, ‘There is one God, from whom, all
things <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883) ;’ and again, ‘Old things
are passed away, behold, all things are become new, and all things are
from God <span id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) .’ But the Fathers,
perceiving their craft and the cunning of their irreligion, were forced
to express more distinctly the sense of the words ‘from God.’
Accordingly, they wrote ‘from the essence of God <span
id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) ,’ in order that ‘from God’ might not
be considered common and equal in the Son and in things originate, but
that all others might be acknowledged as creatures, and the Word alone
as from the Father. For though all things be said to be from God, yet
this is not in the sense in which the Son is from Him; for as to the
creatures, ‘of God’ is said of them on this account, in that they exist
not at random or spontaneously, nor come to be by chance <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) , according to those philosophers who
refer them to the combination of atoms, and to elements of similar
structure,—nor as certain heretics speak of a distinct Framer,—nor as
others again say that the <span id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="xiv.ii.v-Page_163"></span>constitution of all things is from certain
Angels;—but in that (whereas God is), it was by Him that all things were
brought into being, not being before, through His Word; but as to the
Word, since He is not a creature, He alone is both called and is ‘from
the Father;’ and it is significant of this sense to say that the Son is
‘from the essence of the Father,’ for to nothing originate does this
attach. In truth, when Paul says that ‘all things are from God,’ he
immediately adds, ‘and one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom all
things <span id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887) ,’ in order to shew all
men, that the Son is other than all these things which came to be from
God (for the things which came to be from God, came to be through His
Son); and that he had used his foregoing words with reference to the
world as framed by God <span id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888) , and not
as if all things were from the Father as the Son is. For neither are
other things as the Son, nor is the Word one among others, for He is
Lord and Framer of all; and on this account did the Holy Council declare
expressly that He was of the essence <span
id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889) of the Father, that we might believe
the Word to be other than the nature of things originate, being alone
truly from God; and that no subterfuge should be left open to the
irreligious. This then was the reason why the Council wrote ‘of the
essence.’

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p22"></span>20. Again, when the Bishops said that the
Word must be described as the True Power and Image of the Father, in all
things exact <span id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890) and like the
Father, and as unalterable, and as always, and as in Him without
division (for never was the Word not, but He was always, existing
everlastingly with the Father, as the radiance of light), Eusebius and
his fellows endured indeed, as not daring to contradict, being put to
shame by the arguments which were urged against them; but withal they
were caught whispering to each other and winking with their eyes, that
‘like,’ and ‘always,’ and ‘power,’ and ‘in Him,’ were, as before, common
to us and the Son, and that it was no difficulty to agree to these. As
to ‘like,’ they said that it is written of us, ‘Man is the image and
glory of God <span id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891) :’ ‘always,’ that
it was written, ‘For we which live are alway <span
id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892) :’ ‘in Him,’ ‘In Him we live and move
and have our being <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) :’
‘unalterable,’ that it is written, ‘Nothing shall separate us from the
love of Christ <span id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894) :’ as to ‘power,’
that the caterpillar and the locust are called ‘power’ and ‘great
power <span id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) ,’ and that it is often
said of the people, for instance, ‘All the power of the Lord came out of
the land of Egypt <span id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896) :’ and there
are others also, heavenly ones, for Scripture says, ‘The Lord of powers
is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge <span
id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) .’ Indeed Asterius, by title the
sophist, had said the like in writing, having learned it from them, and
before him Arius <span id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) having learned
it also, as has been said. But the Bishops discerning in this too their
dissimulation, and whereas it is written, ‘Deceit is in the heart of the
irreligious that imagine evil <span id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) ,’
were again compelled on their part to collect the sense of the
Scriptures, and to re-say and re-write what they had said before, more
distinctly still, namely, that the Son is ‘one in essence <span
id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) ’ with the Father: by way of
signifying, that the Son was from the Father, and not merely like, but
the same in likeness <span id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) , and <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span id="xiv.ii.v-Page_164"></span>of
shewing that the Son’s likeness and unalterableness was different from
such copy of the same as is ascribed to us, which we acquire from virtue
on the ground of observance of the commandments. For bodies which are
like each other may be separated and become at distances from each
other, as are human sons relatively to their parents (as it is written
concerning Adam and Seth, who was begotten of him that he was like him
after his own pattern <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902) ); but
since the generation of the Son from the Father is not according to the
nature of men, and not only like, but also inseparable from the essence
of the Father, and He and the Father are one, as He has said Himself,
and the Word is ever in the Father and the Father in the Word, as the
radiance stands towards the light (for this the phrase itself
indicates), therefore the Council, as understanding this, suitably wrote
‘one in essence,’ that they might both defeat the perverseness of the
heretics, and shew that the Word was other than originated things. For,
after thus writing, they at once added, ‘But they who say that the Son
of God is from nothing, or created, or alterable, or a work, or from
other essence, these the Holy Catholic Church anathematizes <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903) .’ And by saying this, they shewed
clearly that ‘of the essence,’ and ‘one in essence,’ are destructive of
those catchwords of irreligion, such as ‘created,’ and ‘work,’ and
‘originated,’ and ‘alterable,’ and ‘He was not before His generation.’
And he who holds these, contradicts the Council; but he who does not
hold with Arius, must needs hold and intend the decisions of the
Council, suitably regarding them to signify the relation of the radiance
to the light, and from thence gaining the illustration of the truth.

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p37"></span>21. Therefore if they, as the others,
make an excuse that the terms are strange, let them consider the sense
in which the Council so wrote, and anathematize what the Council
anathematized; and then if they can, let them find fault with the
expressions. But I well know that, if they hold the sense of the
Council, they will fully accept the terms in which it is conveyed;
whereas if it be the sense which they wish to complain of, all must see
that it is idle in them to discuss the wording, when they are but
seeking handles for irreligion. This then was the reason of these
expressions; but if they still complain that such are not scriptural,
that very complaint is a reason why they should be cast out, as talking
idly and disordered in mind. And let them blame themselves in this
matter, for they set the example, beginning their war against God with
words not in Scripture. However, if a person is interested in the
question, let him know, that, even if the expressions are not in so many
words in the Scriptures, yet, as was said before, they contain the sense
of the Scriptures, and expressing it, they convey it to those who have
their hearing unimpaired for religious doctrine. Now this circumstance
it is for thee to consider, and for those ill-instructed men to give ear
to. It has been shewn above, and must be believed as true, that the Word
is from the Father, and the only Offspring <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904) proper to Him and natural. For whence
may one conceive the Son to be, who is the Wisdom and the Word, in whom
all things came to be, but from God Himself? However, the Scriptures
also teach us this, since the Father says by David, ‘My heart uttered a
good Word <span id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) ,’ and, ‘From the womb
before the morning star I begat Thee <span
id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) ;’ and the Son signifies to the Jews
about Himself, ‘If God were your Father, ye would love Me; for I
proceeded forth from the Father <span id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907)
.’ And again; ‘Not that anyone has seen the Father, save He which is
from God, He hath seen the Father <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908) .’ And moreover, ‘I and My Father are
one,’ and, ‘I in the Father and the Father in Me <span
id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909) ,’ is equivalent to saying, ‘I am from
the Father, and inseparable from Him.’ And John in saying, ‘The
Only-begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared
Him, <span id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910) ’ spoke of what He had
learned from the Saviour. Besides, what else does ‘in the bosom’
intimate, but the Son’s genuine generation from the Father?

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p45"></span>22. If then any man conceives God to be
compound, as accident <span id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) is in
essence, or <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="xiv.ii.v-Page_165"></span>to have any external envelopement <span
id="fr_912"></span>[913](#fn_912) , and to be encompassed, or as if
there is aught about Him which completes the essence, so that when we
say ‘God,’ or name ‘Father,’ we do not signify the invisible and
incomprehensible essence, but something about it, then let them complain
of the Council’s stating that the Son was from the essence of God; but
let them reflect, that in thus considering they utter two blasphemies;
for they make God corporeal, and they falsely say that the Lord is not
Son of the very Father, but of what is about Him. But if God be simple,
as He is, it follows that in saying ‘God’ and naming ‘Father,’ we name
nothing as if about Him, but signify his essence itself. For though to
comprehend what the essence of God is be impossible, yet if we only
understand that God is, and if Scripture indicates Him by means of these
titles, we, with the intention of indicating Him and none else, call Him
God and Father and Lord. When then He says, ‘I am that I am,’ and ‘I am
the Lord God <span id="fr_913"></span>[914](#fn_913) ,’ or when
Scripture says, ‘God,’ we understand nothing else by it but the
intimation of His incomprehensible essence Itself, and that He Is, who
is spoken of <span id="fr_914"></span>[915](#fn_914) . Therefore let no
one be startled on hearing that the Son of God is from the Essence of
the Father; but rather let him accept the explanation of the Fathers,
who in more explicit but equivalent language have for ‘from God’ written
‘of the essence.’ For they considered it the same thing to say that the
Word was ‘of God’ and ‘of the essence of God,’ since the word ‘God,’ as
I have already said, signifies nothing but the essence of Him Who Is. If
then the Word is not in such sense from God, as a son, genuine and
natural, from a father, but only as creatures because they are framed,
and as ‘all things are from God,’ then neither is He from the essence of
the Father, nor is the Son again Son according to essence, but in
consequence of virtue, as we who are called sons by grace. But if He
only is from God, as a genuine Son, as He is, then the Son may
reasonably be called from the essence of God.

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p50"></span>23. Again, the illustration of the Light
and the Radiance has this meaning. For the Saints have not said that the
Word was related to God as fire kindled from the heat of the sun, which
is commonly put out again, for this is an external work and a creature
of its author, but they all preach of Him as Radiance <span
id="fr_915"></span>[916](#fn_915) , thereby to signify His being from
the essence, proper and indivisible, and His oneness with the Father.
This also will secure His true unchangableness and immutability; for how
can these be His, unless He be proper Offspring of the Father’s essence?
for this too must be taken to confirm His identity with His own Father.
Our explanation then having so religious an aspect, Christ’s enemies
should not be startled at the ‘One in essence,’ either, since this term
also has a sound sense and good reasons. Indeed, if we say that the Word
is from the essence of God (for after what has been said this must be a
phrase admitted by them), what does this mean but the truth and eternity
of the essence from which He is begotten? for it is not different in
kind, lest it be combined with the essence of God as something foreign
and unlike it. Nor is He like only outwardly, lest He seem in some
respect or wholly to be other in essence, as brass shines like gold and
silver like tin. For these are foreign and of other nature, are
separated off from each other in nature and virtues, nor is brass proper
to gold, nor is the pigeon born from the dove <span
id="fr_916"></span>[917](#fn_916) ; but <span id="page_166">p.
166</span> <span id="xiv.ii.v-Page_166"></span>though they are
considered like, yet they differ in essence. If then it be thus with the
Son, let Him be a creature as we are, and not One in essence; but if the
Son is Word, Wisdom, Image of the Father, Radiance, He must in all
reason be One in essence. For unless it be proved that He is not from
God, but an instrument different in nature and different in essence,
surely the Council was sound in its doctrine and correct in its
decree <span id="fr_917"></span>[918](#fn_917) .

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p54"></span>24. Further, let every corporeal
reference be banished on this subject; and transcending every
imagination of sense, let us, with pure understanding and with mind
alone, apprehend the genuine relation of son to father, and the Word’s
proper relation towards God, and the unvarying likeness of the radiance
towards the light: for as the words ‘Offspring’ and ‘Son’ bear, and are
meant to bear, no human sense, but one suitable to God, in like manner
when we hear the phrase ‘one in essence,’ let us not fall upon human
senses, and imagine partitions and divisions of the Godhead, but as
having our thoughts directed to things immaterial, let us preserve
undivided the oneness of nature and the identity of light; for this is
proper to a son as regards a father, and in this is shewn that God is
truly Father of the Word. Here again, the illustration of light and its
radiance is in point <span id="fr_918"></span>[919](#fn_918) . Who will
presume to say that the radiance is unlike and foreign to the sun?
rather who, thus considering the radiance relatively to the sun, and the
identity of the light, would not say with confidence, ‘Truly the light
and the radiance are one, and the one is manifested in the other, and
the radiance is in the sun, so that whoso sees this, sees that also?’
but such a oneness and natural property, what should it be named by
those who believe and see aright, but Offspring one in essence? and
God’s Offspring what should we fittingly and suitably consider, but
Word, and Wisdom, and Power? which it were a sin to say was foreign to
the Father, or a crime even to imagine as other than with Him
everlastingly. For by this Offspring the Father made all things, and
extended His Providence unto all things; by Him He exercises His love to
man, and thus He and the Father are one, as has been said; unless indeed
these perverse men make a fresh attempt, and say that the essence of the
Word is not the same as the Light which is in Him from the Father, as if
the Light in the Son were one with the Father, but He Himself foreign in
essence as being a creature. Yet this is simply the belief of Caiaphas
and the Samosatene, which the Church cast out, but these now are
disguising; and by this they fell from the truth, and were declared to
be heretics. For if He partakes in fulness the light from the Father,
why is He not rather that which others partake <span
id="fr_919"></span>[920](#fn_919) , that there be no medium introduced
between Him and the Father? Otherwise, it is no longer clear that all
things were generated by the Son, but by Him, of whom He too
partakes <span id="fr_920"></span>[921](#fn_920) . And if this is the
Word, the Wisdom of the Father, in whom the Father is revealed and
known, and frames the world, and without whom the Father doth nothing,
evidently He it is who is from the Father: for all things originated
partake of Him, as partaking of the Holy Ghost. And being such, He
cannot be from nothing, nor a creature at all, but rather a proper
Offspring from the Father, as the radiance from light.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_873"></span>[161:874](2040203.htm#fr_873) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p3"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §6 (2).\]

<span id="fn_874"></span>[161:875](2040203.htm#fr_874) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p4"></span> supr. §7, note 2.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[161:876](2040203.htm#fr_875) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p5.2"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων</span>.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[161:877](2040203.htm#fr_876) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p6"></span> [Heb. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[161:878](2040203.htm#fr_877) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p7"></span> By <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p7.1"></span>αἴων</span>, age, seems to be meant duration,
or the measure of duration, before or independent of the existence of
motion, which is in measure of time. As motion, and therefore time, are
creatures, so are the ages. Considered as the measure of duration, an
age has a sort of positive existence, though not an <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p7.3"></span>οὐσία</span> or substance,
and means the same as ‘world,’ or an existing system of things viewed
apart from time and motion. Vid. Theodt. in *Hebr*. i. 2. Our Lord then
is the Maker of the ages thus considered, as the Apostle also tells us,
[Hebr. xi. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span
id="xiv.ii.v-p7.5"></span>. and God is the King of the ages, <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p7.7"></span>[1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p7.9"></span>. or
is before all ages, as being eternal, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p7.11"></span>προαιώνιος</span>. However, sometimes the
word is synonymous with eternity; ‘as time is to things which are under
time, so ages to things which are everlasting.’ Damasc. *Fid. Orth.* ii.
1, and ‘ages of ages’ stands for eternity; and then the ‘ages’ or
measures of duration may be supposed to stand for the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p7.13"></span>ἴ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p7.14"></span>δεαι</span> or ideas in
the Divine Mind, which seems to have been a Platonic or Gnostic notion.
Hence Synesius, *Hymn* iii. addresses the Almighty as <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p7.16"></span>αἰωνότοκε</span>, parent
of the ages. Hence sometimes God Himself is called the Age, Clem. Alex.
*Hymn. Pæd.* iii. fin. or, the Age of ages, Pseudo-Dion. *de Div. Nom.*
5. p. 580. or again, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p7.18"></span>αἰ& 240·νιος</span>. Theodoret sums up what
has been said thus: ‘Age is not any subsisting substance, but is an
interval indicative of time, now infinite, when God is spoken of, now
commensurate with creation, now with human life.’ *Hær.* v. 6. If then,
as Athan. says in the text, the Word is Maker of the ages, He is
independent of duration altogether; He does not come to be in time, but
is above and beyond it, or eternal. Elsewhere he says, ‘The words
addressed to the Son in the 144th Psalm, ‘Thy kingdom is a kingdom of
all ages,’ forbid any one to imagine any interval at all in which the
Word did not exist. For if every interval is measured by ages, and of
all the ages the Word is King and Maker, therefore, whereas no interval
at all exists prior to Him, it were madness to say, “There was once when
the Everlasting (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p7.20"></span>αἰ& 240·νιος</span>) was not.” *Orat.* i. 12.
And so Alexander; ‘Is it not unreasonable that He who made times, and
ages, and seasons, to all of which belongs ‘was not,’ should be said not
to be? for, if so, that interval in which they say the Son was not yet
begotten by the Father, precedes that Wisdom of God which framed *all*
things.’ Theod. *Hist.* i. 4. vid. also Basil *de Sp. S.* n. 14. Hilar.
*de Trin.* xii. 34.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[162:879](2040203.htm#fr_878) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p7.22"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p8"></span> Herm. *Mand.* 1. vid. *ad Afr.* 5.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[162:880](2040203.htm#fr_879) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p9"></span> \[*Letter* 39, and Prolegg. ch. iv. §4.\]
He calls it elsewhere a most profitable book. *Incarn.* 3.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[162:881](2040203.htm#fr_880) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p11"></span> Athan. here retorts, as it was obvious
to do, the charge brought against the Council which gave occasion for
this Treatise. If the Council went beyond Scripture in the use of the
word ‘essence’ (which however can hardly be granted), who made this
necessary, but they who had already introduced the phrases, ‘the Son was
out of nothing,’ &c., &c.? ‘Of the essence,’ and ‘one in essence,’ were
directly intended to contradict and supplant the Arian unscriptural
innovations, as he says below, §20. fin. 21. init. vid. also *ad Afros.*
6. *de Synod.* §36, 37. He observes in like manner that the Arian <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p11.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p11.3"></span>γένητος</span>, though
allowable as used by religious men, *de Syn.* §40. was unscriptural,
*Orat.* i. §30, 34. Also Epiph. *Hær.* 76. p. 941. Basil. *contr.
Eunom.* i. 5. Hilar. *contr. Const.* 16. Ambros. *Incarn.* 80.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[162:882](2040203.htm#fr_881) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p11.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p12"></span> Vid. §10, note 3.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[162:883](2040203.htm#fr_882) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p14"></span> vid. *ad. Afr.* 5.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[162:884](2040203.htm#fr_883) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p15"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.v-p15.1"></span>[1 Cor.
viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="xiv.ii.v-p15.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[162:885](2040203.htm#fr_884) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p15.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p16"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[162:886](2040203.htm#fr_885) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p17"></span> Hence it stands in the Creed, ‘from the
Father, *that is,* from the essence of the Father.’ vid. Eusebius’s
Letter, *infr*. According to the received doctrine of the Church all
rational beings, and in one sense all beings whatever, are ‘from God,’
over and above the fact of their creation; and of this truth the Arians
made use to deny our Lord’s proper divinity. Athan. lays down elsewhere
that nothing remains in consistence and life, except from a
participation of the Word, which is to be considered a gift from Him,
additional to that of creation, and separable in idea from it; vid.
above, §17, note 5. *contr. Gent.* 42. *de Incarn.* 5. Man thus
considered is, in his first estate, a son of God and born of God, or, to
use the term which occurs so frequently in the Arian controversy, in the
number, not only of the creatures, but of *things generate,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p17.2"></span>γεννητά</span>. This was
the sense in which the Arians said that our Lord was Son of God;
whereas, as Athan. says, ‘things originate, *being works,* cannot be
called generate, except so far as, after their making, they partake of
the begotten Son, and are therefore said to have been generated also;
not at all in their own nature, but because of their participation of
the Son in the Spirit.’ *Orat.* i. 56. The question then was, as to the
*distinction* of the Son’s divine generation over that of holy men; and
the Catholics answered that He was <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p17.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p17.5"></span>ξ οὐσίας</span>, from the essence of God; not
by participation of grace, not by resemblance, not in a limited sense,
but really and simply, and therefore by an internal divine act. vid.
below, §22. and *infr.* §31. \[The above note has been modified so as to
eliminate the erroneous identification of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p17.7"></span>γεννητὸς</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p17.9"></span>γενητός</span>.\]

<span id="fn_886"></span>[162:887](2040203.htm#fr_886) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p17.10"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p18"></span> Cf. *de Syn.* §35.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[163:888](2040203.htm#fr_887) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p19"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.v-p19.1"></span>[1 Cor.
viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="xiv.ii.v-p19.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_888"></span>[163:889](2040203.htm#fr_888) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p19.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p20"></span> When characteristic attributes and
prerogatives are ascribed to God, or to the Father, this is done only to
the exclusion of creatures, or of false gods, not to the exclusion of
His Son who is implied in the mention of Himself. Thus when God is
called only wise, or the Father the only God, or God is said to be
unoriginate, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p20.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p20.3"></span>γένητος</span>, this is not in contrast to
the Son, but to all things which are distinct from God. vid. *Orat.*
iii. 8. Naz. *Orat.* 30, 13. Cyril. *Thesaur.* p 142. ‘The words “one”
and “only” ascribed to God in Scripture,’ says S. Basil, ‘are not used
in contrast to the Son or the Holy Spirit, but with reference to those
who are not God, and falsely called so.’ *Ep.* 8. n. 3. On the other
hand, when the Father is mentioned, the other Divine Persons are implied
in Him, ‘The Blessed and Holy Trinity,’ says S. Athan. ‘is indivisible
and one in itself; and when the Father is mentioned, His Word is added,
and the Spirit in the Son; and if the Son is named, in the Son is the
Father, and the Spirit is not external to the Word.’ *ad Serap.* i. 14.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[163:890](2040203.htm#fr_889) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p20.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p21"></span> Vid. also *ad Afros.* 4. Again, ‘“I am,”
<span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p21.2"></span>τὸ ὂν</span>, is
really proper to God and is a whole, bounded or mutilated neither by
aught before Him, nor after Him, for He neither was, nor shall be.’ Naz.
*Orat.* 30. 18 fin. Also Cyril *Dial.* i. p. 392. Damasc. *Fid. Orth.*
i. 9. and the Semiarians at Ancyra, Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 12 init. By the
‘essence,’ however, or, ‘substance’ of God, the Council did not mean any
thing distinct from God, vid. note 3 *infr.* but God Himself viewed in
His self-existing nature (vid. Tert. in *Hermog,* 3.), nay, it expressly
meant to negative the contrary notion of the Arians, that our Lord was
from something distinct from God, and in consequence of created
substance. Moreover the term expresses the idea of God *positively,* in
contradistinction to negative epithets, such as infinite, immense,
eternal, &c. Damasc. *Fid. Orthod.* i. 4. and as little implies any
thing distinct from God as those epithets do.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[163:891](2040203.htm#fr_890) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p23.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p23.2"></span>παράλλακτον</span>

<span id="fn_891"></span>[163:892](2040203.htm#fr_891) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p23.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p24"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[163:893](2040203.htm#fr_892) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p25"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#011)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[163:894](2040203.htm#fr_893) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p26"></span> [Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[163:895](2040203.htm#fr_894) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p27"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p27.1"></span>,
*who shall separate.*

<span id="fn_895"></span>[163:896](2040203.htm#fr_895) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p27.3"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p28"></span> [Joel ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[163:897](2040203.htm#fr_896) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p29"></span> [Ex. xii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#041)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_897"></span>[163:898](2040203.htm#fr_897) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p30"></span> [Ps. xlvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[163:899](2040203.htm#fr_898) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p31"></span> vid. supr. §8, note 3.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[163:900](2040203.htm#fr_899) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p32"></span> [Prov. xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#020)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[163:901](2040203.htm#fr_900) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p33"></span> vid. *ad Afros.* 5, 6. *ad Serap.* ii.
5. S. Ambrose tells us, that a Letter written by Eusebius of Nicomedia,
in which he said, ‘If we call Him true Son of the Father and uncreate,
then are we granting that He is one in essence, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p33.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p33.3"></span>μοούσιον</span>,’
determined the Council on the adoption of the term. *de Fid.* iii. n.
125. He had disclaimed ‘of the essence,’ in his Letter to Paulinus.
Theod. *Hist.* i. 4. Arius, however, had disclaimed <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p33.5"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p33.6"></span>μοούσιον</span> already,
Epiph. *Hær.* 69. 7. It was a word of old usage in the Church, as
Eusebius of Cæsarea confesses in his Letter, infr. Tertullian in *Prax.*
13 fin. has the translation ‘unius substantiæ:’ (vid. Lucifer *de non
Parc*. p. 218.) as he has ‘de substantia Patris,’ in *Prax.* 4. and
Origen perhaps used the word, vid. Pamph. *Apol.* 5. and Theognostus and
the two Dionysii, *infr*. §25, 26. And before them Clement had spoken of
the <span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p33.8"></span>ἕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p33.9"></span>νωσις τῆς μοναδικῆς
οὐσίας</span>, ‘the union of the single essence,’ vid. Le Quien in
Damasc. *Fid. Orth.* i. 8. Novatian too has ‘per substantiæ
communionem,’ *de Trinit.* 31.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[163:902](2040203.htm#fr_901) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p33.11"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p34"></span> The Arians allowed that our Lord was
like and the image of the Father, but in the sense in which a picture is
like the original, differing from it in substance and in fact. In this
sense they even allowed the strong word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p34.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p34.3"></span>παράλλακτος</span> *unvarying* \[or rather
*exact*\] image, vid. beginning of §20. which had been used by the
Catholics (vid. Alexander, ap. Theod. *Hist.* i. 3. p. 740.) as by the
Semiarians afterwards, who even added the words <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p34.5"></span>κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span>, or
‘according to substance.’ Even this strong phrase, however, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p34.7"></span>κατ᾽ οὐσίαν ἀπαράλλακτος
εἰκὼν</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p34.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p34.9"></span>παραλλάκτως ὅμοιος</span>, did not appear to
the Council an adequate safeguard of the doctrine. Athan. notices *de
Syn.* that ‘like’ applies to qualities rather than to essence, §53. Also
Basil. *Ep.* 8. n. 3. ‘while in itself,’ says the same Father, ‘it is
frequently used of faint similitudes and falling very far short of the
original.’ *Ep.* 9. n. 3. Accordingly, the Council determined on the
word <span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p34.11"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p34.12"></span>μοούσιον</span> as
implying, as the text expresses it, ‘the *same* in likeness,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p34.14"></span>ταὐτὸν τῇ
ὁμοιώσει</span>, that the likeness might not be analogical. vid. the
passage about gold and brass, §23 below, Cyril in Joan. 1. iii. c. v. p.
302. \[See below *de Syn.* 15, note 2.\]

<span id="fn_902"></span>[164:903](2040203.htm#fr_902) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p34.16"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p35"></span> [Gen. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#003)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_903"></span>[164:904](2040203.htm#fr_903) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p36"></span> vid. Euseb.’s Letter, *supr.*

<span id="fn_904"></span>[164:905](2040203.htm#fr_904) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p38.1"></span>γέννημα</span>, offspring; this word is of
very frequent occurrence in Athan. He speaks of it, *Orat.* iv. 3. as
virtually Scriptural. Yet Basil, *contr. Eunom.* ii. 6–8. explicitly
disavows the word, as an unscriptural invention of Eunomius. ‘That the
Father begat we are taught in many places: that the Son is an offspring
we never heard up to this day, for Scripture says, “unto us a *child* is
born, unto us a *son* is given.”’ c. 7. He goes on to say that ‘it is
fearful to give Him names of our own to whom God has given a name which
is above every name;’ and observes that offspring is not the word which
even a human father would apply to his son, as for instance we read,
‘Child, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p38.3"></span>τέκνον</span>,) go into the vineyard,’ and
‘Who art thou, my son?’ moreover that fruits of the earth are called
offspring (‘I will not drink of the offspring of this vine’), rarely
animated things, except indeed in such instances as, ‘O generation
(offspring) of vipers.’ Nyssen defends his brother, *contr. Eunom.
Orat.* iii. p 105. In the Arian formula ‘an offspring, but not as *one
of the offsprings,*’ it is synonymous with ‘work’ or ‘creature.’ On the
other hand Epiphanius uses it, e.g. *Hær*. 76. n. 8. and Naz. *Orat.*
29. n. 2. Eusebius, *Demonstr. Ev.* iv. 2. Pseudo-Basil. *adv. Eunom.*
iv. p. 280. fin.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[164:906](2040203.htm#fr_905) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p38.5"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p39"></span> [Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[164:907](2040203.htm#fr_906) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p40"></span> [Psa.
110.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)<span
id="xiv.ii.v-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[164:908](2040203.htm#fr_907) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p41"></span> [John viii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[164:909](2040203.htm#fr_908) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p42"></span> [John
6.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[164:910](2040203.htm#fr_909) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p43"></span> [John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="xiv.ii.v-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[164:911](2040203.htm#fr_910) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p44"></span> [John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[164:912](2040203.htm#fr_911) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p46.1"></span>συμβεβηκός</span>. Cf. *Orat.* iv. 2. also
*Orat.* i. 36. The text embodies the common doctrine of the Fathers.
Athenagoras, however, speaks of God’s goodness as an accident, ‘as
colour to the body,’ ‘as flame is ruddy and the sky blue,’ *Legat.* 24.
This, however is but a verbal difference, for shortly before he speaks
of His being, <span class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p46.3"></span>τὸ
ὄντως ὂν</span>, and His unity of nature, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p46.4"></span>τὸ μονοφυὲς</span>, as in the number of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p46.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiv.ii.v-p46.6"></span>πισυμβεβηκότα
αὐτῶ</span>. Eusebius uses the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p46.8"></span>συμβεβηκὸς</span> in the same way \[but see
*Orat.* iv. 2, note 8\], Demonstr. *Evang.* iv. 3. And hence S. Cyril,
in controversy with the Arians, is led by the course of their objections
to observe, ‘There are cogent reasons for considering these things *as
accidents* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p46.10"></span>συμβεβηκότα</span> in God, though they be
not.’ *Thesaur.* p. 263. vid. the following note.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[165:913](2040203.htm#fr_912) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p46.12"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p47.1"></span>περιβολὴ</span>, and so *de Syn.* §34. which
is very much the same passage. Some Fathers, however, seem to say the
reverse. E.g. Nazianzen says that ‘neither the immateriality of God nor
ingenerateness, present to us His essence.’ *Orat.* 28. 9. And S.
Augustine, arguing on the word ingenitus, says, that ‘not every thing
which is said to be in God is said according to essence.’ *de Trin.* v.
6. And hence, while Athan. in the text denies that there are qualities
or the like belonging to Him, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p47.3"></span>περὶ αὐτὸν</span>, it is still common in the
Fathers to speak of qualities, as in the passage of S. Gregory just
cited, in which the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p47.5"></span>περὶ θεὸν</span> occur. There is no
difficulty in reconciling these statements, though it would require more
words than could be given to it here. Petavius has treated the subject
fully in his work *de Deo.* i. 7–11. and especially ii. 3. When the
Fathers say that there is no difference between the divine
‘proprietates’ and essence, they speak of the fact, considering the
Almighty as He is; when they affirm a difference, they speak of Him as
contemplated by us, who are unable to grasp the idea of Him as one and
simple, but view His Divine Nature as if *in projection* (if such a word
may be used), and thus divided into substance and quality as man may be
divided into genus and difference.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[165:914](2040203.htm#fr_913) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p47.7"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p48"></span> <span id="xiv.ii.v-p48.1"></span>[Exod.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#015)<span id="xiv.ii.v-p48.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[165:915](2040203.htm#fr_914) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p48.4"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p49"></span> In like manner *de Synod.* §34. Also
Basil, ‘The essence is not any one of things which do not attach, but is
the very being of God.’ *contr. Eun.* i. 10 fin. ‘The nature of God is
no other than Himself, for He is simple and uncompounded.’ Cyril
*Thesaur.* p. 59. ‘When we say the power of the Father, we say nothing
else than the essence of the Father.’ August. *de Trin.* vii. 6. And so
Numenius in Eusebius, ‘Let no one deride, if I say that the name of the
Immaterial is essence and being.’ Præp. *Evang.* xi. 10.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[165:916](2040203.htm#fr_915) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p51"></span> Athan.’s ordinary illustration is, as
here, not from ‘fire,’ but from ‘radiance,’ ἀ<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p51.3"></span>παύγασμα</span>, after S. Paul \[i.e.
Hebrews\] and the Author of the Book of Wisdom, meaning by radiance the
light which a light diffuses by means of the atmosphere. On the other
hand Arius in his letter to Alexander, Epiph. *Hær.* 69. 7. speaks
against the doctrine of Hieracas that the Son was from the Father as a
light from a light or as a lamp divided into two, which after all was
Arian doctrine. Athanasius refers to fire, *Orat.* iv. §2 and 10, but
still to fire and its radiance. However we find the illustration of fire
from fire, Justin. *Tryph.* 61. Tatian *contr. Græc.* 5. At this early
day the illustration of radiance might have a Sabellian bearing, as that
of fire in Athan.’s had an Arian. Hence Justin protests against those
who considered the Son as ‘like the sun’s light in the heaven,’ which
‘when it sets, goes away with it,’ whereas it is as ‘fire kindled from
fire.’ *Tryph*. 128. Athenagoras, however, like Athanasius, says ‘as
light from fire,’ using also the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p51.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiv.ii.v-p51.6"></span>πό& 207·ῥοια</span>, effluence: vid. also
Orig. *Periarch.* i. 2. n. 4. Tertull. *Ap.* 21. Theognostus, quoted
*infr.* §25.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[165:917](2040203.htm#fr_916) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p51.8"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p52"></span> vid. *de Syn.* §41.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[166:918](2040203.htm#fr_917) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p53"></span> As ‘of the essence’ declared that our
Lord was *uncreate,* so ‘one in essence’ declared that He was *equal*
with the Father; no term derived from ‘likeness,’ even ‘like in essence’
answering for this purpose, for such phrases might all be understood of
*resemblance* or *representation.* vid. §20, notes 8, 9.

<span id="fn_918"></span>[166:919](2040203.htm#fr_918) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p55"></span> Athan. has just used the illustration of
radiance in reference to ‘of the essence:’ and now he says that it
equally illustrates ‘one in essence;’ the light diffused from the sun
being at once contemporaneous and homogeneous with its original.

<span id="fn_919"></span>[166:920](2040203.htm#fr_919) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p56"></span> Vid. §10 *init.* note 4.

<span id="fn_920"></span>[166:921](2040203.htm#fr_920) <span
id="xiv.ii.v-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.ii.v-p57"></span> The point in which perhaps all the
ancient heresies concerning our Lord’s divine nature agreed, was in
considering His different titles to be those of different beings or
subjects, or not really and properly to belong to one and the same
person; so that the Word was not the Son, or the Radiance not the Word,
or our Lord was the Son, but only improperly the Word, not the true
Word, Wisdom, or Radiance. Paul of Samosata, Sabellius \[?\], and Arius,
agreed in considering that the Son was a creature, and that He was
called, made after, or inhabited by the impersonal attribute called the
Word or Wisdom. When the Word or Wisdom was held to be personal, it
became the doctrine of Nestorius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Authorities in Support of the Council. Theognostus; Dionysius of
Alexandria; Dionysius of Rome; Origen.](2040204)
