[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040016)  [Next](2040018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.v"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p1"></span> §4. *Early years of his Episcopate. The
Anti-Nicene reaction,* 328–335.

<span id="v.ii.v-p2"></span>Athanasius was elected bishop by general
consent. Alexander, as we have seen, had practically nominated him, and
a large body of popular opinion clamoured for his election, <span
id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span> <span
id="v.ii.v-Page_xxxvii"></span>as “the good, the pious, a Christian, one
of the ascetics, a genuine bishop.” The actual election appears (p. 103)
to have rested with the bishops of Egypt and Libya, who testify ten
years later (ib.) that the majority <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)
of their body elected him.

<span id="v.ii.v-p4"></span>The see to which he succeeded was the second
in Christendom; it had long enjoyed direct jurisdiction over the bishops
of all Egypt and Libya (p. 178, Socr. i. 9), the bishops of Alexandria
enjoyed the position and power of secular potentates, although in a less
degree than those of Rome, or of Alexandria itself in later times (Socr.
vii. 11, cf. 7). The bishop had command of large funds, which, however,
were fully claimed for church purposes and alms (see p. 105). In
particular, the ‘pope’ of Alexandria had practically in his hands the
appointment to the sees in his province: accordingly, as years go on, we
find Arianism disappear entirely from the Egyptian episcopate. The
bishop of Alexandria, like many other influential bishops in antiquity,
was commonly spoken of as Papa or Pope; he also was known as the ᾽<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.v-p4.1"></span>Αρχιεπίσκοπος</span>, as we
learn from a contemporary inscription (see p. 564, note 2).

<span id="v.ii.v-p5"></span>The earliest biographer of Athanasius (see
Introduction to *Hist. Aceph*. p. 495, 496, below) divides the
episcopate of Athanasius into periods of ‘quiet’ and of exile, marking
the periods of each according to what appears to be the reckoning
officially preserved in the episcopal archives. His first period of
‘quiet’ lasts from June 8, 328, to July 11, 335 (departure for Tyre), a
period of seven years, one month and three days; it is thus the third
longest period of undisturbed occupancy of his see, the next being the
last from his final restoration under Valens till his death (seven years
and three months), and the longest of all being the golden decade
(346–356, really nine years and a quarter) preceding the Third Exile.

<span id="v.ii.v-p6"></span>Of the internal events of this first
septennium of quiet we know little that is definite. At the end of it,
however, we find him supported by the solid body of the Egyptian
episcopate: and at the beginning one of his first steps (autumn of 329)
was to make a visitation of the province ‘to strengthen the churches of
God’ (*Vit. Pach.*, cf. also Epiph. *Hær.* 68. 6). We learn from the
life of Pachomius (on which see below, p. 189), that he penetrated as
far as Syene on the Ethiopian frontier, and, as he passed Tabenne, was
welcomed by Pachomius and his monks with great rejoicings. At the
request of Saprion, bishop of Tentyra, in whose diocese the island was,
he appears to have ordained Pachomius to the presbyterate, thus
constituting his community a self-contained body (Acta SS. Mai. iii. 30,
Appx.). The supposed consecration of Frumentius at this time must be
reserved, in accordance with preponderating evidence, for §7.

<span id="v.ii.v-p7"></span>Meanwhile, the anti-Nicene reaction was
being skilfully fostered by the strategy of Eusebius of Nicomedia.
Within a year of the election of Athanasius we find him restored to
imperial favour, and at once the assault upon the Nicene strongholds
begins. The controversy between Marcellus and Eusebius of Cæsarea
(*supra,* p. xxxv.), appears to have begun later, but the latter was
already, in conjunction with his friend Paulinus of Tyre and with
Patrophilus, at theological war with Eustathius of Antioch. A synod of
Arian and reactionary bishops assembled at Antioch, and deposed the
latter on the two charges (equally *de rigueur* in such cases) of
Sabellianism and immorality. Backed by a complaint (possibly founded on
fact) that he had indiscreetly repeated a current tale (p. 271, n. 2)
concerning Helena, the Emperor’s mother, the sentence of the council had
the full support of the civil arm, and Eustathius lost his see for ever.
Although he lived till about 358, no council ventured to ‘restore’ him
(discussed by Gwatkin, pp. 73, 74, note), but the Christian public of
Antioch violently resented his extrusion, and a compact body of the
Church-people steadily refused to recognise any other bishop during, and
even after, his lifetime (*infr.* p. 481). Asclepas of Gaza was next
disposed of, then Eutropius of Hadrianople, and many others (names, p.
271). Meanwhile everything was done to foment disturbance in Egypt. The
Meletians had been stirring ever since the death of Alexander, and
Eusebius was not slow to use such an opportune lever. The object in view
was two-fold, the restoration of Arius to communion in Alexandria,
without which the moral triumph of the reaction would be unachieved, and
the extrusion of Athanasius. Accordingly a fusion took place <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) between the <span id="page_xxxviii">p.
xxxviii</span> <span id="v.ii.v-Page_xxxviii"></span>Arians of Egypt and
the Meletians, now under the leadership of John ‘Arcaph,’ whom Meletius
on his death-bed had consecrated as his successor against the terms of
the Nicene settlement. At any rate, the Meletians were attached to the
cause by Eusebius by means of large promises. At the same time (330?)
Eusebius, having obtained the recall of Arius from exile, wrote to
Athanasius requesting him to admit Arius and his friends (Euzoius,
Pistus, &c.) to communion; the bearer of the letter conveyed the
assurance of dire consequences in the event of his non-compliance (p.
131). Athanasius refused to admit persons convicted of heresy at the
Ecumenical Council. This brought a letter from the Emperor himself,
threatening deposition by an imperial mandate unless he would freely
admit ‘all who should desire it;’—a somewhat sweeping demand. Athanasius
replied firmly and, it would seem, with effect, that ‘the
Christ-opposing heresy had no fellowship with the Catholic Church.’
Thereupon Eusebius played what proved to be the first card of a long
suit. A deputation of three Meletian bishops arrived at the Palace with
a complaint. Athanasius had, they said, levied a precept (<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.v-p8.2"></span>κανών</span>) upon Egypt for
Church expenses: they had been among the first victims of the exaction.
Luckily, two Presbyters of Alexandria were at court, and were able to
disprove the charge, which accordingly drew a stern rebuke upon its
authors. Constantine wrote to Athanasius summoning him to an audience,
probably with the intention of satisfying himself as to other
miscellaneous accusations which were busily ventilated at this date,
e.g., that he was too young (cf. p. 133) when elected bishop, that he
had governed with arrogance and violence, that he used magic (this
charge was again made 30 years later, Ammian. xv. 7), and subsidised
treasonable persons. Athanasius accordingly started for court, as it
would seem, late in 330 (see *Letter* 3, p. 512 *sq*.). His visit was
successful, but matters went slowly; Athanasius himself had an illness,
which lasted a long time, and upon his recovery the winter storms made
communication impossible. Accordingly, his Easter letter for 332
(*Letter* 4) was sent unusually late—apparently in the first navigable
weather of that year—and Athanasius reached home, after more than a
year’s absence <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) , when Lent was
already half over.

<span id="v.ii.v-p10"></span>The principal matters investigated by
Constantine during the visit of Athanasius were certain charges made by
the three Meletian bishops, whom Eusebius had detained for the purpose;
one of these, the story of Macarius and the broken chalice, will be
given at length presently. All alike were treated as frivolous, and
Athanasius carried home with him a commendatory letter from Augustus
himself. Defeated for the moment, the puppets of Eusebius matured their
accusations, and in a year’s time two highly damaging stories were ripe
for an ecclesiastical investigation.

<span id="v.ii.v-p11"></span>(a) *The case of Ischyras.* This person had
been ordained presbyter by Colluthus, and his ordination had been, as we
have seen (§2), pronounced null and void by the Alexandrian Council of
324. In spite of this he had persisted in carrying on his ministrations
at the village where he lived (Irene Secontaruri, possibly the hamlet
‘Irene’ belonged to the township of S., there was a presbyter for the
township, pp. 133, 145, but none at Irene, p. 106). His place of worship
was a cottage inhabited only by an orphan child; of the few inhabitants
of the place, only seven, and those his own relations, would attend his
services. During a visitation of his diocese, Athanasius, had heard of
this from the presbyter of the township, and had sent Macarius, one of
the clergy who were attending him on his tour (cf. pp. 109, 139), to
summon Ischyras for explanations. Macarius found the poor man ill in bed
and unable to come, but urged his father to dissuade him from his
irregular proceedings. But instead of desisting, Ischyras joined the
Meletians. His first version of the matter appears to have been that
Macarius had used violence, and broken his chalice. The Meletians
communicate this to Eusebius, who eggs them on to get up the case. The
story gradually improves. Ischyras, it now appeared, had been actually
celebrating the Eucharist; Macarius had burst in upon him, and not only
broken the chalice but upset the Holy Table. In this form the tale had
been carried to Constantine when Athanasius was at Nicomedia. The
relations of Ischyras, however, prevailed upon him to recall his
statements, and he presented the Bishop with a written statement that
the whole story was false, and had been extorted from him by violence.
Ischyras was forgiven, but placed under censure, which probably led to
his eventually renewing the charge with increased bitterness. Athanasius
now was accused of *personally* breaking the chalice, &c. In the letter
of the council of Philippopolis the cottage of Ischyras becomes a
‘basilica’ which Athanasius had caused to be thrown down.

<span id="v.ii.v-p12"></span>(b) *The case of Arsenius.* Arsenius was
Meletian bishop of Hypsele (not in the Meletian catalogue of 327). By a
large bribe, as it is stated, he was induced by John Arcaph to go into
hiding among the Meletian monks of the Thebaid; rumours were quietly set
in motion that Athanasius had had him murdered, and had procured one of
his hands for magical purposes. A hand was circulated purporting to be
the very hand in question. A report of the case, including the last
version of the Ischyras scandal, was sent to Constantine, who, startled
by the new accusation, sent orders to his half-brother, Dalmatius, a
high official at Antioch, to enquire into the case. He appears to have
suggested a council at Cæsarea under the presidency of Eusebius, which
was to meet at some time in the year 334 (πέρυσιν, p. 141, cf. note 2
there, also Gwatkin, p. 84 note; the ‘30 months’ of Soz. ii. 25 is an
exaggeration). Athanasius, however, obstinately declined a trial before
a judge whom he regarded as biassed; his refusal bitterly offended the
aged historian. Accordingly the *venue* was fixed for Tyre in the
succeeding year; a Count Dionysius was to represent the Emperor, and see
that all was conducted fairly, and Athanasius was stringently (p. 137)
summoned to <span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span> <span
id="v.ii.v-Page_xxxix"></span>attend. Meanwhile a trusted deacon was on
the tracks of the missing man. Arsenius was traced to a ‘monastery’ of
Meletian brethren in the nome of Antæopolis in Upper Egypt. Pinnes, the
presbyter of the community, got wind of the discovery, and smuggled
Arsenius away down the Nile; presently he was spirited away to Tyre. The
deacon, however, very astutely made a sudden descent upon the monastery
in force, seized Pinnes, carried him to Alexandria, brought him before
the ‘Duke,’ confronted him with the monk who had escorted Arsenius away,
and forced them to confess to the whole plot. As soon as he was able to
do so, Pinnes wrote to John Arcaph, warning him of the exposure, and
suggesting that the charge had better be dropped (p. 135; the letter is
an amusingly naive exhibition of human rascality). Meanwhile (Socr. i.
29) Arsenius was heard of at an inn in Tyre by the servant of a
magistrate; the latter had him arrested, and informed Athanasius <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) . Arsenius stoutly denied his identity,
but was recognised by the bishop of Tyre, and at last confessed. The
Emperor was informed and wrote to Athanasius (p. 135), expressing his
indignation at the plot, as also did Alexander, bishop of Thessalonica.
Arsenius made his peace with Athanasius, and in due time succeeded
(according to the Nicene rule) to the sole episcopate of Hypsele (p.
548). John Arcaph even admitted his guilt and renounced his schisms and
was invited to Court (p. 136); but his submission was not permanent.

<span id="v.ii.v-p14"></span>According to the *Apology* of Athanasius,
all this took place some time before the council of Tyre; we cannot fix
the date, except that it must have come after the Easter of 332 (see
above). It appears most natural, from the language of *Apol. Ar.* 71, to
fix the exposure of Arsenius not very long before the summoning of the
council of Tyre, but long enough to allow for the renewed intrigues
which led to its being convened. But this pushes us back behind the
intended council of Cæsarea in 334; we seem therefore compelled to keep
Arsenius waiting at Tyre from about 333 to the summer of 335.

<span id="v.ii.v-p15"></span>It must be remembered that the Council of
Tyre was merely a <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.v-p15.1"></span>πάρεργον</span> to the great Dedication Meeting
at Jerusalem, which was to celebrate the *Tricennalia* of Constantine’s
reign by consecrating his grand church on Mount Calvary. On their way to
Jerusalem the bishops were to despatch at Tyre their business of
quieting the Egyptian troubles <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45)
(Eus. *V. C.* iv. 41). To Tyre accordingly Athanasius repaired. He left
Alexandria on July 11, 335, and was absent, as it proved (according to
the reckoning of the *Hist. Aceph.,* below, p. 496), two years, four
months and eleven days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxxvii:42](2040017.htm#fr_41) <span
id="v.ii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p3"></span> Eager opposition, however, was not lacking.
The accounts are confused, but the statement of the bishops leaves room
for a strong minority of malcontents, who *may* have elected ‘Theonas’
(was he the exiled Arian bishop of Marmarica? the electors of ‘Theonas’
in Epiph. *Hær*. 68 are Meletians, but there is no Theonas in the
Meletian catalogue of 327; the Arians and Meletians very likely
combined; the latter properly had no votes, but they were not likely to
regard this; see Gwatkin, p. 66, note, *Church Quarterly Review.* xvi.
p. 393). The protests of the opposition were apparently disregarded and
Athanasius consecrated before the other side considered the question as
closed, (The statement of Epiph. *Hær*. 69, that the Arians chose one
Achillas, is unsupported.) Athanasius was probably only just thirty
years old, and his opponents did not fail to question whether he were
not under the canonical age.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxxvii:43](2040017.htm#fr_42) <span
id="v.ii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p8"></span> Soz. ii. 21, 22: the account is not very
clear; probably there was a gradual approximation, the first step being
the Meletian support of the Arian Theonas against Athanasius in 328, if
the view suggested above is correct.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxxviii:44](2040017.htm#fr_43) <span
id="v.ii.v-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p9"></span> *Fest. Ind.* iii. The *Index* is of course
right in giving 330–331 as the year of his departure for Nicomedia, but
makes a slip in assigning his absence as the cause of delay in the
despatch of the Letter for *that* year instead of for the following one.
See p. 512 note 1.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxxix:45](2040017.htm#fr_44) <span
id="v.ii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p13"></span> Who perhaps visited Tyre himself at this
time, according to an allusion in *Hist. Aceph.* xii., see Sievers,
*Einl.* p. 131.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[xxxix:46](2040017.htm#fr_45) <span
id="v.ii.v-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p16"></span> The conduct of Constantine will appear
fairly consistent if we suppose that after ordering the investigation at
Antioch, *supr.* (332?) he received proofs (333) of the falsehood of the
Arsenius story, but that, finding that the complaints were constantly
renewed, and that Ath. refused to meet his accusers at Cæsarea, he
yielded to the suggestion (Eus. Nic.?) that the assembly of so many
bishops at Jerusalem might be a valuable opportunity for finally dealing
with so troublesome a matter. He desired peace, and had not lost his
faith in councils. Hefele follows Socrates i. 29, in his error as to the
date of the discovery of Arsenius (E. Tr. ii. 21).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Council of Tyre and First Exile of Athanasius,
335-337.](2040018)
