[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040356)  [Next](2040358) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p1.2"></span>Texts Explained;
Secondly,</span> <span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p1.3"></span><span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p1.4"></span>[Ps.
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p1.5"></span></span>. *Whether the words ‘therefore,’
‘anointed,’ &c., imply that the Word has been rewarded. Argued against
first from the word ‘fellows’ or ‘partakers.’ He is anointed with the
Spirit in His manhood to sanctify human nature. Therefore the Spirit
descended on Him in Jordan, when in the flesh. And He is said to
sanctify Himself for us, and give us the glory He has received. The word
‘wherefore’ implies His divinity. ‘Thou hast loved righteousness,’ &c.,
do not imply trial or choice.*

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p2"></span>46. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p2.1"></span>Such</span> an explanation of the
Apostle’s words confutes the irreligious men; and what the sacred poet
says admits also the same orthodox sense, which they misinterpret, but
which in the Psalmist is manifestly religious. He says then, ‘Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the
sceptre of Thy Kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated
iniquity, therefore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil
of gladness above Thy fellows <span id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079)
.’ Behold, O ye Arians, and acknowledge even hence the truth. The Singer
speaks of us all as ‘fellows’ or ‘partakers’ of the Lord: but were He
one of things which come out of nothing and of things originate, He
Himself had been one of those who partake. But, since he hymned Him as
the eternal God, saying, ‘Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever,’ and
has declared that all other things partake of Him, what conclusion must
we draw, but that He is distinct from originated things, and He only the
Father’s veritable Word, Radiance, and Wisdom, which all things
originate partake <span id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) , being
sanctified by Him in the Spirit <span
id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) ? And therefore He is here
‘anointed,’ not that He may become God, for He was so even before; nor
that He may become King, for He had the Kingdom eternally, existing as
God’s Image, as the sacred Oracle shews; but in our behalf is this
written, as before. For the Israelitish kings, upon their being
anointed, then became kings, not being so before, as David, as Hezekiah,
as Josiah, and the rest; but the Saviour on the contrary, being God, and
ever ruling in the Father’s Kingdom, and being Himself He that supplies
the Holy Ghost, nevertheless is here said to be anointed, that, as
before, being said as man to be anointed with the Spirit, He might
provide for us men, not only exaltation and resurrection, but the
indwelling and intimacy of the Spirit. And signifying this the Lord
Himself hath said by His own mouth in the Gospel according to John, ‘I
have sent them into the world, and for their sakes do I sanctify Myself,
that they may be sanctified in the truth <span
id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) .’ In saying this He has shown that
He is not the sanctified, but the Sanctifier; for He is not sanctified
by other, but Himself sanctifies Himself, that we may be sanctified in
the truth. He who sanctifies Himself is Lord of sanctification. How then
does this take place? What does He mean but this? ‘I, being the Father’s
Word, I give to Myself, when becoming man, the Spirit; and Myself,
become man, do I sanctify in Him, that henceforth in Me, who am Truth
(for “Thy Word is Truth”), all may be sanctified.’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p7"></span>47. If then for our sake He sanctifies
Himself, and does this when He is become man, it is very plain that the
Spirit’s descent on Him in Jordan was a descent upon us, because of His
bearing our body. And it did not take place for promotion to the Word,
but again for our sanctification, that we might share His anointing, and
of us it might be said, ‘Know ye not that ye are God’s Temple, and the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you <span id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083)
?’ For when the Lord, as man, was washed in Jordan, it was we who were
washed in Him and by Him <span id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) .
And when He received the Spirit, we it was who by Him were made
recipients of It. And moreover for this reason, not as Aaron or <span
id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-Page_334"></span>David or the rest, was He anointed
with oil, but in another way above all His fellows, ‘with the oil of
gladness,’ which He Himself interprets to be the Spirit, saying by the
Prophet, ‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because the Lord hath
anointed Me <span id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) ;’ as also the
Apostle has said, ‘How God anointed Him with the Holy Ghost. <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086) ’ When then were these things
spoken of Him but when He came in the flesh and was baptized in Jordan,
and the Spirit descended on Him? And indeed the Lord Himself said, ‘The
Spirit shall take of Mine;’ and ‘I will send Him;’ and to His disciples,
‘Receive ye the Holy Ghost <span id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087) .’
And notwithstanding, He who, as the Word and Radiance of the Father,
gives to others, now is said to be sanctified, because now He has become
man, and the Body that is sanctified is His. From Him then we have begun
to receive the unction and the seal, John saying, ‘And ye have an
unction from the Holy One;’ and the Apostle, ‘And ye were sealed with
the Holy Spirit of promise <span id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) .’
Therefore because of us and for us are these words. What advance then of
promotion, and reward of virtue or generally of conduct, is proved from
this in our Lord’s instance? For if He was not God, and then had become
God, if not being King He was preferred to the Kingdom, your reasoning
would have had some faint plausibility. But if He is God and the throne
of His kingdom is everlasting, in what way could God advance? or what
was there wanting to Him who was sitting on His Father’s throne? And if,
as the Lord Himself has said, the Spirit is His, and takes of His, and
He sends It, it is not the Word, considered as the Word and Wisdom, who
is anointed with the Spirit which He Himself gives, but the flesh
assumed by Him which is anointed in Him and by Him <span
id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) ; that the sanctification coming to
the Lord as man, may come to all men from Him. For not of Itself, saith
He, doth the Spirit speak, but the Word is He who gives It to the
worthy. For this is like the passage considered above; for as the
Apostle has written, ‘Who existing in form of God thought it not a prize
to be equal with God, but emptied Himself, and took a servant’s form,’
so David celebrates the Lord, as the everlasting God and King, but sent
to us and assuming our body which is mortal. For this is his meaning in
the Psalm, ‘All thy garments <span id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090)
smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia;’ and it is represented by Nicodemus
and by Mary’s company, when the one came bringing ‘a mixture of myrrh
and aloes, about an hundred pounds weight;’ and the others <span
id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) ‘the spices which they had
prepared’ for the burial of the Lord’s body.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p17"></span>48. What advancement then was it to
the Immortal to have assumed the mortal? or what promotion is it to the
Everlasting to have put on the temporal? what reward can be great to the
Everlasting God and King in the bosom of the Father? See ye not, that
this too was done and written because of us and for us, that us who are
mortal and temporal, the Lord, become man, might make immortal, and
bring into the everlasting kingdom of heaven? Blush ye not, speaking
lies against the divine oracles? For when our Lord Jesus Christ had been
among us, we indeed were promoted, as rescued from sin; but He is the
same <span id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) ; nor did He alter, when
He became man (to repeat what I have said), but, as has been written,
‘The Word of God abideth for ever <span
id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093) .’ Surely as, before His becoming
man, He, the Word, dispensed to the saints the Spirit as His own <span
id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094) , so also when made man, He
sanctifies all by the Spirit and says to His Disciples, ‘Receive ye the
Holy Ghost.’ And He gave to Moses and the other seventy; and through Him
David prayed to the Father, saying, ‘Take not Thy Holy Spirit from
me <span id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) .’ On the other hand, when
made man, He said, ‘I will send to you the Paraclete, the Spirit of
truth <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096) ;’ and He sent Him, He,
the Word of God, as being faithful. Therefore ‘Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) ,’ remaining unalterable, and at
once gives and receives, giving as God’s Word, receiving as man. It is
not the Word then, viewed as the Word, that is promoted; for He had all
things and has them always; but men, who have in Him and through Him
their origin <span id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) of receiving
them. <span id="page_335">p. 335</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-Page_335"></span>For, when He is now said to be
anointed in a human respect, we it is who in Him are anointed; since
also when He is baptized, we it is who in Him are baptized. But on all
these things the Saviour throws much light, when He says to the Father,
‘And the glory which Thou gavest Me, I have given to them, that they may
be one, even as We are one <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) .’
Because of us then He asked for glory, and the words occur, ‘took’ and
‘gave’ and ‘highly exalted,’ that we might take, and to us might be
given, and we might be exalted in Him; as also for us He sanctifies
Himself, that we might be sanctified in Him <span
id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) .

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p27"></span>49. But if they take advantage of the
word ‘wherefore,’ as connected with the passage in the Psalm, ‘Wherefore
God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee,’ for their own purposes, let
these novices in Scripture and masters in irreligion know, that, as
before, the word ‘wherefore’ does not imply reward of virtue or conduct
in the Word, but the reason why He came down to us, and of the Spirit’s
anointing which took place in Him for our sakes. For He says not,
‘Wherefore He anointed Thee in order to Thy being God or King or Son or
Word;’ for so He was before and is for ever, as has been shewn; but
rather, ‘Since Thou art God and King, therefore Thou wast anointed,
since none but Thou couldest unite man to the Holy Ghost, Thou the Image
of the Father, in which <span id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) we
were made in the beginning; for Thine is even the Spirit.’ For the
nature of things originate could give no warranty for this, Angels
having transgressed, and men disobeyed <span
id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) . Wherefore there was need of God
and the Word is God; that those who had become under a curse, He Himself
might set free. If then He was of nothing, He would not have been the
Christ or Anointed, being one among others and having fellowship as the
rest <span id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) . But, whereas He is
God, as being Son of God, and is everlasting King, and exists as
Radiance and Expression <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) of
the Father, therefore fitly is He the expected Christ, whom the Father
announces to mankind, by revelation to His holy Prophets; that as
through Him we have come to be, so also in Him all men might be redeemed
from their sins, and by Him all things might be ruled <span
id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) . And this is the cause of the
anointing which took place in Him, and of the incarnate presence of the
Word <span id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) , which the Psalmist
foreseeing, celebrates, first His Godhead and kingdom, which is the
Father’s, in these tones, ‘Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a
sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of Thy Kingdom <span
id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) ;’ then announces His descent to us
thus, ‘Wherefore God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of
gladness above Thy fellows <span id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p36"></span>50. What is there to wonder at, what
to disbelieve, if the Lord who gives the Spirit, is here said Himself to
be anointed with the Spirit, at a time when, necessity requiring it, He
did not refuse in respect of His manhood to call Himself inferior to the
Spirit? For the Jews saying that He cast out devils in Beelzebub, He
answered and said to them, for the exposure of their blasphemy, ‘But if
I through the Spirit of God cast out demons <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) .’ Behold, the Giver of the Spirit
here says that He cast out demons in the Spirit; but this is not said,
except because of His flesh. For since man’s nature is not equal of
itself to casting out demons, but only in power of the Spirit, therefore
as man He said, ‘But if I through the Spirit of God cast out demons.’ Of
course too He signified that the blasphemy offered to the Holy Ghost is
greater than that against His humanity, when He said, ‘Whosoever shall
speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him;’ such as
were those who said, ‘Is <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-Page_336"></span>not this the carpenter’s son <span
id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) ?’ but they who blaspheme against
the Holy Ghost, and ascribe the deeds of the Word to the devil, shall
have inevitable punishment <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) .
This is what the Lord spoke to the Jews, as man; but to the disciples
shewing His Godhead and His majesty, and intimating that He was not
inferior but equal to the Spirit, He gave the Spirit and said, ‘Receive
ye the Holy Ghost,’ and ‘I send Him,’ and ‘He shall glorify Me,’ and
‘Whatsoever He heareth, that He shall speak <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) .’ As then in this place the Lord
Himself, the Giver of the Spirit, does not refuse to say that through
the Spirit He casts out demons, as man; in like manner He the same, the
Giver of the Spirit, refused not to say, ‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon
Me, because He hath anointed Me <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) ,’ in respect of His having become
flesh, as John hath said; that it might be shewn in both these
particulars, that we are they who need the Spirit’s grace in our
sanctification, and again who are unable to cast out demons without the
Spirit’s power. Through whom then and from whom behoved it that the
Spirit should be given but through the Son, whose also the Spirit is?
and when were we enabled to receive It, except when the Word became man?
and, as the passage of the Apostle shews, that we had not been redeemed
and highly exalted, had not He who exists in form of God taken a
servant’s form, so David also shews, that no otherwise should we have
partaken the Spirit and been sanctified, but that the Giver of the
Spirit, the Word Himself, hast spoken of Himself as anointed with the
Spirit for us. And therefore have we securely received it, He being said
to be anointed in the flesh; for the flesh being first sanctified in
Him <span id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) , and He being said, as
man, to have received for its sake, we have the sequel of the Spirit
grace, receiving ‘out of His fulness <span
id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p44"></span>51. Nor do the words, ‘Thou hast
loved righteousness and hated iniquity,’ which are added in the Psalm,
show, as again you suppose, that the Nature of the Word is alterable,
but rather by their very force signify His unalterableness. For since of
things originate the nature is alterable, and the one portion had
transgressed and the other disobeyed, as has been said, and it is not
certain how they will act, but it often happens that he who is now good
afterwards alters and becomes different, so that one who was but now
righteous, soon is found unrighteous, wherefore there was here also need
of one unalterable, that men might have the immutability of the
righteousness of the Word as an image and type for virtue <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) . And this thought commends itself
strongly to the right-minded. For since the first man Adam altered, and
through sin death came into the world, therefore it became the second
Adam to be unalterable; that, should the Serpent again assault, even the
Serpent’s deceit might be baffled, and, the Lord being unalterable and
unchangeable, the Serpent might become powerless in his assault against
all. For as when Adam had transgressed, his sin reached unto all men,
so, when the Lord had become man and had overthrown the Serpent, that so
great strength of His is to extend through all men, so that each of us
may say, ‘For we are not ignorant of his devices. <span
id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117) ’ Good reason then that the Lord,
who ever is in nature unalterable, loving righteousness and hating
iniquity, should be anointed and Himself sent, that, He, being and
remaining the same <span id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) , by
taking this alterable flesh, ‘might condemn sin in it <span
id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) ,’ and might secure its freedom,
and its ability <span id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) henceforth
‘to fulfil the righteousness of the law’ in itself, so as to be able to
say, ‘But we are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwelleth in us <span id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121)
.’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p51"></span>52. Vainly then, here again, O
Arians, have ye made this conjecture, and vainly alleged the words of
Scripture; for God’s Word is unalterable, and is ever in one state, not
as it may happen <span id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) , but as the
Father is; since how is He like the Father, unless He be thus? or how is
all that is the Father’s the Son’s also, if He has not the
unalterableness and unchangeableness of the Father <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) ? Not as being subject to
laws <span id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) , and biassed to one
side, does He love the one and hate the other, lest, if from fear of
falling away He chooses the one, we admit that He is alterable otherwise
also; but, as being God and the Father’s Word, He is a just judge and
lover of virtue, or rather its dispenser. Therefore being just and holy
by nature, on this account He is said to love righteousness and to hate
iniquity; as much as to say, that He loves and chooses the virtuous, and
rejects and hates the unrighteous. And divine Scripture <span
id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-Page_337"></span>says
the same of the Father; ‘The Righteous Lord loveth righteousness; Thou
hatest all them that work iniquity <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) ,’ and ‘The Lord loveth the gates
of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126) ;’ and, ‘Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated <span id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) ;’ and in
Isaiah there is the voice of God again saying, ‘I the Lord love
righteousness, and hate robbery of unrighteousness <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) .’ Let them then expound those
former words as these latter; for the former also are written of the
Image of God: else, misinterpreting these as those, they will conceive
that the Father too is alterable. But since the very hearing others say
this is not without peril, we do well to think that God is said to love
righteousness and to hate robbery of unrighteousness, not as if biassed
to one side, and capable of the contrary, so as to select the latter and
not choose the former, for this belongs to things originated, but that,
as a judge, He loves and takes to Him the righteous and withdraws from
the bad. It follows then to think the same concerning the Image of God
also, that He loves and hates no otherwise than thus. For such must be
the nature of the Image as is Its Father, though the Arians in their
blindness fail to see either that image or any other truth of the divine
oracles. For being forced from the conceptions or rather
misconceptions <span id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) of their own
hearts, they fall back upon passages of divine Scripture, and here too
from want of understanding, according to their wont, they discern not
their meaning; but laying down their own irreligion as a sort of canon
of interpretation <span id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) , they
wrest the whole of the divine oracles into accordance with it. And so on
the bare mention of such doctrine, they deserve nothing but the reply,
‘Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) ;’ and if they persist in it, they
must be put to silence, by the words, ‘Render to’ man ‘the things that
are’ man’s, ‘and to God the things that are’ God’s <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[333:2080](2040357.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p3"></span> [Ps.
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[333:2081](2040357.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p4"></span> p. 156, note 4.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[333:2082](2040357.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p5"></span> It is here said that all things
‘originate’ partake the Son and are ‘sanctified’ by the Spirit. How a
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p5.2"></span>γέννησις</span>
or adoption through the Son is necessary for every creature in order to
its consistence, life, or preservation, has been explained, p. 162, note
3. Sometimes the Son was considered as the special Principle of reason,
as by Origen, ap. Athan. *Serap.* iv. 9. vid. himself. *de Incarn.* 11.
These offices of the Son and the Spirit are contrasted by S. Basil, in
his *de Sp. S.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p5.4"></span>τὸν προστάττοντα κύριον, τὸν δημιουργοῦντα
λόγον, τὸ στερεοῦν πνεῦμα</span>, &c. c. 16. n. 38.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[333:2083](2040357.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p6"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p6.1"></span>[John
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p6.3"></span>, vid. Cyril, *Thesaur.* 20.

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[333:2084](2040357.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p8"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p8.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[333:2085](2040357.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p9"></span> Pusey on Baptism, 2nd Ed. pp.
275–293.

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[334:2086](2040357.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p10"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[334:2087](2040357.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p11"></span> [Acts x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[334:2088](2040357.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p12"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p12.1"></span>[John
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p12.3"></span>; xx. 22.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[334:2089](2040357.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p13"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p13.1"></span>[1 John ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p13.3"></span>; [Eph. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p13.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[334:2090](2040357.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p14"></span> Elsewhere Athan. says that our
Lord’s Godhead was the immediate anointing or chrism of the manhood He
assumed, *in Apollin.* ii. 3, *Orat.* iv. §36. vid. Origen. *Periarch.*
ii. 6. n. 4. And S. Greg. Naz. still more expressly, and from the same
text as Athan. *Orat.* x. fin. Again, ‘This \[the Godhead\] is the
anointing of the manhood, not sanctifying by an energy as the other
Christs \[anointed\] but by a presence of Him whole who anointed, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p14.2"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p14.3"></span>λου τοῦ
χρίοντος</span>; whence it came to pass that what anointed was called
man and what was anointed was made God.’ *Orat.* xxx. 20. Damasc. *F.
O.* iii. 3. Dei Filius, sicut pluvia in vellus, toto divinitatis
unguento nostram se fudit in carnem. Chrysolog. *Serm.* 60. It is more
common, however, to consider that the anointing was the descent of the
Spirit, as Athan. says at the beginning of this section, according to
<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p14.5"></span>[Luke iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p14.7"></span>; [Acts x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p14.8"></span>.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[334:2091](2040357.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p14.9"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p15"></span> [Ps. xlv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p15.1"></span>. Our Lord’s manhood is spoken of as a
garment; more distinctly afterwards, ‘As Aaron was himself, and did not
change on putting round him the high priest’s garment, but remaining the
same, was but clothed,’ &c, *Orat.* ii. 8. On the Apollinarian abuse of
the idea, vid. note *in loc.*

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[334:2092](2040357.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p16"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p16.1"></span>[John xix.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p16.3"></span>; [Luke xxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p16.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[334:2093](2040357.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p18"></span> p. 159, note 8.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[334:2094](2040357.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p19"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p19.1"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p19.2"></span>λόγος</span> but <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p19.4"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p19.5"></span>ῆ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p19.6"></span>μα</span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[334:2095](2040357.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p19.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p20"></span> §39, note 4.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[334:2096](2040357.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p21"></span> [Ps. li.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[334:2097](2040357.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p22"></span> [John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[334:2098](2040357.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p23"></span> [Heb. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[334:2099](2040357.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24"></span> The word origin, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24.3"></span>ρχὴ</span>, implies
the doctrine, more fully brought out in other passages of the Fathers,
that our Lord has deigned to become an instrumental cause, as it may be
called, of the life of each individual Christian. For at first sight it
may be objected to the whole course of Athan.’s argument thus;—What
connection is there between the sanctification of Christ’s manhood and
ours? how does it prove that human nature is sanctified because a
particular specimen of it was sanctified in Him? S. Chrysostom explains,
*Hom. in Matt*. lxxxii. 5. And just before, ‘It sufficed not for Him to
be made man, to be scourged, to be sacrificed; but He assimilates us to
Him (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24.6"></span>ναφύρει ἑαυτὸν ἡμῖν</span>), nor merely
by faith, but really, has He made us His body.’ Again, ‘That we are
commingled (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24.9"></span>νακερασθῶμεν</span>) into that flesh, not
merely through love, but really, is brought about by means of that food
which He has bestowed upon us.’ *Hom. in Joann.* 46. 3. And so S. Cyril
writes against Nestorius: ‘Since we have proved that Christ is the Vine,
and we branches as adhering to a communion with Him, not spiritual
merely but bodily, why clamours he against us thus bootlessly, saying
that, since we adhere to Him, not in a bodily way, but rather by faith
and the affection of love according to the Law, therefore He has called,
not His own flesh the vine, but rather the Godhead?’ in *Joann.* lib.
10. Cap. 2. pp. 863, 4. And Nyssen, *Orat. Catech.* 37. Decoctâ quasi
per ollam carnis nostræ cruditate, sanctificavit in æternum nobis cibum
carnem suam. Paulin. *Ep.* 23. Of course in such statements nothing
*material* is implied; Hooker says, ‘The mixture of His bodily substance
with ours is a thing which the ancient Fathers disclaim. Yet the mixture
of His flesh with ours they speak of, to signify what our very bodies
through mystical conjunction receive from that vital efficacy which we
know to be in His, and from bodily mixtures they borrow divers
similitudes rather to declare the truth than the manner of coherence
between His sacred and the sanctified bodies of saints.’ *Eccl. Pol.* v.
56. §10. But without some explanation of this nature, language such as
S. Athanasius’s in the text seems a mere matter of words. vid. infr. §50
fin.

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[335:2100](2040357.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p24.11"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p25"></span> [John xvii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[335:2101](2040357.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p26"></span> Cyril, *Thesaur.* 20. p. 197.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[335:2102](2040357.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p28"></span> §51, note 1.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[335:2103](2040357.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p29.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p29.2"></span>γγέλων μὲν παραβαντων, ἀνθρώπων δὲ
παρακουσαντων</span>. vid. infr. §51. init. Cf. *ad Afr.* 7. vid. *de
Decr.* 19, note 3. infr. *Orat.* ii. iii. Cyril. in *Joann.* lib. v. 2.
On the subject of the sins of Angels, vid. Huet. *Origen.* ii. 5. §16.
Petav. *Dogm.* t. 3. p. 87. Dissert. Bened. in Cyril. Hier. iii. 5.
Natal. Alex. *Hist. Æt.* i. *Diss.* 7.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[335:2104](2040357.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p30"></span> *De Decr.* 10, note 4.

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[335:2105](2040357.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p31"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[335:2106](2040357.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p32"></span> The word *wherefore* is here
declared to denote the *fitness* why the Son of God should become the
Son of man. His Throne, as God, is for ever; He has loved righteousness;
*therefore* He is *equal* to the anointing of the Spirit, as man. And so
S. Cyril on the same text, as in l. c. in the foregoing note. Cf. Leon
*Ep.* 64. 2. vid. *de Incarn.* 7 fin. 10. *In illud Omn.* 2. Cyril. *in
Gen.* i. p. 13.

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[335:2107](2040357.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p33.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p33.2"></span>νσαρκος παρουσία</span>. This phrase
which has occurred above, §8. is very frequent with Athan. vid. also
Cyril. *Catech.* iii. 11. xii. 15. xiv. 27, 30, Epiph. *Hær.* 77. 17.
The Eutychians avail themselves of it at the Council of Constantinople,
vid. Hard. *Conc.* t. 2. pp. 164, 236.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[335:2108](2040357.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p33.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p34"></span> [Ps. xlv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[335:2109](2040357.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p35"></span> [Psa.
45.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[335:2110](2040357.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p37"></span> [Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[336:2111](2040357.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p38"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p38.1"></span>[Matt. xii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p38.3"></span>; xiii. 55.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[336:2112](2040357.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p38.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p39"></span> \[Cf. Prolegg. ch. iii. §1 (22).\].

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[336:2113](2040357.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p40"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p40.1"></span>[John xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p40.3"></span>; xvi. 13, 14.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[336:2114](2040357.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p40.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p41"></span> [Is. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[336:2115](2040357.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p42"></span> §48, note 7.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[336:2116](2040357.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p43"></span> [John i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[336:2117](2040357.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p45"></span> Vid. *de Incarn.* 13. 14. vid. also
*Gent.* 41 fin. and *Nic. Def.* 17, note 5. Cum justitia nulla esset in
terra doctorem misit, quasi vivam legem. Lactant. *Instit.* iv. 25. ‘The
Only-begotten was made man like us,…as if lending us His own
stedfastness.’ Cyril. *in* *Joann.* lib. v. 2. p. 473; vid. also
*Thesaur.* 20. p. 198. August. *de Corr. et Grat.* 10–12. Damasc. *F.
O.* iv. 4. But the words of Athan. embrace too many subjects to
illustrate distinctly in a note.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[336:2118](2040357.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p46"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[336:2119](2040357.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p47"></span> §48, note 1.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[336:2120](2040357.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p48"></span> [Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p48.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p48.3"></span>; ib. 4.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[336:2121](2040357.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p48.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p49"></span> Cf. *de Incarn.* 7, *Orat.* ii. 68.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[336:2122](2040357.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p50"></span> [Rom. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[336:2123](2040357.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p52.1"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p52.2"></span>πλῶς, οὐκ ἁπλῶς ὡρίσθη, ἀλλ᾽ ἀκριβῶς
ἐξητάσθη</span>. *Socr.* i. 9. p. 31.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[336:2124](2040357.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p52.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p53"></span> [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p53.1"></span>, §35, note 2.

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[336:2125](2040357.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p54"></span> Eunomius said that our Lord was
utterly separate from the Father, ‘by natural law,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p54.2"></span>νόμῳ φύσεως</span>;
S. Basil observes, ‘as if the God of all had not power over Himself,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p54.4"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p54.5"></span>αυτοῦ κύριος</span>,
but were in bondage under the decrees of necessity.’ *contr.* *Eunom.*
ii. 30.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[337:2126](2040357.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p54.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p55"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p55.1"></span>[Ps. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p55.3"></span>; v. 5.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[337:2127](2040357.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p55.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p56"></span> [Psa.
87.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[337:2128](2040357.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p57"></span> [Mal.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[337:2129](2040357.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p58"></span> [Is. lxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[337:2130](2040357.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p59.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p59.2"></span>ννοιῶν μᾶλλον δὲ παρανοιῶν</span>, vid.
§40, note 1.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[337:2131](2040357.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p59.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p60"></span> Instead of professing to examine
Scripture or to acquiesce in what they had been taught, the Arians were
remarkable for insisting on certain abstract positions or inferences on
which they make the whole controversy turn. Vid. Socrates’ account of
Arius’s commencement, ‘If God has a Son, he must have a beginning of
existence,’ &c. &c., and so the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p60.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p60.3"></span>γενητόν</span>.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[337:2132](2040357.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p60.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p61"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p61.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p61.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[337:2133](2040357.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p61.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p62"></span> [Matt.
22.21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.xii-p62.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texts Explained; Thirdly, Hebrews i. 4. Additional texts brought
as objections; e.g. Heb. i. 4; vii. 22. Whether the word 'better'
implies likeness to the Angels; and 'made' or 'become' implies creation.
Necessary to consider the circumstances under which Scripture speaks.
Difference between 'better' and 'greater;' texts in proof. 'Made' or
'become' a general word. Contrast in Heb. i. 4, between the Son and the
Works in point of nature. The difference of the punishments under the
two Covenants shews the difference of the natures of the Son and the
Angels. 'Become' relates not to the nature of the Word, but to His
manhood and office and relation towards us. Parallel passages in which
the term is applied to the Eternal Father.](2040358)
