[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040147)  [Next](2040149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.li"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.li-p1"></span> §51. *The new virtue of continence.
Revolution of Society, purified and pacified by Christianity.*

<span id="vii.ii.li-p2"></span>Which of mankind, again, after his death,
or else while living, taught concerning virginity, and that this virtue
was not impossible among men? But Christ, our Saviour and King of all,
had such power in His teaching concerning it, that even children not yet
arrived at the lawful age vow that virginity which lies beyond the law.
2. What man has ever yet been able to pass so far as to come among
Scythians and Ethiopians, or Persians or Armenians or Goths, or those we
hear of beyond the ocean or those beyond Hyrcania, or even the Egyptians
and Chaldees, men that mind magic and are superstitious beyond nature
and savage in their ways, and to preach at all about virtue and
self-control, and against the worshipping of idols, as has the Lord of
all, the Power of God, our Lord Jesus Christ? 3. Who not only preached
by means of His own disciples, but also carried persuasion to men’s
mind, to lay aside the fierceness of their manners, and no longer to
serve their ancestral gods, but to learn to know Him, and through Him to
worship the Father. 4. For formerly, while in idolatry, Greeks and
Barbarians used to war against each other, and were actually cruel to
their own kin. For it was impossible for any one to cross sea or land at
all, without arming the hand with swords <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) , because of their implacable fighting
among themselves. 5. For the whole course of their life was carried on
by arms, and the sword with them took the place of a staff, and was
their support in every emergency; and still, as I said before, they were
serving idols, and offering sacrifices to demons, while for all their
idolatrous superstition they could not be reclaimed from this spirit. 6.
But when they have come over to the school of Christ, then, strangely
enough, as men truly pricked in conscience, they have laid aside the
savagery of their murders and no longer mind the things of war: but all
is at peace with them, and from henceforth what makes for friendship is
to their liking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_342"></span>[64:343](2040148.htm#fr_342) <span
id="vii.ii.li-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.li-p3"></span> Cf. Thucy. i. 5 6: ‘<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.li-p3.2"></span>πᾶσα γὰρ ἡ ῞Ελλας
ἐσιδηροφόρει</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.li-p3.3"></span>,</span>’ &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Wars, &c., roused by demons, lulled by Christianity.](2040149)
