[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040133)  [Next](2040135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxxvii-p1"></span> §37. <span
id="vii.ii.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>*Psalm* xxii. 16*, &c. Majesty of His
birth and death. Confusion of oracles and demons in Egypt.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxxvii-p2"></span>Or who among those recorded in
Scripture was pierced in the hands and feet, or hung <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span id="vii.ii.xxxvii-Page_56"></span>at all
upon a tree, and was sacrificed on a cross for the salvation of all? For
Abraham died, ending his life on a bed; Isaac and Jacob also died with
their feet raised on a bed; Moses and Aaron died on the mountain; David
in his house, without being the object of any conspiracy at the hands of
the people; true, he was pursued by Saul, but he was preserved unhurt.
Esaias was sawn asunder, but not hung on a tree. Jeremy was shamefully
treated, but did not die under condemnation; Ezechie suffered, not
however for the people, but to indicate what was to come upon the
people. 2. Again, these, even where they suffered, were men resembling
all in their common nature; but he that is declared in Scripture to
suffer on behalf of all is called not merely man, but the Life of all,
albeit He was in fact like men in nature. For “ye shall <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) see,” it says, “your Life hanging
before your eyes;” and “who shall declare his generation?” For one can
ascertain the genealogy of all the saints, and declare it from the
beginning, and of whom each was born; but the generation of Him that is
the Life the Scriptures refer to as not to be declared. 3. Who then is
he of whom the Divine Scriptures say this? Or who is so great that even
the prophets predict of him such great things? None else, now, is found
in the Scriptures but the common Saviour of all, the Word of God, our
Lord Jesus Christ. For He it is that proceeded from a virgin and
appeared as man on the earth, and whose generation after the flesh
cannot be declared. For there is none that can tell His father after the
flesh, His body not being of a man, but of a virgin alone; 4. so that no
one can declare the corporal generation of the Saviour from a man, in
the same way as one can draw up a genealogy of David and of Moses and of
all the patriarchs. For He it is that caused the star also to mark the
birth of His body; since it was fit that the Word, coming down from
heaven, should have His constellation also from heaven, and it was
fitting that the King of Creation when He came forth should be openly
recognized by all creation. 5. Why, He was born in Judæa, and men from
Persia came to worship Him. He it is that even before His appearing in
the body won the victory over His demon adversaries and a triumph over
idolatry. All heathen at any rate from every region, abjuring their
hereditary tradition and the impiety of idols, are now placing their
hope in Christ, and enrolling themselves under Him, the like of which
you may see with your own eyes. 6. For at no other time has the impiety
of the Egyptians ceased, save when the Lord of all, riding as it were
upon a cloud, came down there in the body and brought to nought the
delusion of idols, and brought over all to Himself, and through Himself
to the Father. 7. He it is that was crucified before the sun and all
creation as witnesses, and before those who put Him to death: and by His
death has salvation come to all, and all creation been ransomed. He is
the Life of all, and He it is that as a sheep yielded His body to death
as a substitute, for the salvation of all, even though the Jews believe
it not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_298"></span>[56:299](2040134.htm#fr_298) <span
id="vii.ii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxxvii-p3"></span> Cf. 35. 2, and 34. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Other clear prophecies of the coming of God in the flesh.
Christ's miracles unprecedented.](2040135)
