[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040184)  [Next](2040186) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="xiii.i-Page_97"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to Apologia Contra Arianos.</span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>“<span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p3.1"></span>This</span> Apology,” says Montfaucon, “is the
most authentic source of the history of the Church in the first half of
the fourth century. Athanasius is far superior to any other historians
of the period, both from his bearing for the most part a personal
testimony to the facts he relates, and from his great accuracy and use
of actual documents. On the other hand, Rufinus, Socrates, Sozomen,
Theodoret, must not be used without extreme caution, unless they adduce
documents, which is seldom the case.” The ‘Apology’ is a personal
defence by Athanasius against the charges laid against him by the
Eusebian party, and does not directly concern matters of doctrine. After
the Council of Nicæa, the Eusebian policy had been to oust the principal
opponents from their sees on personal grounds, so as to pave the way for
the abrogation of the Nicene formula. The attack upon Athanasius began
in 331, but without success. It was renewed at Cæsarea and Tyre in
334–335, and resulted in the exile of Athanasius to Treveri, 336. His
return in 337 was followed by a Synod at Antioch which ‘deposed’ him
(close of 338), and by his expulsion in favour of Gregory (339). Then
follow the intervention of Julius (339–340), and the Council of Sardica
(343), which resulted in the eventual return of Athanasius in the autumn
of 346. (The details are given more fully in the Prolegomena, ch. ii.
§§4–6). After this latter date, and before the relapse of Valens and
Ursacius which followed upon the death of Constans, Athanasius drew up a
collection of documents in proof of his innocence, connecting them
together by an explanatory narrative. (1) *The charges against him*
related to events alleged to have occurred before the year 332
(extortion of money, subvention of the rebel Philumenus, the chalice of
Ischyras, murder and mutilation of the bishop Arsenius): the principal
evidence as to their falsehood was comprised in the proceedings of the
Councils of Tyre and Jerusalem, and of the commission of enquiry sent by
the assembled bishops to the Mareotis. (2) *The judicial investigations*
which proved the innocence of Athanasius took place first at Rome under
Julius, secondly at Sardica under Hosius; and were followed by the
recognition of his innocence on the part of the Emperor Constantius, of
bishops in various parts of the world, and lastly of some of his chief
accusers.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>The method of defence now adopted by
Athanasius was *firstly* to show how complete that recognition had been:
this he does by a series of documents from the eve of his departure to
Rome down to the recantation of Ursacius and Valens soon after his
return to Alexandria: these documents cover eight years (339–347)
previous to the composition of the Apology (§§1–58). Having shewn the
completeness of his acquittal, he next gives the evidence upon which it
was based. Accordingly the *second part* (§§59–90) of the Apology deals
with facts and documents earlier than those comprised in the first.
Hence the inversion of chronological sequence (*præposterus ordo,*
Montf.) as between the two parts.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>Referring the reader to the Prolegomena for
a connected view of the history of which this Apology is the primary
source, it will suffice for our present purpose to enumerate the
documents quoted, with the briefest possible statement of their contents
and bearing upon the general purpose of the work. It should be noted
that while in the first part the documents follow one another in strict
chronological order, those of the second part fall into groups <span
id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="xiii.i-Page_98"></span>*within
which* the matters are arranged as best suits the argument, and not in
order of time. In the following list the probable or approximate date of
each document is given.

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>a. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p6.1"></span>DOCUMENTS IN THE FIRST PART</span> (general
subject, the vindication of Athanasius before the bishops of the
Christian world).

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>i. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span>Documents Prior to the Council of Sardica</span>
(§§1–35).

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>1. §§3–19 (end of 338 or beginning of 339).
*Circular of Egyptian bishops* reciting the election of Athanasius, the
plots and charges against him, the history of the Mareotic Commission,
the testimony available in his defence, and requesting all bishops to
join in vindicating him.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>2. §§20–35 (340 <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span>). *Letter of Julius* to the Eusebian
bishops (at the request of a Roman Council) remonstrating with their
discourteous reply to a former letter, reciting the history of the
intrigues against Athanasius, pressing them with their disrespect to the
Synod of Nicæa, with their evasion of the invitation to the Council at
Rome, vindicating Athanasius (on the ground of documentary proof of his
innocence, and on that of the irregularity of the proceedings against
him) and Marcellus (upon his own statement of belief), lastly, insisting
on the propriety of a reference of the questions at issue to the whole
Church, and upon the precedent giving the Roman Church a decisive voice
in questions affecting that of Alexandria.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>ii. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>Council of Sardica</span> (§§36–50).

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>3. §§36–40 (<span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p11.1"></span>a.d.</span> 343) *Letter of the Council to the
Church of Alexandria*, reciting the intrigues against Athanasius, and
the confirmation by the council of his acquittal by Julius, encouraging
the Alexandrine Church to patience, and announcing that they have
requested the Emperors to give effect to their decisions.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>4. §§41–43 (same date). *Letter of the
Council to the bishops of Egypt and Libya*: identical with No. 3, except
that it omits the reference to certain presbyters of Alexandria, and
mentions several Arian leaders by name.

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>5. §§44–50 (same date). *Circular letter of
the Council,* reciting the occasion of its assembling, the behaviour of
the Eastern bishops, the violence inflicted by them upon orthodox
bishops, the breakdown of the charges brought by them against
Athanasius, and the purgation of Marcellus and Asclepas, who are
pronounced innocent, while the Arian leaders are deposed and
anathematised. The signatures follow of over 280 bishops, most of whom
signed afterwards while the letter was in circulation.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>iii. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>Documents Forming a Sequel to the Council of
Sardica</span> (§§51–58).

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>6–8. §51. *Letters of Constantius to
Athanasius* before and after death of Gregory.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>6. (<span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p16.1"></span>a.d</span>. 345). Expressing sympathy with his
sufferings, and inviting him to court; he has written to Constans to ask
him to allow Athanasius to return.

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>7. (same year, later). Urging the same
invitation.

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>8. (346, winter, or early spring). A
similar summons, but more pressing.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>9. §52 (same year). *Letter of Julius to
the Church of Alexandria*, eulogising Athanasius, complimenting them for
their constancy, and congratulating them upon his return.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>10. §54 (same year). *Circular letter of
Constantius to the Church at large,* announcing the restoration of
Athanasius and the cessation of all decrees against him, with indemnity
to all in his communion.

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span>11. §55 (same date). *Letter of Constantius
to the Church of Alexandria.* Announcement of the restoration of
Athanasius, with exhortation to peace, and warning against disturbances.

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>12. §56 (same date). *To the Prefect of
Egypt and other officials.* Revocation of decrees against those in
communion with Athanasius, and restoration of their immunities.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>13. §57 (same year, autumn). *Letter of the
bishops of Palestine to the Egyptian Church* congratulating them on the
restoration of Athanasius.

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>14. §58 (<span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p24.1"></span>a.d.</span> 347). *Letter of Valens and
Ursacius to Julius* unreservedly withdrawing their allegations against
Athanasius, anathematizing Arius and his heresy, and at the same time
promising to take the consequences of their offence if required by
Julius to do so.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>15. ib. (same year). *Letter of the same to
Athanasius,* with a greeting and assurance that they are in communion
with him and with the Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>b. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p26.1"></span>DOCUMENTS IN THE SECOND PART</span>.

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>i. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p27.1"></span>Letters of Constantine Previous to the Council
of Tyre</span> (§§59–63).

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>16. §59 (<span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p28.1"></span>a.d.</span> 331). *A fragment,* urging
Athanasius with threats to admit to communion all (Arians) who wish it.

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span>17. §61 (same year). *Letter to the people
of Alexandria,* remonstrating with them for their dissensions and
stigmatising the calumnies against Athanasius (about the affair of
Philumenus).

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span><span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="xiii.i-Page_99"></span>ii. 18. §64 (332). *Confession of Ischyras*,
that he had been compelled by the violence of certain Meletians to
fabricate false charges against Athanasius.

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span>iii. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p31.1"></span>The Affair of Arsenius</span> (§§65–70).

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span>19. §67 (probably 332). *Intercepted letter
of the presbyter Pinnes to John Arcaph,* warning him of the discovery of
the plot, and begging him to drop the matter.

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span>20. §68 (same year). *Letter of Constantine
to Athanasius,* expressing indignation at the charges concerning
Arsenius and Ischyras, and bidding him publish this letter in
vindication of himself.

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span>21. §66 (same year). *Letter of Alexander,
Bishop of Thessalonica,* praising Serapion, the son of an old friend,
and congratulating Athanasius on the exposure of the plot about
Arsenius.

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span>22. §69 (same year). *Letter of Arsenius to
Athanasius,* offering submission and requesting communion with the
Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span>23. §70 (same year). *Letter of Constantine
to John Arcaph* accepting his reconciliation to Athanasius, and
summoning him to court.

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>iv. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p37.1"></span>Proceedings at Tyre in 335</span> (§§71–83).

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span>24. §77. *Address to the Council by the
Egyptian Bishop,* complaining of the presence of partizan judges, of the
rejection of their evidence, and of the proposed constitution of the
Mareotic Commission.

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span>25. §71. (Written <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p39.1"></span>a.d.</span> 327, but put in as evidence at Tyre
by Athanasius in the matter of Ischyras, after the exposure of the plot
concerning Arsenius). *List of Meletian Bishops and Clergy* presented to
Alexander of Alexandria shortly before his death, and *not containing
the name of Ischyras.*

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span>26. §78. *Protest addressed by the Egyptian
Bishops to Count Dionysius,* repeating the above complaints (in No. 24),
and requesting him to stop the irregularities.

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span>27. §80. *Alexander of Thessalonica to
Dionysius,* warning him of the conspiracy against Athanasius, and of the
character of the Mission to the Mareotis.

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span>28. §81. *Letter of Dionysius to the
Council,* strongly remonstrating against their proceedings.

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span>29. §79. *Letter of the Egyptian Bishops to
Dionysius appealing to the Emperor.*

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span>30–32. *Protests made by Egyptian Clergy
against the proceedings of the* <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p44.1"></span>Mareotic Commission</span>.

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span>30. §73. *Clergy of Alexandria to the
Commissioners*, protesting against the exclusion of all independent
persons from the proceedings.

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span>31. §§74, 75. *Clergy of the Mareotis to
the Council*, giving an account of the facts concerning Ischyras, and of
the *ex-parte* character of the proceedings of the Commission.

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span>32. §76. *The same to the Prefect and other
officials of Egypt* (dated Sep. 8, 335), denying upon oath the tale of
Ischyras, and requesting them to forward their statement to the Emperor.

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span>v. <span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.i-p48.1"></span>Documents Subsequent to the Council of
Tyre</span> (§§84–88).

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span>33. §86 (335). *Constantine to the Bishops
assembled at Tyre*, summoning them to give an account of their
proceedings.

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span>34. §84. *The Council of Jerusalem to the
Church of Alexandria*, announcing that Arius has been received to
communion.

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span>35. §87 (June 17, 337). *Constantine II. to
the Church of Alexandria* (upon the death of Constantine, whose purpose
he claims to be carrying out), announcing the restoration of Athanasius.

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span>36. §85 (perhaps in 337, but possibly as
early as 335). *Order by Flavius Hemerius* for the erection of a church
for Ischyras.

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span>The two concluding sections (89, 90) of the
Apology are a postscript added during the troubles under Constantius
(about 358, see Introd. to *Hist. Ar.*). He points to the sufferings
which many bishops, including Hosius and Liberius, had endured rather
than surrender his cause, as fresh evidence of their belief in his
innocence. He refuses to see any detraction from the force of this
argument in the fall of the two bishops mentioned.

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span>The importance to the historian of this
collection of documents need not be dwelt upon. If the charges in
dispute seem trivial and even grotesque, they none the less illustrate
the temper of the parties concerned, and the character of the
controversy during the very important twenty years which end with the
death of Constans and the reign of Constantius over the undivided
Empire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Apologia Contra Arianos. (Defence Against the Arians.)](2040186)
