[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040022)  [Next](2040024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p1"></span> §10. *Last Years,* Feb. 1, 366–May 2, 373.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p2"></span>Athanasius now entered upon the last
septennium of his life, a well-earned Sabbath of honoured peace and
influence for good. Little occurred to disturb his peace at home, and if
the confusion and distress of the Eastern Church under Valens could not
but cause him anxiety, in Egypt at any rate, so long as he lived, the
Catholic Faith was secure from molestation.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p3"></span>In 367 Lucius, who had been ordained Bishop
of Alexandria by the Arian party at Antioch, made an attempt to enter
the city. He arrived by night on Sept. 24, but on the following day the
public got wind of his presence in Alexandria, and a dangerous riot was
imminent. A strong military force rescued him from the enraged mob, and
on Sept. 26 he was escorted out of Egypt. In the previous year a heathen
riot had taken place and the great Church in the Cæsareum had been
burned. But in May, 368, the building was recommenced (the incendiaries
having been punished) under an Imperial order.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p4"></span>On Sept. 22, 368, Athanasius began to build
a Church in the quarter ‘Mendidium’ (perhaps in commemoration of his
completion of the 40th year of his Episcopate, see *Hist. Aceph.* xii.),
which was dedicated Aug. 7, 370, and called after his own name.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p5"></span>In 368 or the following year we place the
Synod at which Athanasius drew up his letter to the bishops of Africa
giving an account of the proceedings at Nicæa, and mentioning his
dissatisfaction at the continued immunity enjoyed by Auxentius at Milan
(see p. 488).

<span id="v.ii.xi-p6"></span>Our knowledge of the last years of the life
of Athanasius is derived partly from his own letters (59–64), partly
from the scanty data of his latest works, partly from the letters of
Synesius and Basil. From Synesius (*Ep.* 77) we hear of the case of
Siderius, a young officer from the army who was present in Libya on
civil duty. The Bishop of Erythrum, Orion by name, was in his dotage,
and the inhabitants of two large villages in the diocese, impatient of
the lack of supervision, clamoured for a bishop of their own, and for
the appointment of Siderius. Siderius was accordingly consecrated by a
certain Bishop Philo alone, without the canonical two assistants, and
without the cognisance of Athanasius. But in view of the immense utility
of the appointment Athanasius overlooked its irregularity, and even
promoted Siderius to the Metropolitan see of Ptolemais, merging the two
villages upon Orion’s death once more into their proper diocese. (Fuller
details D.C.B. iv. 777, *sq.*) But if Athanasius was no slave to
ecclesiastical discipline when the good of the church was in question,
he enforced it unsparingly in the interest of morality. An immoral
governor of Libya was sternly excommunicated and the fact announced far
and wide. We have the reply of <span class="c10"><span
id="v.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>Basil</span> the Great, who in 370 had become
Bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, to this notification, and from this
time frequent letters passed between the champions of the Old and of the
New Nicene orthodoxy. Unhappily we have none of the letters of
Athanasius: those of Basil shew us that the loss is one to be deplored.
The correspondence bore partly on the continuance of the unhappy schism
at Antioch. Basil asks for the mediation of Athanasius; if he could not
bring himself to write a letter to the bishops in communion with
Meletius, he might at least use his influence with Paulinus and prevail
upon him to withdraw. He also presses Meletius to take the initiative in
conciliation: possibly he did so, at least one of Basil’s letters is
sent by the hand of one of Meletius’ deacons (Bas. *Epp.* 60, 66, 69,
80, 82, 89). But ‘nothing came of the application:’ Meletius probably
felt injured at the strong support Athanasius had given to Paulinus,
even in so questionable an affair as that of Diodorus of Tyre (*supra,*
§9, and cf. *Letter* 64); while Athanasius was too deeply committed to
surrender Paulinus, who again was the last man to yield of his own
accord (Thdt. *H. E*. v. 23).

<span id="v.ii.xi-p7"></span>Basil obtained the good offices of
Athanasius in his attempt to induce the bishops of Rome and the West to
give him some support in his efforts against heresy in the East; but the
failure here was due to the selfishness and arrogance of the Westerns.
(*Epp.* 61, 67).

<span id="v.ii.xi-p8"></span>Basil was also troubled with the continued
refusal of Athanasius and the Westerns to repudiate Marcellus, who was
still living in extreme old age, and to whom the mass of the people at
Ancyra were attached (Bas. Ep. 266<span id="v.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>,
*Legat. Eugen.* 1, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xi-p8.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xi-p8.3"></span>ναρίθμητον πλῆθος</span>). This state of
things, he urged, kept alive the prejudice of many against the Nicene
decrees (*Ep.* 69). But the Marcellians, perhaps aware of the efforts of
Basil, sent a deputation, headed by the deacon Eugenius, and fortified
by letters from ‘the bishops’ of Macedonia and Achaia, to Alexandria. A
synod was apparently in readiness to receive them, and upon demand they
produced a statement of their faith, emphatically adopting the Nicene
creed, condemning Sabellius, but affirming an <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xi-p8.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xi-p8.5"></span>ν ὑποστάσει τριάδα</span>. The distinction
between <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ii.xi-p8.6"></span>Λόγος</span>
and the Son is rejected, and the idea that the Monad existed before the
Son anathematised. Photinus is classed as a heretic with Paul of
Samosata. Only the eternal duration of Christ’s kingdom is not
mentioned. (It may be noted that while this letter gives up many points
of the theology of Marcellus, the process is quite completed in a letter
submitted by the Marcellian community in 375 to some exiled Egyptian
bishops at Diocæsarea <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) ; Epiph.
*Hær.* 72, 11). Athanasius accepted the confession, and the assembled
bishops subscribed their names (only a few <span id="page_lxiii">p.
lxiii</span> <span id="v.ii.xi-Page_lxiii"></span>signatures are
preserved). While we understand Basil’s regret at the refusal of
Athanasius to condemn Marcellus, we can scarcely share it. If Athanasius
shewed partiality toward his old ally, it was an error of generosity, or
rather let us say a recognition of the truth, too often forgotten in
religious controversy, that mistakes are not necessarily heresies, and
that a man may go very far wrong in his opinions and yet be entitled to
sympathy and respect.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p10"></span>Basil speaks of Athanasius in terms of
unbounded veneration and praise, and Athanasius in turn rebukes those
who attempted to disparage Basil’s orthodoxy, calling him a bishop such
as any church might desire to call its own (p. 579 *sq*.).

<span id="v.ii.xi-p11"></span>During the last decade of his life the
attention of Athanasius was drawn to the questions raised by the Arian
controversy as to the human nature of our Lord. The Arian doctrine on
this subject was apparently as old as Lucian, but the whole subject
received little or no attention in the earlier stages of the
controversy, and it was only with the rise of the Anomœan school that
the questions came into formal discussion. In the later letters of
Athanasius we see the traces of wide-spread controversy on the matter
(especially in that to Epictetus, No. 59), and Apollinarius, bishop of
the Syrian Laodicea, and a former close friend of Athanasius, whose
legates in 362 had joined in condemning the Arian Christology, broached
a peculiar theory on the subject, viz., that while Christ took a human
*soul* along with His Body, the Word took the place of the human
*spirit*, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ii.xi-p11.1"></span>πνεῦμα</span> ([1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="v.ii.xi-p11.2"></span>).
The details of the system do not belong to our subject (an excellent
sketch in Gwatkin’s *Arian Controversy*, pp. 136–141); in fact it was
two years after the death of Athanasius when Apollinarius definitely
founded a sect by consecrating a schismatic bishop for the already
distracted Church of Antioch. But Athanasius marked with alarm the
tendency of his friend, and in the very last years of his life wrote a
tract against his tenet in two short books, in which, as in writing
against Marcellus and Photinus 15 years before, he refrains from
mentioning Apollinarius by name. It may be observed that at the close of
the second book he brings himself for the first time to censure by name
‘him they call Photinus,’ classing him along with Paul of Samosata.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p12"></span>Athanasius was active to the last;
spiritually (we are not able to say physically) ‘his eye was not dim,
nor his natural force abated.’ In his seventy-fifth year he entered
(Ruf. ii. 3) upon the forty-sixth year of his episcopate. Feeling that
his end was near, he followed the example of his revered predecessor
Alexander, and named Peter as the man whom he judged fittest to succeed
him; then ‘on the seventh of Pachon <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86)
(May 2, 373) he departed this life in a wonderful manner.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[lxii:86](2040023.htm#fr_85) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p8.7"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p9"></span> For the best treatment of the document,
see Zahn, p, 95. I am quite unable to follow the theory advanced in D.
C. B. iii. 812; least of all the writer’s suggestion that Athanasius was
‘egregiously duped’ (!) by Marcellus.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[lxiii:87](2040023.htm#fr_86) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p13"></span> *Fest. Ind.* xlv. The *Hist. Aceph.* give
May 3; probably he died after midnight; but May 2 is kept as his feast
by the Copts and by the Western Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2040024)
