[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040120)  [Next](2040122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> §24. *Further objections anticipated.
He did not choose His manner of death; for He was to prove Conqueror of
death in all or any of its forms: (simile of a good wrestler). The death
chosen to disgrace Him proved the Trophy against death: moreover it
preserved His body undivided.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxiv-p2"></span>But what others also might have said,
we must anticipate in reply. For perhaps a man might say even as
follows: If it was necessary for His death to take place before all, and
with witnesses, that the story of His Resurrection also might be
believed, it would have been better at any rate for Him to have devised
for Himself a glorious death, if only to escape the ignominy of the
Cross. 2. But had He done even this, He would give ground for suspicion
against Himself, that He was not powerful against every death, but only
against the death devised for <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264)
Him; and so again there would have been a pretext for disbelief about
the Resurrection all the same. So death came to His body, not from
Himself, but from hostile counsels, in order that whatever death they
offered to the Saviour, this He might utterly do away. 3. And just as a
noble wrestler, great in skill and courage, does not pick out his
antagonists for himself, lest he should raise a suspicion of his being
afraid of some of them, but puts it in the choice of the onlookers, and
especially so if they happen to be his enemies, so that against
whomsoever they match him, him he may throw, and be believed superior to
them all; so also the Life of all, our Lord and Saviour, even Christ,
did not devise a death for His own body, so as not to appear to be
fearing some other death; but He accepted on the Cross, and endured, a
death inflicted by others, and above all by His enemies, which they
thought dreadful and ignominious and not to be faced; so that this also
being destroyed, both He Himself might be believed to be the Life, and
the power of death be brought utterly to nought. 4. So something
surprising and startling has happened; for the death, which they thought
to inflict as a disgrace, was actually a monument of victory against
death itself. Whence neither did He suffer the death of John, his head
being severed, nor, as Esaias, was He sawn in sunder; in order that even
in death He might still keep His body undivided and in perfect
soundness, and no pretext be afforded to those that would divide the
Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[49:265](2040121.htm#fr_264) <span
id="vii.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> *i.e.* suggested as <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.xxiv-p3.3"></span>νδοξον</span> (*supra,*
1); a reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xxiv-p3.5"></span>παρ᾽ ἐαυτοῦ</span> has been suggested:
(devised) “by Himself.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Why the Cross, of all deaths? (1) He had to bear the curse for
us. (2) On it He held out His hands to unite all, Jews and Gentiles, in
Himself. (3) He defeated the “Prince of the powers of the air” in His
own region, clearing the way to heaven and opening for us the
everlasting doors.](2040122)
