[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040125)  [Next](2040127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxix-p1"></span> §29. *Here then are wonderful effects,
and a sufficient cause, the Cross, to account for them, as sunrise
accounts for daylight.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxix-p2"></span>Now if by the sign of the Cross, and by
faith in Christ, death is trampled down, it must be evident before the
tribunal of truth that it is none other than Christ Himself that has
displayed trophies and triumphs over death, and made him lose all his
strength. 2. And if, while previously death was strong, and for that
reason terrible, now after the sojourn of the Saviour and the death and
Resurrection of His body it is despised, it must be evident that death
has been brought to nought and conquered by the very Christ that
ascended the Cross. 3. For as, if after night-time the sun rises, and
the whole region of earth is illumined by him, it is at any rate not
open to doubt that it is the sun who has revealed his light everywhere,
that has also driven away the dark and given light to all things; so,
now that death has come into contempt, and been <span id="page_52">p.
52</span> <span id="vii.ii.xxix-Page_52"></span>trodden under foot, from
the time when the Saviour’s saving manifestation in the flesh and His
death on the Cross took place, it must be quite plain that it is the
very Saviour that also appeared in the body, Who has brought death to
nought, and Who displays the signs of victory over him day by day in His
own disciples. 4. For when one sees men, weak by nature, leaping forward
to death, and not fearing its corruption nor frightened of the descent
into Hades, but with eager soul challenging it; and not flinching from
torture, but on the contrary, for Christ’s sake electing to rush upon
death in preference to life upon earth, or even if one be an eye-witness
of men and females and young children rushing and leaping upon death for
the sake of Christ’s religion; who is so silly, or who is so
incredulous, or who so maimed in his mind, as not to see and infer that
Christ, to Whom the people witness, Himself supplies and gives to each
the victory over death, depriving him of all his power in each one of
them that hold His faith and bear the sign of the Cross. 5. For he that
sees the serpent trodden under foot, especially knowing his former
fierceness no longer doubts that he is dead and has quite lost his
strength, unless he is perverted in mind and has not even his bodily
senses sound. For who that sees a lion, either, made sport of by
children, fails to see that he is either dead or has lost all his power?
6. Just as, then, it is possible to see with the eyes the truth of all
this, so, now that death is made sport of and despised by believers in
Christ let none any longer doubt, nor any prove incredulous, of death
having been brought to nought by Christ, and the corruption of death
destroyed and stayed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The reality of the resurrection proved by facts: (1) the victory
over death described above: (2) the Wonders of Grace are the work of One
Living, of One who is God: (3) if the gods be (as alleged) real and
living, a fortiori He Who shatters their power is alive.](2040127)
