[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040366)  [Next](2040368) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p1.2"></span>Texts Explained;
Sixthly, [Proverbs viii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p1.3"></span> Continued.</span> *Our Lord is said to
be created ‘for the works,’ i.e. with a particular purpose, which no
mere creatures are ever said to be. Parallel of* <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p1.4"></span>*Isai. xlix. 5, &c. When His manhood is
spoken of, a reason for it is added; not so when His Divine Nature;
Texts in proof.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p2"></span>51 (*continued*). <span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>For</span> the passage
in the Proverbs, as I have said before, signifies, not the Essence, but
the manhood of the Word; for if He says that He was created ‘for the
works,’ He shews His intention of signifying, not His Essence, but the
Economy which took place ‘for His works,’ which comes second to being.
For things which are in formation and creation are made specially that
they may be and exist <span id="fr_2540"></span>[2541](#fn_2540) , and
next they have to do whatever the Word bids them, as may be seen in the
case of all things. For Adam was created, not that He might work, but
that first he might be man; for it was after this that he received the
command to work. And Noah was created, not because of the ark, but that
first he might exist and be a man; for after this he received
commandment to prepare the ark. And the like will be found in every case
on inquiring into it;—thus the great Moses first was made a man, and
next was entrusted with the government of the people. Therefore here too
we must suppose the like; for thou seest, that the Word is not created
into existence, but, ‘In the beginning was the Word,’ and He is
afterwards sent ‘for the works’ and the Economy towards them. For before
the works were made, the Son was ever, nor was there yet need that He
should be created; but when the works were created and need arose
afterwards of the Economy for their restoration, then it was that the
Word took upon Himself this condescension and assimilation to the works;
which He has shewn us by the word ‘He created.’ And through the Prophet
Isaiah willing to signify the like, He says again: ‘And now thus saith
the Lord, who formed me from the womb to be His servant, to gather
together Jacob unto Him and Israel, I shall be brought together and be
glorified before the Lord <span id="fr_2541"></span>[2542](#fn_2541) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p5"></span>52. See here too, He is formed, not
into existence, but in order to gather together the tribes, which were
in existence before He was formed. For as in the former passage stands
‘He created,’ so in this ‘He formed;’ and as there ‘for the works,’ so
here ‘to gather together;’ so that in every point of view it appears
that ‘He created’ and ‘He formed’ are said after ‘the Word was.’ For as
before His forming the tribes existed, for whose sake He was formed, so
does it appear that the works exist, for which He was created. And when
‘in the beginning was the Word,’ not yet were the works, as I have said
before; but when the works were made and the need required, then ‘He
created’ was said; and as if some son, when the servants were lost, and
in the hands of the enemy by their own carelessness, and need was
urgent, were sent by his father to succour and recover them, and on
setting out were to put over him the like dress <span
id="fr_2542"></span>[2543](#fn_2542) with them, and should fashion
himself as they, lest the capturers, recognising him <span
id="fr_2543"></span>[2544](#fn_2543) as the master, should take to
flight and prevent his descending to those who were hidden under the
earth by them; and then were any one to inquire of him, why he did so,
were to make answer, ‘My Father thus formed and prepared me for his
works,’ while in thus speaking, he neither implies that he is a servant
nor one of the works, nor speaks of the beginning of His origination,
but of the subsequent charge given him over the works,—in the same way
the Lord also, having put over Him our flesh, and ‘being found in
fashion as a man,’ if He were questioned by those who saw Him thus and
marvelled, would say, ‘The Lord created Me the beginning of His ways for
His works,’ and ‘He formed Me to gather together Israel.’ This again the
Spirit <span id="fr_2544"></span>[2545](#fn_2544) foretells in the
Psalms, saying, ‘Thou didst set Him over the works of Thine hands <span
id="fr_2545"></span>[2546](#fn_2545) ;’ which elsewhere the Lord
signified of Himself, ‘I am set as King by Him upon His <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-Page_377"></span>holy hill of Sion <span
id="fr_2546"></span>[2547](#fn_2546) .’ And as, when He shone <span
id="fr_2547"></span>[2548](#fn_2547) in the body upon Sion, He had not
His beginning of existence or of reign, but being God’s Word and
everlasting King, He vouchsafed that His kingdom should shine in a human
way in Sion, that redeeming them and us from the sin which reigned in
them, He might bring them under His Father’s Kingdom, so, on being set
‘for the works,’ He is not set for things which did not yet exist, but
for such as already were and needed restoration.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p12"></span>53. ‘He created’ then and ‘He
formed’ and ‘He set,’ having the same meaning, do not denote the
beginning of His being, or of His essence as created, but His beneficent
renovation which came to pass for us. Accordingly, though He thus
speaks, yet He taught also that He Himself existed before this, when He
said, ‘Before Abraham came to be, I am <span
id="fr_2548"></span>[2549](#fn_2548) ;’ and ‘when He prepared the
heavens, I was present with Him;’ and ‘I was with Him disposing
things <span id="fr_2549"></span>[2550](#fn_2549) .’ And as He Himself
was before Abraham came to be, and Israel had come into being after
Abraham, and plainly He exists first and is formed afterwards, and His
forming signifies not His beginning of being but His taking manhood,
wherein also He collects together the tribes of Israel; so, as ‘being
always with the Father,’ He Himself is Framer of the creation, and His
works are evidently later than Himself, and ‘He created’ signifies, not
His beginning of being, but the Economy which took place for the works,
which He effected in the flesh. For it became Him, being other than the
works, nay rather their Framer, to take upon Himself their
renovation <span id="fr_2550"></span>[2551](#fn_2550) , that, whereas He
is created for us, all things may be now created in Him. For when He
said ‘He created,’ He forthwith added the reason, naming ‘the works,’
that His creation for the works might signify His becoming man for their
renovation. And this is usual with divine Scripture <span
id="fr_2551"></span>[2552](#fn_2551) ; for when it signifies the fleshly
origination of the Son, it adds also the cause <span
id="fr_2552"></span>[2553](#fn_2552) for which He became man; but when
he speaks or His servants declare anything of His Godhead, all is said
in simple diction, and with an absolute sense, and without reason being
added. For He is the Father’s Radiance; and as the Father is, but not
for any reason, neither must we seek the reason of that Radiance. Thus
it is written, ‘In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with
God, and the Word was God <span id="fr_2553"></span>[2554](#fn_2553) ;’
and the wherefore it assigns not <span
id="fr_2554"></span>[2555](#fn_2554) ; but when ‘the Word was made
flesh <span id="fr_2555"></span>[2556](#fn_2555) ,’ then it adds the
reason why, saying, ‘And dwelt among us.’ And again the Apostle saying,
‘Who being in the form of God,’ has not introduced the reason, till ‘He
took on Him the form of a servant;’ for then he continues, ‘He humbled
Himself unto death, even the death of the cross <span
id="fr_2556"></span>[2557](#fn_2556) ;’ for it was for this that He both
became flesh and took the form of a servant.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p22"></span>54. And the Lord Himself has spoken
many things in proverbs; but when giving us notices about Himself, He
has spoken absolutely <span id="fr_2557"></span>[2558](#fn_2557) ; ‘I in
the Father and the Father in Me,’ and ‘I and the Father are one,’ and,
‘He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father,’ and ‘I am the Light of the
world,’ and, ‘I am the Truth <span id="fr_2558"></span>[2559](#fn_2558)
;’ not setting down in every case the reason, nor the wherefore, lest He
should seem second to those things for which He was made. For that
reason would needs take precedence of Him, without which not even He
Himself had come into being. Paul, for instance, ‘separated an Apostle
for the Gospel, which the Lord had promised afore by the Prophets <span
id="fr_2559"></span>[2560](#fn_2559) ,’ was thereby made subordinate to
the Gospel, of which he was made minister, and John, being chosen to
prepare the Lord’s way, was made subordinate to the Lord; but the Lord,
not being made subordinate to any reason why He should be Word, save
only that He is the Father’s Offspring and Only-begotten Wisdom, when He
becomes man, then assigns the reason why He is about to take flesh. For
the need of man preceded His becoming man, apart from which He had not
put on flesh <span id="fr_2560"></span>[2561](#fn_2560) . And what the
need was for which He became man, He Himself thus signifies, ‘I came
down from heaven, not to do Mine own will, but the will of Him that sent
Me. And this is the will of Him which hath sent Me, that of all which He
hath given Me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last day. And this is the will of My Father, that every one which
seeth the Son and believeth on Him may have everlasting life, and I will
raise him up at the last day <span id="fr_2561"></span>[2562](#fn_2561)
.’ And again; ‘I am come a light into the world, that whosoever
believeth on Me, should not abide in darkness <span
id="fr_2562"></span>[2563](#fn_2562) .’ And again he says; ‘To this end
was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness unto the truth <span id="fr_2563"></span>[2564](#fn_2563) .’ And
John has written: ‘For this was manifested the Son of God, that He might
destroy the works of the devil <span
id="fr_2564"></span>[2565](#fn_2564) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p31"></span><span id="page_378">p. 378</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-Page_378"></span>55. To give a witness then,
and for our sakes to undergo death, to raise man up and destroy the
works of the devil <span id="fr_2565"></span>[2566](#fn_2565) , the
Saviour came, and this is the reason of His incarnate presence. For
otherwise a resurrection had not been, unless there had been death; and
how had death been, unless He had had a mortal body? This the Apostle,
learning from Him, thus sets forth, ‘Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself likewise took part of the
same; that through death He might bring to nought him that had the power
of death, that is, the devil, and deliver them who through fear of death
were all their lifetime subject to bondage <span
id="fr_2566"></span>[2567](#fn_2566) .’ And, ‘Since by man came death,
by man came also the resurrection of the dead <span
id="fr_2567"></span>[2568](#fn_2567) .’ And again, ‘For what the Law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God, sending His
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in
the flesh; that the ordinance of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit <span
id="fr_2568"></span>[2569](#fn_2568) .’ And John says, ‘For God sent not
His Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through
Him might be saved <span id="fr_2569"></span>[2570](#fn_2569) .’ And
again, the Saviour has spoken in His own person, ‘For judgment am I come
into this world, that they who see not might see, and that they which
see might become blind <span id="fr_2570"></span>[2571](#fn_2570) .’ Not
for Himself then, but for our salvation, and to abolish death, and to
condemn sin, and to give sight to the blind, and to raise up all from
the dead, has He come; but if not for Himself, but for us, by
consequence not for Himself but for us is He created. But if not for
Himself is He created, but for us, then He is not Himself a creature,
but, as having put on our flesh, He uses such language. And that this is
the sense of the Scriptures, we may learn from the Apostle, who says in
Ephesians, ‘Having broken down the middle wall of partition between us,
having abolished in His flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments
contained in ordinances, to create in Himself of twain one new man, so
making peace <span id="fr_2571"></span>[2572](#fn_2571) .’ But if in Him
the twain are created, and these are in His body, reasonably then,
bearing the twain in Himself, He is as if Himself created; for those who
were created in Himself He made one, and He was in them, as they. And
thus, the two being created in Him, He may say suitably, ‘The Lord
created me.’ For as by receiving our infirmities, He is said to be
infirm Himself, though not Himself infirm, for He is the Power of God,
and He became sin for us and a curse, though not having sinned Himself,
but because He Himself bare our sins and our curse, so <span
id="fr_2572"></span>[2573](#fn_2572) , by creating us in Him, let Him
say, ‘He created me for the works,’ though not Himself a creature.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p40"></span>56. For if, as they hold, the
Essence of the Word being of created nature, therefore He says, ‘The
Lord created me,’ being a creature, He was not created for us; but if He
was not created for us, we are not created in Him; and, if not created
in Him, we have Him not in ourselves but externally; as, for instance,
as receiving instruction from Him as from a teacher <span
id="fr_2573"></span>[2574](#fn_2573) . And it being so with us, sin has
not lost its reign over the flesh, being inherent and not cast out of
it. But the Apostle opposes such a doctrine a little before, when he
says, ‘For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus <span
id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574) ;’ and if in Christ we are created,
then it is not He who is created, but we in Him; and thus the words ‘He
created’ are for our sake. For because of our need, the Word, though
being Creator, endured words which are used of creatures; which are not
proper to Him, as being the Word, but are ours who are created in Him.
And as, since the Father is always, so is His Word, and always being,
always says ‘I was daily His delight, rejoicing always before Him <span
id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575) ,’ and ‘I am in the Father and the
Father in Me <span id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576) ;’ so, when for
our need He became man, consistently does He use language, as ourselves,
‘The Lord hath created Me,’ that, by His dwelling in the flesh, sin
might perfectly be expelled from the flesh, and we might have a free
mind <span id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577) . For what ought He,
when made <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-Page_379"></span>man, to say? ‘In the beginning I was
man?’ this were neither suitable to Him nor true; and as it beseemed not
to say this, so it is natural and proper in the case of man to say, ‘He
created’ and ‘He made’ Him. On this account then the reason of ‘He
created’ is added, namely, the need of the works; and where the reason
is added, surely the reason rightly explains the lection. Thus here,
when He says ‘He created,’ He sets down the cause, ‘the works;’ on the
other hand, when He signifies absolutely the generation from the Father,
straightway He adds, ‘Before all the hills He begets me <span
id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578) ;’ but He does not add the
‘wherefore,’ as in the case of ‘He created,’ saying, ‘for the works,’
but absolutely, ‘He begets me,’ as in the text, ‘In the beginning was
the Word <span id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579) .’ For, though no
works had been created, still ‘the Word’ of God ‘was,’ and ‘the Word was
God.’ And His becoming man would not have taken place, had not the need
of men become a cause. The Son then is not a creature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2540"></span>[376:2541](2040367.htm#fr_2540) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p3"></span> He says in effect, ‘Before the
generation of the works, they were not; *but* Christ on the contrary’
(not, ‘*was* before His generation,’ as Bull’s hypothesis, *supr. Exc.
B.* would require, but) ‘is from everlasting,’ vid. §57, note.

<span id="fn_2541"></span>[376:2542](2040367.htm#fr_2541) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p4"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_2542"></span>[376:2543](2040367.htm#fr_2542) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p6"></span> §7.

<span id="fn_2543"></span>[376:2544](2040367.htm#fr_2543) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p7"></span> Vid. the well-known passage in S.
Ignatius, *ad Eph.* 19 \[and Lightfoot’s note\].

<span id="fn_2544"></span>[376:2545](2040367.htm#fr_2544) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p8"></span> *Supr.* 20.

<span id="fn_2545"></span>[376:2546](2040367.htm#fr_2545) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p9"></span> [Heb. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2546"></span>[377:2547](2040367.htm#fr_2546) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p10"></span> [Ps. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_2547"></span>[377:2548](2040367.htm#fr_2547) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p11.2"></span>πέλαμψε</span>, vid. of the Holy
Spirit, *Serap.* i. 20, c.

<span id="fn_2548"></span>[377:2549](2040367.htm#fr_2548) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p13"></span> [John viii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2549"></span>[377:2550](2040367.htm#fr_2549) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p14"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p14.1"></span>[Prov.
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p14.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2550"></span>[377:2551](2040367.htm#fr_2550) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p15"></span> p. 335, note 1.

<span id="fn_2551"></span>[377:2552](2040367.htm#fr_2551) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p16.2"></span>θος ἐστὶ τῇ θεί& 139· γραφῇ</span>: and
so *Orat.* iii. 18, b. And <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p16.4"></span>τῆς γραφῆς ἔθος ἐχούσης</span>, ibid.
30, d.

<span id="fn_2552"></span>[377:2553](2040367.htm#fr_2552) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p16.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p17"></span> Vid. Naz. *Orat.* 30. 2.

<span id="fn_2553"></span>[377:2554](2040367.htm#fr_2553) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p18"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2554"></span>[377:2555](2040367.htm#fr_2554) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p19"></span> Naz. ibid.

<span id="fn_2555"></span>[377:2556](2040367.htm#fr_2555) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p20"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2556"></span>[377:2557](2040367.htm#fr_2556) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p21"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p21.1"></span>[Phil. ii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p21.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2557"></span>[377:2558](2040367.htm#fr_2557) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p23"></span> *Infr.* 62.

<span id="fn_2558"></span>[377:2559](2040367.htm#fr_2558) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p24"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p24.1"></span>[John
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p24.3"></span>; x. 30; viii. 12

<span id="fn_2559"></span>[377:2560](2040367.htm#fr_2559) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p25"></span> [Rom.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2560"></span>[377:2561](2040367.htm#fr_2560) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p26"></span> It is the general teaching of the
Fathers that our Lord would not have been incarnate had not man sinned.
\[But see Prolegg. ch. iv. §3, c.\] Cf. *de Incarn.* 4. vid. Thomassin.
at great length *de Incarn.* ii. 5–11. also Petav. *de Incarn.* ii. 17,
7–12. Vasquez. *in* 3 *Thom. Disp.* x. 4 and 5.

<span id="fn_2561"></span>[377:2562](2040367.htm#fr_2561) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p27"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p27.1"></span>[John vi.
38-40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="fn_2562"></span>[377:2563](2040367.htm#fr_2562) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p28"></span> [John
12.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2563"></span>[377:2564](2040367.htm#fr_2563) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p29"></span> [John
18.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2564"></span>[377:2565](2040367.htm#fr_2564) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p30"></span> [1 John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2565"></span>[378:2566](2040367.htm#fr_2565) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p32"></span> Two ends of our Lord’s Incarnation
are here mentioned; that He might die for us, and that He might renew
us, answering nearly to those specified in <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p32.2"></span>[Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p32.4"></span>. ‘who was delivered for our offences
and raised again for our justification.’ The general object of His
coming, including both of these, is treated of in *Incarn.* esp. §§4–20.
and in the two books against Apollinaris. Vid. *supr.* §8. §9. Also
*infr. Orat.* iv. 6. And Theodoret, *Eran.* iii. p. 196, 7. Vigil.
Thaps. *contr.* *Eutych.* i. p. 496. (B. P. ed. 1624.) and S. Leo speaks
of the whole course of redemption, i.e. incarnation, atonement,
regeneration, justification, &c., as one sacrament, not drawing the line
distinctly between the several agents, elements, or stages in it, but
considering it to lie in the intercommunion of Christ’s and our persons.
*Serm.* 63. 14. He speaks of His fortifying us against our passions and
infirmities, both *sacramento susceptionis* and exemplo. *Serm.* 65, 2.
and of a duplex remedium cujus aliud in *sacramento,* aliud in exemplo.
*Serm.* 67, 5. also 69, 5. The tone of his teaching is throughout
characteristic of the Fathers, and very like that of S. Athanasius.

<span id="fn_2566"></span>[378:2567](2040367.htm#fr_2566) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p32.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p33"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p33.1"></span>[Heb.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p33.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2567"></span>[378:2568](2040367.htm#fr_2567) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p33.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p34"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#021)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2568"></span>[378:2569](2040367.htm#fr_2568) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p35"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p35.1"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p35.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2569"></span>[378:2570](2040367.htm#fr_2569) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p35.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p36"></span> [John iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2570"></span>[378:2571](2040367.htm#fr_2570) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p37"></span> [John
9.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2571"></span>[378:2572](2040367.htm#fr_2571) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p38"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p38.1"></span>[Eph.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p38.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2572"></span>[378:2573](2040367.htm#fr_2572) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p38.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p39"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p39.2"></span>αὐτὸς</span>, ‘Himself,’ is all along
used, where a later writer would have said ‘His Person;’ vid. *supr.*
§45, n. 2; still there is more to be explained in this passage, which,
taken in the letter, would speak a language very different from
Athan.’s, as if the infirmities or the created nature of the Word were
not more real than His imputed sinfulness. (vid. on the other hand
*infr.* iii. 31–35). But nothing is more common in theology than
comparisons which are only parallel to a certain point as regards the
matter in hand, especially since many doctrines do not admit of exact
illustrations. Our Lord’s real manhood and imputed sinfulness were alike
adjuncts to His Divine Person, which was of an Eternal and Infinite
Nature; and therefore His Manhood may be compared to an Attribute, or to
an accident, without meaning that it really was either.

<span id="fn_2573"></span>[378:2574](2040367.htm#fr_2573) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p41"></span> Note on iii. 19.

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[378:2575](2040367.htm#fr_2574) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p42"></span> [Eph. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[378:2576](2040367.htm#fr_2575) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p43"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p43.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p43.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[378:2577](2040367.htm#fr_2576) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p43.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p44"></span> [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[378:2578](2040367.htm#fr_2577) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p45.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p45.2"></span>λεύθερον τὸ φρόνημα</span>. vid. also
beginning of the paragraph, where sanctification is contrasted to
teaching. vid. also note on 79, *infr. Contr. Apoll.* i. 20. fin. ibid.
ii. 6. also *Orat.* iii. 33, where vid. note, and 34. vid. for <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p45.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p45.5"></span>ρχή</span>, *Orat.*
i. 48, note 7. Also vid. *infr. Orat.* iii. 56, a. iv. 33, a. Naz. *Epp.
ad Cled.* 1. and 2. (101, 102. Ed. Ben.) Nyssen. *ad Theoph. in Apoll.*
p. 696. Leo, *Serm.* 26, 2. *Serm.* 72, 2. vid. *Serm.* 22, 2. ut corpus
regenerati fiat caro Crucifixi. *Serm.* 63, 6. Hæc est nativitas nova
dum homo nascitur in Deo; in quo homine Deus natus est, carne antiqui
seminis suscepta, sine semine antiquo, ut illam novo semine, id est,
spiritualiter, reformaret, exclusis antiquitatis sordibus expiatam.
Tertull. *de Carn. Christ.* 17. vid. *supr.* i. 51, note 5. and note on
64 *infr.* 65 and 70. and on iii. 34.

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[379:2579](2040367.htm#fr_2578) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p45.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p46"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p46.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p46.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[379:2580](2040367.htm#fr_2579) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p46.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p47"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.vii-p47.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Texts Explained; Sixthly, Proverbs viii. 22, Continued. Our Lord
not said in Scripture to be 'created,' or the works to be 'begotten.'
'In the beginning' means in the case of the works 'from the beginning.'
Scripture passages explained. We are made by God first, begotten next;
creatures by nature, sons by grace. Christ begotten first, made or
created afterwards. Sense of 'First-born of the dead;' of 'First-born
among many brethren;' of 'First-born of all creation,' contrasted with
'Only-begotten.' Further interpretation of 'beginning of ways,' and 'for
the works.' Why a creature could not redeem; why redemption was
necessary at all. Texts which contrast the Word and the works.](2040368)
