[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040445)  [Next](2040447) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p1.1"></span>Letter XLIX</span>.—*Letter to
Dracontius <span id="fr_4598"></span>[4599](#fn_4598) . Written <span
class="c10"><span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p2.3"></span>a.d.</span> 354 or
355.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>I am</span> at a loss how to write. Am I
to blame <span id="page_558">p. 558</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-Page_558"></span>you for your refusal? or for having
regard to the trials, and hiding for fear of the Jews <span
id="fr_4599"></span>[4600](#fn_4599) ? In any case, however it may be,
what you have done is worthy of blame, beloved Dracontius. For it was
not fitting that after receiving the grace you should hide, nor that,
being a wise man, you should furnish others with a pretext for flight.
For many are offended when they hear it; not merely that you have done
this, but that you have done it having regard to the times and to the
afflictions which are weighing upon the Church. And I fear lest, in
flying for your own sake, you prove to be in peril in the sight of the
Lord on account of others. For if ‘he that offendeth one of the little
ones, should rather choose that a mill stone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the depths of the sea <span
id="fr_4600"></span>[4601](#fn_4600) ,’ what can be in store for you, if
you prove an offence to so many? For the surprising unanimity about your
election in the district <span id="fr_4601"></span>[4602](#fn_4601) of
Alexandria will of necessity be broken up by your retirement: and the
episcopate of the district will be grasped at by many,—and many unfit
persons, as you are well aware. And many heathen who were promising to
become Christians upon your election will remain heathen, if your piety
sets at nought the grace given you.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p7"></span>2. What defence will you offer for
such conduct? With what arguments will you be able to wash away and
efface such an impeachment? How will you heal those who on your account
are fallen and offended? Or how will you be able to restore the broken
peace? Beloved Dracontius, you have caused us grief instead of joy,
groaning instead of consolation. For we expected to have you with us as
a consolation; and now we behold you in flight, and that you will be
convicted in judgment, and when upon your trial will repent it. And ‘Who
shall have pity upon thee <span id="fr_4602"></span>[4603](#fn_4602) ,’
as the Prophet says, who will turn his mind to you for peace, when he
sees the brethren for whom Christ died injured on account of your
flight? For you must know, and not be in doubt, that while before your
election you lived to yourself, after it, you live for your flock. And
before you had received the grace of the episcopate, no one knew you;
but after you became one, the laity expect you to bring them food,
namely instruction from the Scriptures. When then they expect, and
suffer hunger, and you are feeding yourself <span
id="fr_4603"></span>[4604](#fn_4603) only, and our Lord Jesus Christ
comes and we stand before Him, what defence will you offer when He sees
His own sheep hungering? For had you not taken the money, He would not
have blamed you. But He would reasonably do so if upon taking it you dug
and buried it,—in the words which God forbid that your piety should ever
hear: ‘Thou oughtest to have given my money to the bankers, that when I
came I might demand it of them <span
id="fr_4604"></span>[4605](#fn_4604) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p11"></span>3. I beseech you, spare yourself and
us. Yourself, lest you run into peril; us, lest we be grieved because of
you. Take thought of the Church, lest many of the little ones be injured
on your account, and the others be given an occasion of withdrawing. Nay
but if you feared the times and acted as you did from timidity, your
mind is not manly; for in such a case you ought to manifest zeal for
Christ, and rather meet circumstances boldly, and use the language of
blessed Paul: ‘in all these things we are more than conquerors <span
id="fr_4605"></span>[4606](#fn_4605) ;’ and the more so in that we ought
to serve not the time, but the Lord <span
id="fr_4606"></span>[4607](#fn_4606) . But if the organising of the
Churches is distasteful to you, and you do not think the ministry of the
episcopate has its reward, why, then you have brought yourself to
despise the Saviour that ordered these things. I beseech you, dismiss
such ideas, nor tolerate those who advise you in such a sense, for this
is not worthy of Dracontius. For the order the Lord has established by
the Apostles abides fair and firm; but the cowardice of the brethren
shall cease <span id="fr_4607"></span>[4608](#fn_4607) .

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p15"></span>4. For if all were of the same mind
as your present advisers, how would you have become a Christian, since
there would be no bishops? Or if our successors are to inherit this
state of mind, how will the Churches be able to hold together? Or do
your advisers think that you have received nothing, that they despise
it? If so surely they are wrong. For it is time for them to think that
the grace of the Font is nothing, if some are found to despise it. But
<span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-Page_559"></span>you have received it, beloved
Dracontius; do not tolerate your advisers nor deceive yourself. For this
will be required of you by the God who gave it. Have you not heard the
Apostle say, ‘Neglect not the gift that is in thee <span
id="fr_4608"></span>[4609](#fn_4608) ?’ or have you not read how he
accepts the man that had doubled his money, while he condemned the one
that had hidden it? But may it come to pass that you may quickly return,
in order that you too may be one of those who are praised. Or tell me,
whom do your advisers wish you to imitate? For we ought to walk by the
standard of the saints and the fathers, and imitate them, and to be sure
that if we depart from them we put ourselves also out of their
fellowship. Whom then do they wish you to imitate? The one who
hesitated, and while wishing to follow, delayed it and took counsel
because of his family <span id="fr_4609"></span>[4610](#fn_4609) , or
blessed Paul, who, the moment the stewardship was entrusted to him,
‘straightway conferred not with flesh and blood <span
id="fr_4610"></span>[4611](#fn_4610) ?’ For although he said, ‘I am not
worthy to be called an Apostle <span
id="fr_4611"></span>[4612](#fn_4611) ,’ yet, knowing what he had
received, and being not ignorant of the giver, he wrote, ‘For woe is me
if I preach not the gospel <span id="fr_4612"></span>[4613](#fn_4612) .’
But, as it was ‘woe to me’ if he did not preach, so, in teaching and
preaching the gospel, he had his converts as his joy and crown <span
id="fr_4613"></span>[4614](#fn_4613) . This explains why the saint <span
id="fr_4614"></span>[4615](#fn_4614) was zealous to preach as far as
Illyricum, and not to shrink from proceeding to Rome <span
id="fr_4615"></span>[4616](#fn_4615) , or even going as far as the
Spains <span id="fr_4616"></span>[4617](#fn_4616) , in order that the
more he laboured, he might receive so much the greater reward for his
labour. He boasted then that he had fought the good fight, and was
confident that he should receive the great crown <span
id="fr_4617"></span>[4618](#fn_4617) . Therefore, beloved Dracontius,
whom are you imitating in your present action? Paul, or men unlike him?
For my part, I pray that you, and myself, may prove an imitator of all
the saints.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p26"></span>5. Or possibly there are some who
advise you to hide, because you have given your word upon oath not to
accept the office if elected. For I hear that they are buzzing in your
ears to this effect, and consider that they are thus acting
conscientiously. But if they were truly conscientious, they would above
all have feared God, Who imposed this ministry upon you. Or if they had
read the divine Scriptures, they would not have advised you contrary to
them. For it is time for them to blame Jeremiah also, and to impeach the
great Moses, in that they did not listen to their advice, but fearing
God fulfilled their ministry, and prophesying were made perfect. For
they also when they had received their mission and the grace of
Prophecy, refused. But afterwards they feared, and did not set at nought
Him that sent them. Whether then you be of stammering utterance, and
slow of tongue, yet fear God that made you, or if you call yourself too
young to preach, yet reverence Him Who knew you before you were made. Or
if you have given your word (now their word was to the saints as an
oath), yet read Jeremiah, how he too had said, ‘I will not name the Name
of the Lord <span id="fr_4618"></span>[4619](#fn_4618) ,’ yet afterwards
he feared the fire kindled within him, and did not do as he had said,
nor hid himself as if bound by an oath, but reverenced Him that had
entrusted to him his office, and fulfilled the prophetic call. Or are
you not aware, beloved, that Jonah also fled, but met with the fate that
befel him, after which he returned and prophesied?

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p28"></span>6. Do not then entertain counsels
opposite to this. For the Lord knows our case better than we ourselves,
and He knows to whom He is entrusting His Churches. For even if a man be
not worthy, yet let him not look at his former life, but let him carry
out his ministry, lest, in addition to his life he incur also the curse
of negligence. I ask you, beloved Dracontius, whether knowing this, and
being a wise man, you are not pricked in your soul? Do you not feel
anxious lest any of those entrusted to you should perish? Do you not
burn, as with a fire in your conscience? Are you not in fear of the day
of judgment, in which none of your present advisers will be there to aid
you? For each shall give account of those entrusted to his hands. For
how did his excuse benefit the man who hid the money? Or how did it
benefit Adam to say, ‘The woman beguiled me <span
id="fr_4619"></span>[4620](#fn_4619) ?’ Beloved Dracontius, even if you
are really weak, yet you ought to take up the charge, lest, the Church
being unoccupied, the enemies injure it, taking advantage of your
flight. You should gird yourself up, so as not to leave us alone in the
struggle; you should labour with us, in order to receive the reward also
along with all.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p30"></span>7. Make haste then, beloved, and
tarry no longer, nor suffer those who would prevent you: but remember
Him that has given, and come hither to us who love you, who give you
Scriptural advice, in order that you may both be installed by ourselves,
and, as you minister in the churches make remembrance of us. For you are
not the only one who has been elected from among monks, nor the only one
to have presided over a monastery, or to have been beloved by monks. But
you know that not only was Serapion a monk, and presided <span
id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-Page_560"></span>over that number of monks; you were
not unaware of how many monks Apollos was father; you know Agathon, and
are not ignorant of Ariston. You remember Ammonius who went abroad <span
id="fr_4620"></span>[4621](#fn_4620) with Serapion. Perhaps you have
also heard of Muitus <span id="fr_4621"></span>[4622](#fn_4621) in the
upper Thebaid, and can learn about Paul <span
id="fr_4622"></span>[4623](#fn_4622) at Latopolis, and many others. And
yet these, when elected, did not gainsay; but taking Elisha as an
example, and knowing the story of Elijah, and having learnt all about
the disciples and apostles, they grappled with the charge, and did not
despise the ministry, and were not inferior to themselves, but rather
look for the reward of their labour, advancing themselves, and guiding
others onward. For how many have they turned away from the idols? How
many have they caused to cease from their familiarity with demons by
their warning? How many servants have they brought to the Lord, so as to
cause those who saw such wonders to marvel at the sight? Or is it not a
great wonder to make a damsel live as a virgin, and a young man live in
continence, and an idolater come to know Christ?

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p34"></span>8. Let not monks then prevent you,
as though you alone had been elected from among monks; nor do you make
excuses, to the effect that you will deteriorate. For you may even grow
better if you imitate Paul, and follow up the actions of the Saints. For
you know that men like those, when appointed stewards of the mysteries,
all the more pressed forward to the mark of their high calling <span
id="fr_4623"></span>[4624](#fn_4623) . When did Paul meet martyrdom and
expect to receive his crown, if not after being sent to teach? When did
Peter make his confession, if not when he was preaching the Gospel, and
had become a fisher of men <span id="fr_4624"></span>[4625](#fn_4624) ?
When was Elijah taken up, if not after completing his prophetic career?
When did Elisha gain a double share of the Spirit, if not after leaving
all to follow Elijah? Or why did the Saviour choose disciples, if not to
send them out as apostles?

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p37"></span>9. So take these as an example,
beloved Dracontius, and do not say, or believe those who say, that the
bishop’s office is an occasion of sin, nor that it gives rise to
temptations to sin. For it is possible for you also as a bishop to
hunger and thirst <span id="fr_4625"></span>[4626](#fn_4625) , as Paul
did. You can drink no wine, like Timothy <span
id="fr_4626"></span>[4627](#fn_4626) , and fast constantly too, like
Paul <span id="fr_4627"></span>[4628](#fn_4627) , in order that thus
fasting after his example you may feast others with your words, and
while thirsting for lack of drink, water others by teaching. Let not
your advisers, then, allege these things. For we know both bishops who
fast, and monks who eat. We know bishops who drink no wine, as well as
monks who do. We know bishops who work <span
id="fr_4628"></span>[4629](#fn_4628) wonders, as well as monks who do
not. Many also of the bishops have not even married, while monks have
been <span id="fr_4629"></span>[4630](#fn_4629) fathers of children;
just as conversely we know bishops who are fathers of children and monks
‘of the completest kind <span id="fr_4630"></span>[4631](#fn_4630) .’
And again, we know clergy who suffer hunger, and monks who fast. For it
is possible in the latter way, and not forbidden in the former. But let
a man, wherever he is, strive earnestly; for the crown is given not
according to position, but according to action.

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p44"></span>10. Do not then suffer those who
give contrary advice. But rather hasten and delay not; the more so as
the holy festival is approaching; so that the laity may not keep the
feast without you, and you bring great danger upon yourself. For who
will in your absence preach them the Easter sermon? Who will announce to
them the great day of the Resurrection, if you art in hiding? Who will
counsel them, if you are in flight, to keep the feast fittingly? Ah, how
many will be the better if you appear, how many be injured if you fly!
And who will think well of you for this? and why do they advise you not
to take up the bishop’s office, when they themselves wish to have
presbyters <span id="fr_4631"></span>[4632](#fn_4631) ? For if you are
bad, let them not associate with you. But if they know that you are
good, let them not envy the others. For if, as they say, teaching and
government is an occasion of sin, let them not be taught themselves, nor
have presbyters, lest they deteriorate, both they and those who teach
them. But do not attend to these human sayings, nor suffer those who
give such advice, as I have often already said. But rather make haste
and turn to the Lord, in order that, taking thought for his sheep, you
may remember us also. But to this end I have bidden our beloved Hierax,
the presbyter, and Maximus the reader go, and bid you by word of mouth
also, that you may be able thus to learn both with what feelings I have
written, and the danger that results from gainsaying the ordinance of
the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4598"></span>[557:4599](2040446.htm#fr_4598) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p2"></span> Dracontius, Bishop of Hermupolis
Parva, was one of the bishops expelled from their sees, 356–7. His place
of exile was the desert near ‘Clysma,’ i.e. the gulf of Suez (*Hist.
Ar.* 75, cf. Hieron. *Vit. Hilar.* 30). We find him in 362 at the
Council of Alexandria. The present letter, written to urge Dracontius
not to refuse the Episcopate, was written just before Easter (§10), when
persecution was expected (§3), and after the mission of Serapion,
Ammonius and others to Constantius, <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span> 353. It was probably written,
therefore, early either in 354 or 355. The letter is one of the
masterpieces of Athanasius: its unforced warmth, vigour, and affection
can fail to touch no one who reads it. It is, like the letter to Amun,
one of our most important documents for the history of Egyptian
Monasticism. (Migne xxv. 524 *sqq.*)

<span id="fn_4599"></span>[558:4600](2040446.htm#fr_4599) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p4"></span> Cf. [John
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002), [John
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4600"></span>[558:4601](2040446.htm#fr_4600) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p5"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>[Matt. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p5.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4601"></span>[558:4602](2040446.htm#fr_4601) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p6"></span> Hermupolis Parva was in the nome, or
department, of Alexandria (anciently called the nome of Hermupolis in
the Delta), and lay on a canal 44 miles east of the Capital; it is
identified with *Damanhur.* Agathammon, a Meletian bishop of this
‘district,’ is mentioned in the list, *Apol. Ar.* 71, where the district
of ‘Sais’ seems to include a much wider area than the ancient Saite nome
(Maspero. *Hist. Anc.* 4, p. 24).

<span id="fn_4602"></span>[558:4603](2040446.htm#fr_4602) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p8"></span> [Jer. xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4603"></span>[558:4604](2040446.htm#fr_4603) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p9"></span> Cf. [Ezek. xxxiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4604"></span>[558:4605](2040446.htm#fr_4604) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p10"></span> See [Matt.
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027), [Luke
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p10.1"></span>[Matt. xxv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p10.3"></span>, and [Luke xix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p10.4"></span>. It is not clear whether by the ‘money’
received by Drac. is meant his actual consecration, or merely his
election.

<span id="fn_4605"></span>[558:4606](2040446.htm#fr_4605) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p12"></span> [Rom. viii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4606"></span>[558:4607](2040446.htm#fr_4606) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p13"></span> [Rom. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>, and Westcott and Hort on various
reading.

<span id="fn_4607"></span>[558:4608](2040446.htm#fr_4607) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p14"></span> It should be observed that the fear
of Dracontius was, not that he would suffer *in dignity* by becoming a
bishop, but lest he should deteriorate *spiritually* (§8, init.). Cf.
the dying soliloquy of Pope Eugenius IV.: ‘Gabriele, hadst thou never
been Pope nor Cardinal it had been better for thy salvation.’ See also
S. Bernard, *de Consideratione.*

<span id="fn_4608"></span>[559:4609](2040446.htm#fr_4608) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p16"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4609"></span>[559:4610](2040446.htm#fr_4609) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p17"></span> [Luke ii.
61](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#061)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4610"></span>[559:4611](2040446.htm#fr_4610) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p18"></span> [Gal. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4611"></span>[559:4612](2040446.htm#fr_4611) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4612"></span>[559:4613](2040446.htm#fr_4612) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p20"></span> [1 Cor.
9.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4613"></span>[559:4614](2040446.htm#fr_4613) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p21"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>[1 Thes. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p21.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4614"></span>[559:4615](2040446.htm#fr_4614) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p21.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p22"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>τῷ ἁγί& 251·</span> as proposed by
Montf.

<span id="fn_4615"></span>[559:4616](2040446.htm#fr_4615) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p23"></span> [Rom. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4616"></span>[559:4617](2040446.htm#fr_4616) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p24"></span> [Rom.
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4617"></span>[559:4618](2040446.htm#fr_4617) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p25"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>[2 Tim.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p25.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4618"></span>[559:4619](2040446.htm#fr_4618) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p27"></span> [Jer. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4619"></span>[559:4620](2040446.htm#fr_4619) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p29"></span> [Gen. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4620"></span>[560:4621](2040446.htm#fr_4620) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p31"></span> In 353, see *Fest. Ind.* xxv.;
Sozom. iv. 9.

<span id="fn_4621"></span>[560:4622](2040446.htm#fr_4621) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p32"></span> Perhaps the ‘Muis’ of the Sardican
subscriptions (*Apol. Ar.*) and the ‘Move’ of *Vit. Pachom. c.* 72.

<span id="fn_4622"></span>[560:4623](2040446.htm#fr_4622) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p33"></span> Paulus, perhaps identical with the
‘Philo’ of Sard. subsc. and *Vit. Pach. ubi supr.* A ‘Philo’ and ‘Muius’
also occur close together in *Apol. Fug.* 7 (note 9).

<span id="fn_4623"></span>[560:4624](2040446.htm#fr_4623) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p35"></span> [Phil. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4624"></span>[560:4625](2040446.htm#fr_4624) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p36"></span> [Matt. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4625"></span>[560:4626](2040446.htm#fr_4625) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p38"></span> [Phil. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4626"></span>[560:4627](2040446.htm#fr_4626) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p39"></span> [1 Tim. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4627"></span>[560:4628](2040446.htm#fr_4627) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p40"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)<span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4628"></span>[560:4629](2040446.htm#fr_4628) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p41.1"></span>σημεῖα</span>. At the end of §7 this
word can only be rendered ‘wonders.’ But here it appears at least
probable that it has the different sense of ‘miracles.’

<span id="fn_4629"></span>[560:4630](2040446.htm#fr_4629) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p42"></span> Probably the reference is to
married men who had *subsequently* become monks. Or else, as monks at
this time lived in many cases in the world, not in communities, it may
refer to married men leading an ascetic life.

<span id="fn_4630"></span>[560:4631](2040446.htm#fr_4630) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p43.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p43.2"></span>ξ ὁλοκλήρου γένους</span>.

<span id="fn_4631"></span>[560:4632](2040446.htm#fr_4631) <span
id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iv.iv-p45"></span> This is not our earliest notice of
ordained persons in monastic societies. see *Apol. Ar.* 67.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Letter to Lucifer.](2040447)
