[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040077)  [Next](2040079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iii-p1"></span> §32. (3) *The body cannot originate
such phenomena; and in fact the action of the rational soul is seen in
its over-ruling the instincts of the bodily organs*.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iii-p2"></span>We add a further point to complete our
demonstration for the benefit of those <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) who shamelessly take refuge in denial
of reason. How is it, that whereas the body is mortal by nature, man
reasons on the things of immortality, and often, where virtue demands
it, courts death? Or how, since the body lasts but for a time, does man
imagine of things eternal, so as to despise what lies before him, and
desire what is beyond? The body could not have spontaneously such
thoughts about itself, nor could it think upon what is external to
itself. For it is mortal and lasts but for a time. And it follows that
that which thinks what is opposed to the body and against its nature
must be distinct in kind. What then can this be, save a rational and
immortal soul? For it introduces the echo of higher things, not outside,
but within the body, as the musician does in his lyre. 2. Or how again,
the eye being naturally constituted to see and the ear to hear, do they
turn from some objects and choose others? For who is it that turns away
the eye from seeing? Or who shuts off the ear from hearing, its natural
function? Or who often hinders the palate, to which it is natural to
taste things, from its natural impulse? Or who withholds the hand from
its natural activity of touching something, or turns aside the sense of
smell from its normal exercise <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) ?
Who is it that thus acts against the natural instincts of the body? Or
how does the body, turned from its natural course, turn to the counsels
of another and suffer itself to be guided at the beck of that other?
Why, these things prove simply this, that the rational soul presides
over the body. 3. For the body is not even constituted to drive itself,
but it is carried at the will of another, just as a horse does not yoke
himself, but is driven by his master. Hence laws for human beings to
practise what is good and to abstain from evil-doing, while to the
brutes evil remains unthought of and undiscerned, because they lie
outside rationality and the process of understanding. I think then that
the existence of a rational soul in man is proved by what we have said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[21:148](2040078.htm#fr_147) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iii-p3"></span> Supra xxx.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[21:149](2040078.htm#fr_148) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iii-p4"></span> Compare the somewhat analogous
argument in Butler, *Serm. ii*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: §33. The soul immortal. Proved by (1) its being distinct from the
body, (2) its being the source of motion, (3) its power to go beyond the
body in imagination and thought.](2040079)
