[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040362)  [Next](2040364) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p1.2"></span>Introductory to</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p1.3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p1.4"></span>[Proverbs viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p1.5"></span></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p1.6"></span>, that the Son is not a Creature</span>.
*Arian formula, a creature but not as one of the creatures; but each
creature is unlike all other creatures; and no creature can create. The
Word then differs from all creatures in that in which they, though
otherwise differing, all agree together, as creatures; viz. in being an
efficient cause; in being the one medium or instrumental agent in
creation; moreover in being the revealer of the Father; and in being the
object of worship.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p2"></span>18. (*continued*). Now in the next
place let us consider the passage in the Proverbs, ‘The Lord created me
a beginning of His ways for His works <span
id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311) ;’ although in shewing that the
Word is no work, it has been also shewn that He is no creature. For it
is the same <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-Page_358"></span>to say work or creature, so that the
proof that He is no work is a proof also that He is no creature. Whereas
one may marvel at these men, thus devising excuses to be irreligious,
and nothing daunted at the refutations which meet them upon every point.
For first they set about deceiving the simple by their questions, <span
id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) ‘Did He who is make from that which
was not one that was not or one that was <span
id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313) ?’ and, ‘Had you a son before
begetting him <span id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314) ?’ And when
this had been proved worthless, next they invented the question, ‘Is the
Unoriginate one or two <span id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) ?’
Then, when in this they had been confuted, straightway they formed
another, ‘Has He free-will and an alterable nature <span
id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316) ?’ But being forced to give up
this, next they set about saying, ‘Being made so much better than the
Angels <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317) ;’ and when the truth
exposed this pretence, now again, collecting them all together, they
think to recommend their heresy by ‘work’ and ‘creature <span
id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318) .’ For they mean those very things
over again, and are true to their own perverseness, putting into various
shapes and turning to and fro the same errors, if so be to deceive some
by that variousness. Although then abundant proof has been given above
of this their reckless expedient, yet, since they make all places sound
with this passage from the Proverbs, and to many who are ignorant of the
faith of Christians, seem to say somewhat, it is necessary to examine
separately, ‘He created’ as well as ‘Who was faithful to Him that made
Him <span id="fr_2319"></span>[2320](#fn_2319) ;’ that, as in all
others, so in this text also, they may be proved to have got no further
than a fantasy.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p12"></span>19. And first let us see the
answers, which they returned to Alexander of blessed memory, in the
outset, while their heresy was in course of formation. They wrote thus:
‘He is a creature, but not as one of the creatures; a work, but not as
one of the works; an offspring, but not as one of the offsprings <span
id="fr_2320"></span>[2321](#fn_2320) .’ Let every one consider the
profligacy and craft of this heresy; for knowing the bitterness of its
own malignity, it makes an effort to trick itself out with fair words,
and says, what indeed it means, that He is a creature, yet thinks to be
able to screen itself by adding, ‘but not as one of the creatures.’
However, in thus writing, they rather convict themselves of irreligion;
for if, in your opinion, He is simply a creature, why add the
pretence <span id="fr_2321"></span>[2322](#fn_2321) , ‘but not as one of
the creatures?’ And if He is simply a work, how ‘not as one of the
works?’ In which we may see the poison of the heresy. For by saying,
‘offspring, but not as one of the offsprings,’ they reckon many sons,
and one of these they pronounce to be the Lord; so that according to
them He is no more Only begotten, but one out of many brethren, and is
called <span id="fr_2322"></span>[2323](#fn_2322) offspring and son.
What use then is this pretence of saying that He is a creature and not a
creature? for though ye shall say, Not as ‘one of the creatures,’ I will
prove this sophism of yours to be foolish. For still ye pronounce Him to
be one of the creatures; and whatever a man might say of the other
creatures, such ye hold concerning the Son, ye truly ‘fools and
blind <span id="fr_2323"></span>[2324](#fn_2323) .’ For is any one of
the creatures just what another is <span
id="fr_2324"></span>[2325](#fn_2324) , that ye should predicate this of
the Son as some prerogative <span id="fr_2325"></span>[2326](#fn_2325) ?
And all the visible creation was made in six days:—in the first, the
light which He called day; in the second the firmament; in the third,
gathering together the waters, He bared the dry land, and brought out
the various fruits that are in it; and in the fourth, He made the sun
and the moon and all the host of the stars; and on the fifth, He created
the race of living things in the sea, and of birds in the air; and on
the sixth, He made the quadrupeds on the earth, and at length man. And
‘the invisible things of Him from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made <span
id="fr_2326"></span>[2327](#fn_2326) ;’ and neither the light is as the
night, nor the sun as the moon; nor the irrational as rational man; nor
the Angels as the Thrones, nor the Thrones as the Authorities, yet they
are all creatures, but each of the things made according to its kind
<span id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-Page_359"></span>exists and remains in its own
essence, as it was made.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p20"></span>20. Let the Word then be excepted
from the works, and as Creator be restored to the Father, and be
confessed to be Son by nature; or if simply He be a creature, then let
Him be assigned the same condition as the rest one with another, and let
them as well as He be said every one of them to be ‘a creature but not
as one of the creatures, offspring or work, but not as one of the works
or offsprings.’ For ye say that an offspring is the same as a work,
writing ‘generated or made <span id="fr_2327"></span>[2328](#fn_2327) .’
For though the Son excel the rest on a comparison, still a creature He
is nevertheless, as they are; since in those which are by nature
creatures one may find some excelling others. Star, for instance,
differs from star in glory, and the rest have all of them their mutual
differences when compared together; yet it follows not for all this that
some are lords, and others servants to the superior, nor that some are
efficient causes <span id="fr_2328"></span>[2329](#fn_2328) , others by
them come into being, but all have a nature which comes to be and is
created, confessing in their own selves their Framer: as David says in
the Psalms, ‘The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
sheweth His handy work <span id="fr_2329"></span>[2330](#fn_2329) ;’ and
as Zorobabel the wise says, ‘All the earth calleth upon the Truth, and
the heaven blesseth it: all works shake and tremble at it <span
id="fr_2330"></span>[2331](#fn_2330) .’ But if the whole earth hymns the
Framer and the Truth, and blesses, and fears it, and its Framer is the
Word, and He Himself says, ‘I am the Truth <span
id="fr_2331"></span>[2332](#fn_2331) ,’ it follows that the Word is not
a creature, but alone proper to the Father, in whom all things are
disposed, and He is celebrated by all, as Framer; for ‘I was by Him
disposing <span id="fr_2332"></span>[2333](#fn_2332) ;’ and ‘My Father
worketh hitherto, and I work <span id="fr_2333"></span>[2334](#fn_2333)
.’ And the word ‘hitherto’ shews His eternal existence in the Father as
the Word; for it is proper to the Word to work the Father’s works and
not to be external to Him.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p28"></span>21. But if what the Father worketh,
that the Son worketh also <span id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334) ,
and what the Son createth, that is the creation of the Father, and yet
the Son be the Father’s work or creature, then either He will work His
own self, and will be His own creator (since what the Father worketh is
the Son’s work also), which is absurd and impossible; or, in that He
creates and worketh the things of the Father, He Himself is not a work
nor a creature; for else being Himself an efficient cause <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335) , He may cause that to be in the
case of things caused, which He Himself has become, or rather He may
have no power to cause at all.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p31"></span>For how, if, as you hold, He is
come of nothing, is He able to frame things that are nothing into being?
or if He, a creature, withal frames a creature, the same will be
conceivable in the case of every creature, viz. the power to frame
others. And if this pleases you, what is the need of the Word, seeing
that things inferior can be brought to be by things superior? or at all
events, every thing that is brought to be could have heard in the
beginning God’s words, ‘Become’ and ‘be made,’ and so would have been
framed. But this is not so written, nor could it be. For none of things
which are brought to be is an efficient cause, but all things were made
through the Word: who would not have wrought all things, were He Himself
in the number of the creatures. For neither would the Angels be able to
frame, since they too are creatures, though Valentinus, and Marcion, and
Basilides think so, and you are their copyists; nor will the sun, as
being a creature, ever make what is not into what is; nor will man
fashion man, nor stone devise stone, nor wood give growth to wood. But
God is He who fashions man in the womb, and fixes the mountains, and
makes wood grow; whereas man, as being capable of science, puts together
and arranges that material, and works things that are, as he has
learned; and is satisfied if they are but brought to be, and being
conscious of what his nature is, if he needs aught, knows to ask <span
id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336) it of God.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p33"></span>22. If then God also wrought and
compounded out of materials, this indeed is a gentile thought, according
to which God is an artificer and not a Maker, but yet even in that case
let the Word work the materials, at the bidding and in the service of
God <span id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337) . But if He <span
id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-Page_360"></span>calls into existence things which
existed not by His proper Word, then the Word is not in the number of
things non-existing and called; or we have to seek another Word <span
id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338) , through whom He too was called;
for by the Word the things which were not have come to be. And if
through Him He creates and makes, He is not Himself of things created
and made; but rather He is the Word of the Creator God and is known from
the Father’s works which He Himself worketh, to be ‘in the Father and
the Father in Him,’ and ‘He that hath seen Him hath seen the
Father <span id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339) ,’ because the Son’s
Essence is proper to the Father, and He in all points like Him <span
id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340) . How then does He create through
Him, unless it be His Word and His Wisdom? and how can He be Word and
Wisdom, unless He be the proper offspring of His Essence <span
id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341) , and did not come to be, as
others, out of nothing? And whereas all things are from nothing, and are
creatures, and the Son, as they say, is one of the creatures too and of
things which once were not, how does He alone reveal the Father, and
none else but He know the Father? For could He, a work, possibly know
the Father, then must the Father be also known by all according to the
proportion of the measures of each: for all of them are works as He is.
But if it be impossible for things originate either to see or to know,
for the sight and the knowledge of Him surpasses all (since God Himself
says, ‘No one shall see My face and live <span
id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342) ’), yet the Son has declared, ‘No
one knoweth the Father, save the Son <span
id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343) ,’ therefore the Word is different
from all things originate, in that He alone knows and alone sees the
Father, as He says, ‘Not that any one hath seen the Father, save He that
is from the Father,’ and ‘no one knoweth the Father save the Son <span
id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344) ,’ though Arius think otherwise.
How then did He alone know, except that He alone was proper to Him? and
how proper, if He were a creature, and not a true Son from Him? (For one
must not mind saying often the same thing for religion’s sake.)
Therefore it is irreligious to think that the Son is one of all things;
and blasphemous and unmeaning to call Him ‘a creature, but not as one of
the creatures, and a work, but not as one of the works, an offspring,
but not as one of the offsprings;’ for how not as one of these, if, as
they say, He was not before His generation <span
id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345) ? for it is proper to the creatures
and works not to be before their origination, and to subsist out of
nothing, even though they excel other creatures in glory; for this
difference of one with another will be found in all creatures, which
appears in those which are visible <span
id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346) .

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p44"></span>23. Moreover if, as the heretics
hold, the Son were creature or work, but not as one of the creatures,
because of His excelling them in glory, it were natural that Scripture
should describe and display Him by a comparison in His favour with the
other works; for instance, that it should say that He is greater than
Archangels, and more honourable than the Thrones, and both brighter than
sun and moon, and greater than the heavens. But he is not in fact thus
referred to; but the Father shews Him to be His own proper and only Son,
saying, ‘Thou art My Son,’ and ‘This is My beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. <span id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347) ’ Accordingly
the Angels ministered unto Him, as being one beyond themselves; and they
worship Him, not as being greater in glory, but as being some one beyond
all the creatures, and beyond themselves, and alone the Father’s proper
Son according to essence <span id="fr_2348"></span>[2349](#fn_2348) .
For if He was worshipped as excelling them in glory, each of things
subservient ought to worship what excels itself. But this is not the
case <span id="fr_2349"></span>[2350](#fn_2349) ; for creature does not
worship creature, but servant Lord, and creature God. Thus Peter the
Apostle hinders Cornelius who would worship him, saying, ‘I myself also
am a man <span id="fr_2350"></span>[2351](#fn_2350) .’ And an Angel,
when John would worship him in the Apocalypse, hinders him, saying, ‘See
thou do it not; for I am thy fellow-servant, and of thy brethren the
Prophets, and of them that keep the sayings of this book: worship
God <span id="fr_2351"></span>[2352](#fn_2351) .’ Therefore to God alone
appertains worship, and this the very Angels know, that though they
excel other beings in glory, yet they are all creatures and not to be
worshipped <span id="fr_2352"></span>[2353](#fn_2352) , but worship the
Lord. Thus Manoah, the father of <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-Page_361"></span>Samson, wishing to offer sacrifice
to the Angel, was thereupon hindered by him, saying, ‘Offer not to me,
but to God <span id="fr_2353"></span>[2354](#fn_2353) .’ On the other
hand, the Lord is worshipped even by the Angels; for it is written, ‘Let
all the Angels of God worship Him <span
id="fr_2354"></span>[2355](#fn_2354) ;’ and by all the Gentiles, as
Isaiah says, ‘The labour of Egypt and merchandize of Ethiopia and of the
Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be
thy servants;’ and then, ‘they shall fall down unto thee, and shall make
supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee, and there is none
else, there is no God <span id="fr_2355"></span>[2356](#fn_2355) .’ And
He accepts His disciples’ worship, and certifies them who He is, saying,
‘Call ye Me not Lord and Master? and ye say well, for so I am.’ And when
Thomas said to Him, ‘My Lord and my God <span
id="fr_2356"></span>[2357](#fn_2356) ,’ He allows his words, or rather
accepts him instead of hindering him. For He is, as the other Prophets
declare, and David says in the Psalm, ‘the Lord of hosts, the Lord of
Sabaoth,’ which is interpreted, ‘the Lord of Armies,’ and God True and
Almighty, though the Arians burst <span
id="fr_2357"></span>[2358](#fn_2357) at the tidings.

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p56"></span>24. But He had not been thus
worshipped, nor been thus spoken of, were He a creature merely. But now
since He is not a creature, but the proper offspring of the Essence of
that God who is worshipped, and His Son by nature, therefore He is
worshipped and is believed to be God, and is Lord of armies, and in
authority, and Almighty, as the Father is; for He has said Himself, ‘All
things that the Father hath, are Mine <span
id="fr_2358"></span>[2359](#fn_2358) .’ For it is proper to the Son, to
have the things of the Father, and to be such that the Father is seen in
Him, and that through Him all things were made, and that the salvation
of all comes to pass and consists in Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[357:2312](2040363.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p3"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p3.3"></span>. \[This text, which had been
immemorially applied to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p3.5"></span>Λόγος</span> (*supr.* p. 168, note 7),
and which in the false rendering of the LXX. strongly favoured the Arian
side\], is presently explained at greater length than any other of the
texts he handles, forming the chief subject of the Oration henceforth,
after an introduction which extends down to 44.

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[358:2313](2040363.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p3.7"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p4"></span> From the methodical manner in which
the successive portions of his foregoing Oration are here referred to,
it would almost seem as if he were answering in course some Arian work.
vid. also *supr. Orat.* i. 37, 53. *infr. Orat.* iii. 26. He does not
seem to be tracing the controversy historically.

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[358:2314](2040363.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p5"></span> Supr. ch. vii.

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[358:2315](2040363.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p6"></span> Ch. viii.

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[358:2316](2040363.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p7"></span> Ch. ix.

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[358:2317](2040363.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p8"></span> Ch. x.

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[358:2318](2040363.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p9"></span> Ch. xiii.

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[358:2319](2040363.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p10"></span> Ch. xiv. and xv.

<span id="fn_2319"></span>[358:2320](2040363.htm#fr_2319) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p11"></span> Ch. xiv. [Heb. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="fn_2320"></span>[358:2321](2040363.htm#fr_2320) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p13"></span> Vid. Arius’s letter, *de Syn.* 16.
This was the sophism by means of which Valens succeeded with the Fathers
of Arminium. vid. S. Jerome *in Luciferian.* 18. vid. also in Eusebius,
*supr. Ep. Eus.* 6.

<span id="fn_2321"></span>[358:2322](2040363.htm#fr_2321) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p14"></span> *De Syn.* 32.

<span id="fn_2322"></span>[358:2323](2040363.htm#fr_2322) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>υἵον χρηματίζειν</span>. The question
between Catholics and Arians was whether our Lord was a true Son, or
only *called* Son. ‘Since they whisper something about Word and Wisdom
as only *names* of the Son, &c.’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.3"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.4"></span>νόματα μόνον</span>, *supr.* i. 26,
note 1, and *de Decr.* 16, note 10. And so ‘the title of Image is not a
token of a similar substance, but His *name* only,’ *supr.* i. 21, and
so *infr.* 38. where <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.6"></span>τοῖς ὀνόμασι</span> is synonymous with
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.8"></span>κατ᾽
ἐπίνοιαν</span>, as *Sent. D.* 22. f. a. Vid. also 39. *Orat.* iii. 11.
18. ‘not named Son, but ever Son,’ iv. 24. fin. *Ep. Æg.* 16. ‘We call
Him so, and mean truly what we say; they say it, but do not confess it.’
Chrysost. in *Act. Hom.* 33. 4. vid. also <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.10"></span>νόθοις ὥσπερ ὀνόμασι</span>, Cyril.
*de Trin.* ii. p. 418. Non hæc nuda nomina, Ambros. *de Fid.* i. 17.
Yet, since the Sabellians equally failed here, also considering the
Sonship as only a notion or title, vid. *Orat.* iv. 2. (where in
contrast, ‘The Father is Father, and the Son Son,’ vid. supr. p. 319,
note 1.) 12. 23. 25. the word ‘real’ was used as against *them,* and in
opposition to <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.12"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.13"></span>νυπόστατος λόγος</span> by the Arians,
and in consequence failed as a test of orthodox teaching; e.g. by Arius,
*supr.* p. 97. by Euseb. *in Marc.* pp. 19, d. 35, b. 161, c. by
Asterius, *infr.* 37. by Palladius and Secundus in the Council of
Aquileia ap. Ambros. *Opp.* t. 2. p. 791. (ed. Bened.) by Maximinus ap.
August. *contr. Max.* i. 6.

<span id="fn_2323"></span>[358:2324](2040363.htm#fr_2323) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p15.15"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p16"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>[Matt. xxiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p16.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2324"></span>[358:2325](2040363.htm#fr_2324) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p17"></span> And so S. Ambrose, Quæ enim
creatura non sicut alia creatura non est? Homo non ut Angelus, terra non
ut cœlum. *de Fid.* i. n. 130, and a similar passage in Nyss. *contr.
Eun.* iii. p. 132, 3.

<span id="fn_2325"></span>[358:2326](2040363.htm#fr_2325) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p18.2"></span>ξαίρετον</span>. vid. *infr. Orat.*
iii. 3. init. iv. 28. init. Euseb. *Eccl. Theol.* pp. 47. b. 73. b. 89.
b. 124. a. 129. c. Theodor. *H. E.* p. 732. Nyss. *contr. Eunom.* iii.
p. 133. a. Epiph. *Hær*. 76. p. 970. Cyril. *Thes.* p. 160.

<span id="fn_2326"></span>[358:2327](2040363.htm#fr_2326) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p19"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2327"></span>[359:2328](2040363.htm#fr_2327) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>γεννηθέντα ἢ ποιηθέντα</span>; as if
they were synonymous; in opposition to which the Nicene Creed says,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.3"></span>γεννηθέντα ἢ
ποιηθέντα</span>. In like manner Arius in his letter to Eusebius uses
the words, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.5"></span>πρὶν γεννηθῇ ἤτοι κτισθῇ, ἢ ὀρισθῇ, ἢ
θεμελιωθῇ</span>, Theodor. *H. E.* p. 750. And to Alexander, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.7"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.8"></span>χρόνως γεννηθεὶς
καὶ πρὸ αἰ& 240·νων κτισθεὶς καὶ θεμελιωθείς·</span> *de Syn.* 16. And
Eusebius to Paulinus, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.10"></span>κτιστὸν καὶ θεμελιωτὸν καὶ
γεννητόν</span> Theod. p. 752. The different words profess to be
Scriptural, and to explain each other; ‘created’ being in <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.12"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.14"></span>. ‘made’ in the passages considered in
the last two chapters, ‘appointed’ or ‘declared’ in <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.16"></span>[Rom. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.18"></span>. and ‘founded’ or ‘established’ in
<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.20"></span>[Prov. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.22"></span>. which is discussed *infr.* 22, &c.
vid. also 52.

<span id="fn_2328"></span>[359:2329](2040363.htm#fr_2328) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p21.24"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p22"></span> 21, note 2.

<span id="fn_2329"></span>[359:2330](2040363.htm#fr_2329) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p23"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2330"></span>[359:2331](2040363.htm#fr_2330) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p24"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>[1 Esdr. iv.
36](../../../bib/apo/es1004.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p24.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2331"></span>[359:2332](2040363.htm#fr_2331) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p25"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2332"></span>[359:2333](2040363.htm#fr_2332) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p26"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p26.3"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2333"></span>[359:2334](2040363.htm#fr_2333) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p26.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p27"></span> [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[359:2335](2040363.htm#fr_2334) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p29"></span> *Orat.* iii. 11. note.

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[359:2336](2040363.htm#fr_2335) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>ποιητικὸν αἴτιον</span>, also, *infr.*
27. and *Orat.* iii. 14. and *contr. Gent.* 9 init. No creature can
create, vid. e.g. about Angels, August. *de Civ. Dei* xii. 24. *de
Trin.* iii. 13–18. Damasc. *F. O.* ii. 3. Cyril *in Julian,* ii. p. 62.
‘Our reason rejects the idea that the Creator should be a creature, for
creation is by the Creator.’ Hil. *Trin.* xii. 5. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p30.3"></span>πῶς δύναται τὸ
κτιζόμενον κτίζειν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p30.4"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p30.5"></span>ἢ πῶς ὁ κτίζων κτίζεται</span>; Athan.
*ad Afros.* 4 fin. Vid. also *Serap.* i. 24, 6. iii. 4, e. The Gnostics
who attributed creation to Angels are alluded to *infr. Orat.* iii. 12.
Epiph. *Hær.* 52. 53, 163, &c. Theodor. *Hær.* i. 1 and 3.

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[359:2337](2040363.htm#fr_2336) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p32"></span> *De Decr.* 11.

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[359:2338](2040363.htm#fr_2337) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>προσταττόμενος καὶ ὑπουργῶν</span>. It
is not quite clear that Athan. accepts these words in his own person, as
has been assumed *de Decr.* 9. note 2, *de Syn.* 27 (3). Vid. *de Decr.*
7. and *infr.* 24. and 31, which, as far as they go, are against the use
of the word. Also S. Basil objects to <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.3"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.4"></span>ποῦργος</span> *contr. Eunom.* ii. 21.
and S. Cyril in *Joan.* p. 48. though S. Basil speaks of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.7"></span>τὸν προστάττοντα
κύριον</span>. i. 46, note 3. and S. Cyril of the Son’s <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.9"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.10"></span>ποταγή</span>,
*Thesaur.* p. 255. Vid. ‘ministering, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.12"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.13"></span>πηρετοῦντα</span>, to the Father of
all.’ Just. *Tryph.* p. 72. ‘The Word become minister, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.15"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.16"></span>πηρέτης</span>, of
the Creator,’ Origen *Hom. in Joan.* p. 61. also *Constit. Ap.* viii.
12. but Pseudo-Athan. objects to <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.18"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.19"></span>πηρετῶν</span>, *de Comm. Essent.* 30.
and Athan. apparently, *infr.* 28. Again, ‘Whom did He order, præcepit?’
Iren. *Hær.* iii. 8. n. 3. ‘The Father bids, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.21"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.22"></span>ντέλλεται</span> (allusion to [Ps.
xxxiii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.24"></span>. vid. *infr.* 31), the Word
accomplishes.…He who commands, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.25"></span>κελεύων</span>, is the Father, He who
obeys, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.26"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.27"></span>πακούων</span>, the Son.…The Father
willed, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.28"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.29"></span>θέλησεν</span>, the Son did it.’
Hippol. *contr. Noet.* 14. on which Fabricius’s note. S. Hilary speaks
of the Son as ‘subditus per obedientiæ obsequelam.’ *de Syn.* 51. Vid.
below, on §31. In note 8 there the principle is laid down for the use of
these expressions. \[*Supr.* p. 87, note 2.\]

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[360:2339](2040363.htm#fr_2338) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p34.31"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p35"></span> Cf. *Ep. Æg.* 14. vid. also
*supr.* p. 155. and *Orat.* iii. 2. 64. Aug. in *Joan. Tract.* i. 11.
Vid. a parallel argument with reference to the Holy Spirit. *Serap.* i.
25. b.

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[360:2340](2040363.htm#fr_2339) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p36"></span> Vid. [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[360:2341](2040363.htm#fr_2340) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>τὴν κατὰ πάντα ὁμοιότητα</span>: vid.
parallel instances, *de Syn.* 26 (5) note 1, which add, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.3"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.4"></span>μοιος κατὰ
πάντα</span>, *Orat.* i. 40. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.6"></span>κατὰ πάντα καὶ ἐν πᾶσι</span>, *Ep.
Æg.* 17, c. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.8"></span>τοῦ πατρὸς ὅμοιος</span>, *Orat.* ii.
17. *Orat.* iii. 20, a. ‘not <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.10"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.11"></span>μοιος</span>, as the Church preaches,
but <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.13"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.14"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.15"></span>αὐτοὶ θέλουσι᾽</span> (vid. p. 289,
note 4), also *de Syn.* 53, note 9.

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[360:2342](2040363.htm#fr_2341) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p37.17"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p38"></span> As Sonship is implied in ‘Image’
(*supr.* §2, note 2), so it is implied in ‘Word’ and ‘Wisdom.’ *Orat.*
iv. 15. *Orat.* iii. 29 init. *de Decr.* 17. And still more pointedly,
*Orat.* iv. 24 fin. vid. also *supr.* i. 28, note 5. And so ‘Image is
implied in Sonship: ‘being Son of God He must be like Him,’ *supr.* 17.
And so ‘Image’ is implied in Word;’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p38.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p38.3"></span>ν τῇ ἰδί& 139· εἰκόνι, ἥτις ἐστὶν ὁ
λόγος αὐτοῦ</span>, *infr.* 82, d. also 34, c. On the contrary, the very
root of heretical error was the denial that these titles implied each
other, vid. *supr.* 27, *de Decr.* 17, 24, notes.

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[360:2343](2040363.htm#fr_2342) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p38.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p39"></span> Vid. [Ex. xxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[360:2344](2040363.htm#fr_2343) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p40"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[360:2345](2040363.htm#fr_2344) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p41"></span> [John vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p41.1"></span>, not to the letter.

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[360:2346](2040363.htm#fr_2345) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p42"></span> Vid. *supr.* 1. and *Exc. B*.

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[360:2347](2040363.htm#fr_2346) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p43"></span> Greek text dislocated.

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[360:2348](2040363.htm#fr_2347) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p45"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p45.1"></span>[Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p45.3"></span>; [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p45.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_2348"></span>[360:2349](2040363.htm#fr_2348) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p45.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p46"></span> *De Decr.* 10.

<span id="fn_2349"></span>[360:2350](2040363.htm#fr_2349) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p47"></span> Vid. *Orat.* iii. 12.

<span id="fn_2350"></span>[360:2351](2040363.htm#fr_2350) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p48"></span> [Acts x.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2351"></span>[360:2352](2040363.htm#fr_2351) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p49"></span> [Rev. xxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2352"></span>[360:2353](2040363.htm#fr_2352) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p50"></span> \[A note, to the effect that
‘worship’ is an ambiguous term, is omitted here.\]

<span id="fn_2353"></span>[361:2354](2040363.htm#fr_2353) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p51"></span> Vid. [Judg. xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2354"></span>[361:2355](2040363.htm#fr_2354) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p52"></span> [Heb. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2355"></span>[361:2356](2040363.htm#fr_2355) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p53"></span> [Is. xlv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2356"></span>[361:2357](2040363.htm#fr_2356) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p54"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p54.1"></span>[John xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p54.3"></span>; xx. 28.

<span id="fn_2357"></span>[361:2358](2040363.htm#fr_2357) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p54.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p55.1"></span>διαῤ& 191·ηγνύωσιν ἑαυτούς·</span> also
*ad Adelph.* 8. and vid. *supr.* note on *de Decr.* 17. vid. also <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p55.3"></span>διαῤ&
191·ηγνύωνται</span>, *de Syn.* 54, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p55.5"></span>καὶ διαῤ& 191·αγοῖεν</span>, Marcell.
ap. Euseb. *Eccl. Theol.* p. 116. also p. 40 <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p55.7"></span>τρίζωσι τοὺς ὀδόντως</span>, *de Fug.*
26. init. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p55.9"></span>τριζέτωσαν</span>, *ad Adelph.* 8.
*Hist. Ar.* 68. fin. and literally 72. a. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p55.11"></span>κόπτουσιν ἑαυτούς</span>. *In illud
Omnia* 5.

<span id="fn_2358"></span>[361:2359](2040363.htm#fr_2358) <span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p57"></span> [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iii.iii-p57.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction to Proverbs viii. 22 continued. Absurdity of
supposing a Son or Word created in order to the creation of other
creatures; as to the creation being unable to bear God's immediate hand,
God condescends to the lowest. Moreover, if the Son a creature, He too
could not bear God's hand, and an infinite series of media will be
necessary. Objected, that, as Moses who led out the Israelites was a
man, so our Lord; but Moses was not the Agent in creation:--again, that
unity is found in created ministrations, but all such ministrations are
defective and dependent:--again, that He learned to create, yet could
God's Wisdom need teaching? and why should He learn, if the Father
worketh hitherto? If the Son was created to create us, He is for our
sake, not we for His.](2040364)
