[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040110)  [Next](2040112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xiv-p1"></span> §14. *A portrait once effaced must be
restored from the original. Thus the Son of the Father came to seek,
save, and regenerate. No other way was possible. Blinded himself, man
could not see to heal. The witness of creation had failed to preserve
him, and could not bring him back. The Word alone could do so. But how?
Only by revealing Himself as Man.*

<span id="vii.ii.xiv-p2"></span>For as, when the likeness painted on a
panel has been effaced by stains from without, he whose likeness it is
must needs come once more to enable the portrait to be renewed on the
same wood: for, for the sake of his picture, even the mere wood on which
it is painted is not thrown away, but the outline is renewed upon it; 2.
in the same way also the most holy Son of the Father, being the Image of
the Father, came to our region to renew man once made in His likeness,
and find him, as one lost, by the remission of sins; as He says Himself
in the Gospels: “I came <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) to find
and to save the lost.” Whence He said to the Jews also: “Except <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) a man be born again,” not meaning,
<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="vii.ii.xiv-Page_44"></span>as
they thought, birth from woman, but speaking of the soul born and
created anew in the likeness of God’s image. 3. But since wild idolatry
and godlessness occupied the world, and the knowledge of God was hid,
whose part was it to teach the world concerning the Father? Man’s, might
one say? But it was not in man’s power to penetrate everywhere beneath
the sun; for neither had they the physical strength to run so far, nor
would they be able to claim credence in this matter, nor were they
sufficient by themselves to withstand the deceit and impositions of evil
spirits. 4. For where all were smitten and confused in soul from
demoniacal deceit, and the vanity of idols, how was it possible for them
to win over man’s soul and man’s mind—whereas they cannot even see them?
Or how can a man convert what he does not see? 5. But perhaps one might
say creation was enough; but if creation were enough, these great evils
would never have come to pass. For creation was there already, and all
the same, men were grovelling in the same error concerning God. 6. Who,
then, was needed, save the Word of God, that sees both soul and mind,
and that gives movement to all things in creation, and by them makes
known the Father? For He who by His own Providence and ordering of all
things was teaching men concerning the Father, He it was that could
renew this same teaching as well. 7. How, then, could this have been
done? Perhaps one might say, that the same means were open as before,
for Him to shew forth the truth about the Father once more by means of
the work of creation. But this was no longer a sure means. Quite the
contrary; for men missed seeing this before, and have turned their eyes
no longer upward but downward. 8. Whence, naturally, willing to profit
men, He sojourns here as man, taking to Himself a body like the others,
and from things of earth, that is by the works of His body \[He teaches
them\], so that they who would not know Him from His Providence and rule
over all things, may even from the works done by His actual body know
the Word of God which is in the body, and through Him the Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_237"></span>[43:238](2040111.htm#fr_237) <span
id="vii.ii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xiv-p3"></span> Cf. Luc. xix. 10.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[43:239](2040111.htm#fr_238) <span
id="vii.ii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xiv-p4"></span> See [John
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)<span id="vii.ii.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thus the Word condescended to man's engrossment in corporeal
things, by even taking a body. All man's superstitions He met halfway;
whether men were inclined to worship Nature, Man, Demons, or the dead,
He shewed Himself Lord of all these.](2040112)
