[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040078)  [Next](2040080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iv-p1"></span> §33. *The soul immortal. Proved by (1)
its being distinct from the body, (2) its being the source of motion,
(3) its power to go beyond the body in imagination and thought*.

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iv-p2"></span>But that the soul is made immortal is a
further point in the Church’s teaching which you must know, to show how
the idols are to be overthrown. But we shall more directly arrive at a
knowledge of this from what we know of the body, and from the difference
between the body and the soul. For if our argument has proved it to be
distinct from the body, while the body is by nature mortal, it follows
that the soul is immortal, because it is not like the body. 2. And
again, if as we have shewn, the soul moves the body and is not moved by
other things, it follows that the movement of the soul is spontaneous,
and that this spontaneous movement goes on after the body is laid aside
in the earth. If then the soul were moved by the body, it would follow
that the severance of its motor would involve its death. But if the soul
moves the body also, it follows all the more that it moves itself. But
if moved by itself <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) , it follows
that it outlives the body. 3. For the movement of the soul is the same
thing as its life, just as, of course, we call the body alive when it
moves, and say that its death takes place when it ceases moving. But
this can be made clearer once for all from the action of the soul in the
body. For if even when united and coupled with the body it is not shut
in or commensurate with the small dimensions of the body, but
often <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) , when the body lies in
bed, not moving, but in death-like sleep, the soul keeps awake by virtue
of its own power, and transcends the natural power of the body, and as
though travelling away from the body while remaining in it, imagines and
beholds things above the earth, and often even holds converse with the
saints and angels who are above earthly and bodily existence, and
approaches them in the confidence of the purity of its intelligence;
shall it not all the more, when separated from the body at the time
appointed by God Who coupled them together, have its knowledge of
immortality more clear? For if even when coupled with the body it lived
a life outside the body, much more shall its life continue after the
death of the body, <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="vi.ii.ii.iv-Page_22"></span>and live without ceasing by reason of
God Who made it thus by His own Word, our Lord Jesus Christ. 4. For this
is the reason why the soul thinks of and bears in mind things immortal
and eternal, namely, because it is itself immortal. And just as, the
body being mortal, its senses also have mortal things as their objects,
so, since the soul contemplates and beholds immortal things, it follows
that it is immortal and lives for ever. For ideas and thoughts about
immortality never desert the soul, but abide in it, and are as it were
the fuel in it which ensures its immortality. This then is why the soul
has the capacity for beholding God, and is its own way thereto,
receiving not from without but from herself the knowledge and
apprehension of the Word of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[21:150](2040079.htm#fr_149) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iv-p3"></span> Cf. Plato *Phædr*. 245 C–E., *Legg.*
896, A, B. The former passage is more likely to be referred to here as
it is, like the text, an argument for immortality. Athan. has also
referred to *Phædrus* above, §5. (Against Gwatkin, *Studies*, p. 101.)

<span id="fn_150"></span>[21:151](2040079.htm#fr_150) <span
id="vi.ii.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii.iv-p4"></span> Cp. xxxi. 5, and ref.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: §34. The soul, then, if only it get rid of the stains of sin is
able to know God directly, its own rational nature imaging back the Word
of God, after whose image it was created. But even if it cannot pierce
the cloud which sin draws over its vision, it is confronted by the
witness of creation to God.](2040080)
