[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040412)  [Next](2040414) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>Letter II</span>.—*For 330. Easter-day
xxiv Pharmuthi; xiii Kal. Mai; Æra Dioclet. 46; Coss. Gallicianus,
Valerius Symmachus; Præfect, Magninianus; Indict. iii.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p2.1"></span>Again</span>, my brethren, is Easter
come and gladness; again the Lord hath brought us to this season; so
that when, according to custom, we have been nourished with His words,
we may duly keep the feast. Let us celebrate it then, even heavenly joy,
with those saints who formerly proclaimed a like feast, and were
ensamples to us of conversation in Christ. For not only were they
entrusted with the charge of preaching the Gospel, but, if we enquire,
we shall see, as it is written, that its power was displayed in them.
‘Be ye therefore followers of me <span
id="fr_3929"></span>[3930](#fn_3929) ,’ he wrote to the Corinthians. Now
the apostolic precept exhorts us all, for those commands which he sent
to individuals, he at the same time enjoined upon every man in every
place, for he was ‘a teacher of all nations in faith and truth <span
id="fr_3930"></span>[3931](#fn_3930) .’ And, generally, the commands of
all the saints urge us on similarly, as Solomon makes use of proverbs,
saying, ‘Hear, my children, the instruction of a father, and attend to
know understanding; for I give you a good gift, forsake ye not my word:
for I was an obedient son to my father, and beloved in the sight of my
mother <span id="fr_3931"></span>[3932](#fn_3931) .’ For a just father
brings up \[his children\] well, when he is diligent in teaching others
in accordance with his own upright conduct, so that when he meets with
opposition, he may not be ashamed on hearing it said, ‘Thou therefore
that teachest others, teachest thou not thyself <span
id="fr_3932"></span>[3933](#fn_3932) ?’ but rather, like the good
servant, may both save himself and gain others; and thus, when the grace
committed to him has been doubled, he may hear, ‘Thou good and faithful
servant, thou hast been faithful in a little, I will set thee over much:
enter into the joy of thy Lord <span
id="fr_3933"></span>[3934](#fn_3933) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p8"></span>2. Let us <span
id="fr_3934"></span>[3935](#fn_3934) then, as is becoming, as at all
times, yet especially in the days of the feast, be not hearers only, but
doers of the commandments of our Saviour; that having imitated the
behaviour of the saints, we may enter together into the joy of our Lord
which is in heaven, which is not transitory, but truly abides; of which
evil doers having deprived themselves, there remains to them as the
fruit of their ways, sorrow and affliction, and groaning with torments.
Let a man see what these become like, that they bear not the
likeness <span id="fr_3935"></span>[3936](#fn_3935) of the conversation
of the saints, nor of that right understanding, by which man at the
beginning was rational, and in the image of God. But they are compared
to their disgrace to beasts without understanding, and becoming like
them in unlawful pleasures, they are spoken of as wanton horses <span
id="fr_3936"></span>[3937](#fn_3936) ; also, for their craftiness, and
errors, and sin laden with death, they are called a ‘generation of
vipers,’ as John saith <span id="fr_3937"></span>[3938](#fn_3937) . Now
having thus fallen, and grovelling in the dust like the serpent <span
id="fr_3938"></span>[3939](#fn_3938) , having their minds set on nothing
beyond visible things, they esteem these things good, and rejoicing in
them, serve their own lusts and not God.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p14"></span>3. Yet even in this state, the
man-loving Word, who came for this very reason, that He might seek and
find that which was lost, sought to restrain them from such folly,
crying and saying, ‘Be ye not as the horse and the mule which have no
understanding, whose cheeks ye hold in with bit and bridle <span
id="fr_3939"></span>[3940](#fn_3939) .’ Because they were careless and
imitated the wicked, the prophet prays in spirit and says, ‘Ye are to me
like merchant-men of Phœnicia <span id="fr_3940"></span>[3941](#fn_3940)
.’ And the avenging Spirit protests against them in these words, ‘Lord,
in Thy city Thou wilt despise their image <span
id="fr_3941"></span>[3942](#fn_3941) .’ Thus, being changed <span
id="page_511">p. 511</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-Page_511"></span>into the likeness of fools, they
fell so low in their understanding, that by their excessive reasoning,
they even likened the Divine Wisdom to themselves, thinking it to be
like their own arts. Therefore, ‘professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into the
likeness of the corruptible image of man, and birds, and four-footed
beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore God gave them over to a reprobate
mind, to do those things which are not convenient <span
id="fr_3942"></span>[3943](#fn_3942) .’ For they did not listen to the
prophetic voice that reproved them (saying), ‘To what have ye likened
the Lord, and with what have ye compared Him <span
id="fr_3943"></span>[3944](#fn_3943) ?’ neither to David, who prayed
concerning such as these, and sang, ‘All those that make them are like
unto them, and all those who put their trust in them <span
id="fr_3944"></span>[3945](#fn_3944) .’ Being blind to the truth, they
looked upon a stone as God, and hence, like senseless creatures, they
walked in darkness, and, as the prophet cried, ‘They hear indeed, but
they do not understand; they see indeed, but they do not perceive; for
their heart is waxen fat, and with their ears they hear heavily <span
id="fr_3945"></span>[3946](#fn_3945) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p22"></span>4. Now those who do not observe the
feast, continue such as these even to the present day, feigning indeed
and devising names of feasts <span id="fr_3946"></span>[3947](#fn_3946)
, but rather introducing days of mourning than of gladness; ‘For there
is no peace to the wicked, saith the Lord <span
id="fr_3947"></span>[3948](#fn_3947) .’ And as Wisdom saith, ‘Gladness
and joy are taken from their mouth <span
id="fr_3948"></span>[3949](#fn_3948) .’ Such are the feasts of the
wicked. But the wise servants of the Lord, who have truly put on the man
which is created in God <span id="fr_3949"></span>[3950](#fn_3949) ,
have received gospel words, and reckon as a general commandment that
given to Timothy, which saith, ‘Be thou an example to the believers in
word, in conversation, in love, in faith, in purity <span
id="fr_3950"></span>[3951](#fn_3950) .’ So well do they keep the Feast,
that even the unbelievers, seeing their order <span
id="fr_3951"></span>[3952](#fn_3951) , may say, ‘God is with them of a
truth <span id="fr_3952"></span>[3953](#fn_3952) .’ For as he who
receives an apostle receives Him who sent him <span
id="fr_3953"></span>[3954](#fn_3953) , so he who is a follower of the
saints, makes the Lord in every respect his end and aim, even as Paul,
being a follower of Him, goes on to say, ‘As I also of Christ <span
id="fr_3954"></span>[3955](#fn_3954) .’ For there were first our
Saviour’s own words, who from the height of His divinity, when
conversing with His disciples, said, ‘Learn of Me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls <span
id="fr_3955"></span>[3956](#fn_3955) .’ Then too when He poured water
into a basin, and girded Himself with a towel, and washed His disciples’
feet, He said to them, ‘Know what I have done. Ye call Me Master and
Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. If therefore I, your Lord and
Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another’s feet:
for I have given you an example, that as I have done to you, ye also
should do <span id="fr_3956"></span>[3957](#fn_3956) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p34"></span>5. Oh! my brethren, how shall we
admire the loving-kindness of the Saviour? With what power, and with
what a trumpet should a man cry out, exalting these His benefits! That
not only should we bear His image, but should receive from Him an
example and pattern of heavenly conversation; that as He hath begun, we
should go on, that suffering, we should not threaten, being reviled, we
should not revile again, but should bless them that curse, and in
everything commit ourselves to God who judgeth righteously <span
id="fr_3957"></span>[3958](#fn_3957) . For those who are thus disposed,
and fashion themselves according to the Gospel, will be partakers of
Christ, and imitators of apostolic conversation, on account of which
they shall be deemed worthy of that praise from him, with which he
praised the Corinthians, when he said, ‘I praise you that in everything
ye are mindful of me <span id="fr_3958"></span>[3959](#fn_3958) .’
Afterwards, because there were men who used his words, but chose to hear
them as suited their lusts, and dared to pervert them, as the followers
of Hymenæus and Alexander, and before them the Sadducees, who as he
said, ‘having made shipwreck of faith,’ scoffed at the mystery of the
resurrection, he immediately proceeded to say, ‘And as I have delivered
to you traditions, hold them fast <span
id="fr_3959"></span>[3960](#fn_3959) .’ That means, indeed, that we
should think not otherwise than as the teacher has delivered.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p38"></span>6. For not only in outward form did
those wicked men dissemble, putting on as the Lord says sheep’s
clothing, and appearing like unto whited sepulchres; but they took those
divine words in their mouth, while they inwardly cherished evil
intentions. And the first to put on this appearance was the serpent, the
inventor of wickedness from the beginning—the devil,—who, in disguise,
conversed with Eve, and forthwith deceived her. But after him and with
him are all inventors of unlawful heresies, who indeed refer to the
Scriptures, but do not hold such opinions as the saints have handed
down, and receiving them as the traditions of men, err, because they do
not rightly know them nor their <span
id="fr_3960"></span>[3961](#fn_3960) power. Therefore Paul justly
praises the Corinthians <span id="fr_3961"></span>[3962](#fn_3961) ,
because their opinions were in accordance with his traditions. And the
<span id="page_512">p. 512</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-Page_512"></span>Lord most righteously reproved the
Jews, saying, ‘Wherefore do ye also transgress the commandments of God
on account of your traditions <span id="fr_3962"></span>[3963](#fn_3962)
.’ For they changed the commandments they received from God after their
own understanding, preferring to observe the traditions of men. And
about these, a little after, the blessed Paul again gave directions to
the Galatians who were in danger thereof, writing to them, ‘If any man
preach to you aught else than that ye have received, let him be
accursed <span id="fr_3963"></span>[3964](#fn_3963) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p43"></span>7. For there is no fellowship
whatever between the words of the saints and the fancies of human
invention; for the saints are the ministers of the truth, preaching the
kingdom of heaven, but those who are borne in the opposite direction
have nothing better than to eat, and think their end is that they shall
cease to be, and they say, ‘Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we
die <span id="fr_3964"></span>[3965](#fn_3964) .’ Therefore blessed Luke
reproves the inventions of men, and hands down the narrations of the
saints, saying in the beginning of the Gospel, ‘Since many have presumed
to write narrations of those events of which we are assured, as those
who from the beginning were witnesses and ministers of the Word have
delivered to us; it hath seemed good to me also, who have adhered to
them all from the first, to write correctly in order to thee, O
excellent Theophilus, that thou mayest know the truth concerning the
things in which thou hast been instructed <span
id="fr_3965"></span>[3966](#fn_3965) .’ For as each of the saints has
received, that they impart without alteration, for the confirmation of
the doctrine of the mysteries. Of these the (divine) word would have us
disciples, and these should of right be our teachers, and to them only
is it necessary to give heed, for of them only is ‘the word faithful and
worthy of all acceptation <span id="fr_3966"></span>[3967](#fn_3966) ;’
these not being disciples because they heard from others, but being
eye-witnesses and ministers of the Word, that which they had heard from
Him have they handed down.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p47"></span>Now some have related the wonderful
signs performed by our Saviour, and preached His eternal Godhead. And
others have written of His being born in the flesh of the Virgin, and
have proclaimed the festival of the holy passover, saying, ‘Christ our
Passover is sacrificed <span id="fr_3967"></span>[3968](#fn_3967) ;’ so
that we, individually and collectively, and all the churches in the
world may remember, as it is written, ‘That Christ rose from the dead,
of the seed of David, according to the Gospel <span
id="fr_3968"></span>[3969](#fn_3968) .’ And let us not forget that which
Paul delivered, declaring it to the Corinthians; I mean His
resurrection, whereby ‘He destroyed him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil <span id="fr_3969"></span>[3970](#fn_3969) ;’ and
raised us up together with Him, having loosed the bands of death, and
vouchsafed a blessing instead of a curse, joy instead of grief, a feast
instead of mourning, in this holy joy of Easter, which being continually
in our hearts, we always rejoice, as Paul commanded; ‘We pray without
ceasing; in everything we give thanks <span
id="fr_3970"></span>[3971](#fn_3970) .’ So we are not remiss in giving
notice of its seasons, as we have received from the Fathers. Again we
write, again keeping to the apostolic traditions, we remind each other
when we come together for prayer; and keeping the feast in common, with
one mouth we truly give thanks to the Lord. Thus giving thanks unto Him,
and being followers of the saints, ‘we shall make our praise in the Lord
all the day <span id="fr_3971"></span>[3972](#fn_3971) ,’ as the
Psalmist says. So, when we rightly keep the feast, we shall be counted
worthy of that joy which is in heaven.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p53"></span>8. We begin the fast of forty days
on the 13th of the month Phamenoth ([Mar.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#000)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p53.1"></span>). After we have given ourselves to
fasting in continued succession, let us begin the holy Paschal <span
id="fr_3972"></span>[3973](#fn_3972) week on the 18th of the month
Pharmuthi (April 13). Then resting on the 23rd of the same month
Pharmuthi (April 18), and keeping the feast afterwards on the first of
the week, on the 24th (April 19), let us add to these the seven weeks of
the great Pentecost, wholly rejoicing and exulting in Christ Jesus our
Lord, through Whom to the Father be glory and dominion in the Holy
Ghost, for ever and ever. Amen.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p55"></span>The brethren which are with me
salute you. Salute one another with a holy kiss <span
id="fr_3973"></span>[3974](#fn_3973) .

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p57"></span>Here endeth the second Festal
Letter of the holy lord Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3929"></span>[510:3930](2040413.htm#fr_3929) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p3"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3930"></span>[510:3931](2040413.htm#fr_3930) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p4"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p4.1"></span>. Cf. Letter iii.

<span id="fn_3931"></span>[510:3932](2040413.htm#fr_3931) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p5"></span> [Prov. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3932"></span>[510:3933](2040413.htm#fr_3932) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p6"></span> [Rom. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3933"></span>[510:3934](2040413.htm#fr_3933) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p7"></span> [Mat. xxv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3934"></span>[510:3935](2040413.htm#fr_3934) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p9"></span> We have here the first fragment
extant of the original Greek text. It is to be found in Cosmas
Indicopleustes. p. 316.

<span id="fn_3935"></span>[510:3936](2040413.htm#fr_3935) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p10"></span> Syr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>εἰκών</span>.

<span id="fn_3936"></span>[510:3937](2040413.htm#fr_3936) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p11"></span> [Jer. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3937"></span>[510:3938](2040413.htm#fr_3937) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p12"></span> i.e. the Baptist, <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p12.2"></span>[Matt. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p12.4"></span>; [Luke iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p12.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_3938"></span>[510:3939](2040413.htm#fr_3938) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p12.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p13"></span> Cf. *Vit. Anton. supr.* p. 202.

<span id="fn_3939"></span>[510:3940](2040413.htm#fr_3939) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p15"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>. Cf. *Orat.* iii. 18.

<span id="fn_3940"></span>[510:3941](2040413.htm#fr_3940) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p16"></span> [Is. xxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3941"></span>[510:3942](2040413.htm#fr_3941) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p17"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ps. lxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#020)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p17.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3942"></span>[511:3943](2040413.htm#fr_3942) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p18"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Rom.
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#022),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p18.3"></span>, and cf. *c. Gent.* 19. 2.

<span id="fn_3943"></span>[511:3944](2040413.htm#fr_3943) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p18.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p19"></span> [Is. xl.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3944"></span>[511:3945](2040413.htm#fr_3944) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p20"></span> [Ps. cxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3945"></span>[511:3946](2040413.htm#fr_3945) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p21"></span> [Is. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3946"></span>[511:3947](2040413.htm#fr_3946) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p23"></span> Syr. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>σχηματισάμενος</span>. The allusion in
this sentence is evidently to the conduct of Jeroboam, as recorded <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p23.3"></span>[1 Kings
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#033)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p23.5"></span>. The phraseology of the Syriac
resembles that of the Syr. version in v. 33.

<span id="fn_3947"></span>[511:3948](2040413.htm#fr_3947) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p23.7"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p24"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p24.1"></span>[Is. xlviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#022)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p24.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3948"></span>[511:3949](2040413.htm#fr_3948) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p25"></span> Vid. *Letter* iii. note.

<span id="fn_3949"></span>[511:3950](2040413.htm#fr_3949) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p26"></span> [Eph. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3950"></span>[511:3951](2040413.htm#fr_3950) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p27"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3951"></span>[511:3952](2040413.htm#fr_3951) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>τάξις</span>, Syr. Cf. [Col. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p28.3"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p28.5"></span>βλέπων ὑμῶν τὴν τάξιν</span>.

<span id="fn_3952"></span>[511:3953](2040413.htm#fr_3952) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p28.6"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p29"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p29.1"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p29.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3953"></span>[511:3954](2040413.htm#fr_3953) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p30"></span> [Matt. x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3954"></span>[511:3955](2040413.htm#fr_3954) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p31"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3955"></span>[511:3956](2040413.htm#fr_3955) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p32"></span> [Matt. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3956"></span>[511:3957](2040413.htm#fr_3956) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p33"></span> [John xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#012)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3957"></span>[511:3958](2040413.htm#fr_3957) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p35"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p35.1"></span>[1 Pet. ii.
21-23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="fn_3958"></span>[511:3959](2040413.htm#fr_3958) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p35.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p36"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3959"></span>[511:3960](2040413.htm#fr_3959) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p37"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p37.1"></span>[1 Tim. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p37.3"></span>; [2 Tim. ii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p37.4"></span>; [1 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p37.5"></span>

<span id="fn_3960"></span>[511:3961](2040413.htm#fr_3960) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p39"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p39.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p39.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3961"></span>[511:3962](2040413.htm#fr_3961) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p39.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p40"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3962"></span>[512:3963](2040413.htm#fr_3962) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p41"></span> [Matt. xv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3963"></span>[512:3964](2040413.htm#fr_3963) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p42"></span> [Gal. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3964"></span>[512:3965](2040413.htm#fr_3964) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p44"></span> [Is. xxii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3965"></span>[512:3966](2040413.htm#fr_3965) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p45"></span> [Luke i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3966"></span>[512:3967](2040413.htm#fr_3966) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p46"></span> [1 Tim. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3967"></span>[512:3968](2040413.htm#fr_3967) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p48"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3968"></span>[512:3969](2040413.htm#fr_3968) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p49"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3969"></span>[512:3970](2040413.htm#fr_3969) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p50"></span> [Heb. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3970"></span>[512:3971](2040413.htm#fr_3970) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p51"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p51.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p51.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3971"></span>[512:3972](2040413.htm#fr_3971) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p51.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p52"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#028)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3972"></span>[512:3973](2040413.htm#fr_3972) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p54"></span> In Syriac there is but one word
‘pescha’ to express the Passover and Easter feasts, it is therefore
sometimes rendered Easter, and sometimes Passover, in the following
pages.

<span id="fn_3973"></span>[512:3974](2040413.htm#fr_3973) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.ii-p56"></span> The twenty-fifth Paschal Letter of
S. Cyril ends with the same words. This is the usual form in which our
author concludes his Paschal Letters. S. Cyril employs it but once, as
above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: For 331. Easter-day xvi Pharmuthi; iii Id. April; Æra Dioclet.
47; Coss. Annius Bassus, Ablabius; Præfect, Florentius; Indict.
iv.](2040414)
