[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040117)  [Next](2040119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxi-p1"></span> §21. *Death brought to nought by the
death of Christ. Why then did not Christ die privately, or in a more
honourable way? He was not subject to natural death, but had to die at
the hands of others. Why then did He die? Nay but for that purpose He
came, and but for that, He could not have risen.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxi-p2"></span>Why, now that the common Saviour of all
has died on our behalf, we, the faithful in Christ, no longer die the
death as before, agreeably to the warning of the law; for this
condemnation has ceased; but, corruption ceasing and being put away by
the grace of the Resurrection, henceforth we are only dissolved,
agreeably to our bodies’ mortal nature, at the time God has fixed for
each, that we may be able to gain a better resurrection. 2. For like the
seeds which are cast into the earth, we do not perish by dissolution,
but sown in the earth, shall rise again, death having been brought to
nought by the grace of the Saviour. Hence it is that blessed Paul, who
was made a surety of the Resurrection to all, says: “This
corruptible <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258) must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality; but when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O death where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory?” 3. Why, then, one might say, if it were
necessary for Him to yield up His body to death in the stead of all, did
He not lay it aside as man privately, instead of going as far as even to
be crucified? For it were more fitting for Him to have laid His body
aside honourably, than ignominiously to endure a death like this. 4.
Now, see to it, I reply, whether such an objection be not merely human,
whereas what the Saviour did is truly divine and for many reasons worthy
of His Godhead. Firstly, because the death which befalls men comes to
them agreeably to the weakness of their nature; for, unable to continue
in one stay, they are dissolved with time. Hence, too, diseases befall
them, and they fall sick and die. But the Lord is not weak, but is the
Power of God and Word of God and Very Life. 5. If, then, He had laid
aside His body somewhere in private, <span id="page_48">p. 48</span>
<span id="vii.ii.xxi-Page_48"></span>and upon a bed, after the manner of
men, it would have been thought that He also did this agreeably to the
weakness of His nature, and because there was nothing in him more than
in other men. But since He was, firstly, the Life and the Word of God,
and it was necessary, secondly, for the death on behalf of all to be
accomplished, for this cause, on the one hand, because He was life and
power, the body gained strength in Him; 6. while on the other, as death
must needs come to pass, He did not Himself take, but received at
others’ hands; the occasion of perfecting His sacrifice. Since it was
not fit, either, that the Lord should fall sick, who healed the diseases
of others; nor again was it right for that body to lose its strength, in
which He gives strength to the weaknesses of others also. 7. Why, then,
did He not prevent death, as He did sickness? Because it was for this
that He had the body, and it was unfitting to prevent it, lest the
Resurrection also should be hindered, while yet it was equally unfitting
for sickness to precede His death, lest it should be thought weakness on
the part of Him that was in the body. Did He not then hunger? Yes; He
hungered, agreeably to the properties of His body. But He did not perish
of hunger, because of the Lord that wore it. Hence, even if He died to
ransom all, yet He saw not corruption. For \[His body\] rose again in
perfect soundness, since the body belonged to none other, but to the
very Life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_258"></span>[47:259](2040118.htm#fr_258) <span
id="vii.ii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxi-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="vii.ii.xxi-p3.1"></span>,
*sqq.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: But why did He not withdraw His body from the Jews, and so guard
its immortality? (1) It became Him not to inflict death on Himself, and
yet not to shun it. (2) He came to receive death as the due of others,
therefore it should come to Him from without. (3) His death must be
certain, to guarantee the truth of His Resurrection. Also, He could not
die from infirmity, lest He should be mocked in His healing of
others.](2040119)
