[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040156)  [Next](2040158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_69"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Deposition of Arius.</span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span>Alexander’s Deposition of Arius and his
companions, and Encyclical Letter on the subject.

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="viii.ii-p4.1"></span>Alexander</span>, being assembled with his
beloved brethren, the Presbyters and Deacons of Alexandria, and the
Mareotis, greets them in the Lord.

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span>Although you have already subscribed to the
letter I addressed to Arius and his fellows, exhorting them to renounce
his impiety, and to submit themselves to the sound Catholic Faith, and
have shewn your right-mindedness and agreement in the doctrines of the
Catholic Church: yet forasmuch as I have written also to our
fellow-ministers in every place concerning Arius and his fellows, and
especially since some of you, as the Presbyters Chares and Pistus <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) , and the Deacons Serapion, Parammon,
Zosimus, and Irenæus, have joined Arius and his fellows, and been
content to suffer deposition with them, I thought it needful to assemble
together you, the Clergy of the city, and to send for you the Clergy of
the Mareotis, in order that you may learn what I am now writing, and may
testify your agreement thereto, and give your concurrence in the
deposition of Arius, Pistus, and their fellows. For it is desirable that
you should be made acquainted with what I write, and that each of you
should heartily embrace it, as though he had written it himself.

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>A Copy.

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span>To his dearly beloved and most honoured
fellow-ministers of the Catholic Church in every place, Alexander sends
health in the Lord.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span>1. As there is one body <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) of the Catholic Church, and a command
is given us in the sacred Scriptures to preserve the bond of unity and
peace, it is agreeable thereto that we should write and signify to one
another whatever is done by each of us individually; so that whether one
member suffer or rejoice, we may either suffer or rejoice with one
another. Now there are gone forth in this diocese, at this time, certain
lawless <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) men, enemies of Christ,
teaching an apostasy, which one may justly suspect and designate as a
forerunner <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) of Antichrist. I was
desirous <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) to pass such a matter
by without notice, in the hope that perhaps the evil would spend itself
among its supporters, and not extend to other places to defile <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) the ears <span
id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) of the simple <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) . But seeing that Eusebius, now of
Nicomedia, who thinks that the government of the Church rests with him,
because retribution has not come upon him for his desertion of Berytus,
when he had cast an eye <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) of
desire on the Church of the Nicomedians, begins to support these
apostates, and has taken upon him to write letters every where in their
behalf, if by any means he may draw in certain ignorant persons to this
most base and antichristian heresy; I am therefore constrained, knowing
what is written in the law, no longer to hold my peace, but to make it
known to you all; that you may understand who the apostates are, and the
cavils <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) which their heresy has
adopted, and that, should Eusebius write to you, you may pay no
attention to him, for he now desires by means of these men to exhibit
anew his old malevolence <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) , which
has so long been concealed, pretending to write in their favour, <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span id="viii.ii-Page_70"></span>while in
truth it clearly appears, that he does it to forward his own interests.

<span id="viii.ii-p20"></span>2. Now those who became apostates are
these, Arius, Achilles, Aeithales, Carpones, another Arius, and
Sarmates, sometime Presbyters: Euzoïus, Lucius, Julius, Menas,
Helladius, and Gaius, sometime Deacons: and with them Secundus and
Theonas, sometime called Bishops. And the novelties they have invented
and put forth contrary to the Scriptures are these following:—God was
not always a Father <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) , but there
was a time when God was not a Father. The Word of God was not always,
but originated from things that were not; for God that is, has made him
that was not, of that which was not; wherefore there was a time when He
was not; for the Son is a creature and a work. Neither is He like in
essence to the Father; neither is He the true and natural Word of the
Father; neither is He His true Wisdom; but He is one of the things made
and created, and is called the Word and Wisdom by an abuse of terms,
since He Himself originated by the proper Word of God, and by the Wisdom
that is in God, by which God has made not only all other things but Him
also. Wherefore He is by nature subject to change and variation as are
all rational creatures. And the Word is foreign from the essence <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) of the Father, and is alien and
separated therefrom. And the Father cannot be described by the Son, for
the Word does not know the Father perfectly and accurately, neither can
He see Him perfectly. Moreover, the Son knows not His own essence as it
really is; for He is made for us, that God might create us by Him, as by
an instrument; and He would not have existed, had not God wished to
create us. Accordingly, when some one asked them, whether the Word of
God can possibly change as the devil changed, they were not afraid to
say that He can; for being something made and created, His nature is
subject to change.

<span id="viii.ii-p23"></span>3. Now when Arius and his fellows made
these assertions, and shamelessly avowed them, we being assembled with
the Bishops of Egypt and Libya, nearly a hundred in number,
anathematized both them and their followers. But Eusebius and his
fellows admitted them to communion, being desirous to mingle falsehood
with the truth, and impiety with piety. But they will not be able to do
so, for the truth must prevail; neither is there any “communion of light
with darkness,” nor any “concord of Christ with Belial <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) .” For who ever heard such assertions
before <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) ? or who that hears them
now is not astonished and does not stop his ears lest they should be
defiled with such language? Who that has heard the words of John, “In
the beginning was the Word <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) ,”
will not denounce the saying of these men, that “there was a time when
He was not?” Or who that has heard in the Gospel, “the Only-begotten
Son,” and “by Him were all things made <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) ,” will not detest their declaration
that He is “one of the things that were made.” For how can He be one of
those things which were made by Himself? or how can He be the
Only-begotten, when, according to them, He is counted as one among the
rest, since He is Himself a creature and a work? And how can He be “made
of things that were not,” when the Father saith, “My heart hath uttered
a good Word,” and “Out of the womb I have begotten Thee before the
morning star <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) ?” Or again, how is
He “unlike in substance to the Father,” seeing He is the perfect “image”
and “brightness <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) ” of the Father,
and that He saith, “He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) ?” And if the Son is the “Word” and
“Wisdom” of God, how was there “a time when He was not?” It is the same
as if they should say that God was once without Word and without
Wisdom <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) . And how is He “subject
to change and variation,” Who says, by Himself, “I am in the Father, and
the Father in Me <span id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) ,” and “I and
the Father are One <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) ;” and by the
Prophet, “Behold Me, for I am, and I change not <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) ?” For although one may refer this
expression to the Father, yet it may now be more aptly spoken of the
Word, viz., that though He has been made man, He has not changed; but as
the Apostle has said, “Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to-day, and
for ever.” And who can have persuaded them to say, that He was made for
us, whereas Paul writes, “for Whom are all things, and by Whom are all
things <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) ?”

<span id="viii.ii-p36"></span><span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_71"></span>4. As to their blasphemous position that
“the Son knows not the Father perfectly,” we ought not to wonder at it;
for having once set themselves to fight against Christ, they contradict
even His express words, since He says, “As the Father knoweth Me, even
so know I the Father <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) .” Now if
the Father knows the Son but in part, then it is evident that the Son
does not know the Father perfectly; but if it is not lawful to say this,
but the Father does know the Son perfectly, then it is evident that as
the Father knows His own Word, so also the Word knows His own Father
Whose Word He is.

<span id="viii.ii-p38"></span>5. By these arguments and references to
the sacred Scriptures we frequently overthrew them; but they changed
like chameleons <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) , and again
shifted their ground, striving to bring upon themselves that sentence,
“when the wicked falleth into the depth of evils, he despiseth <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) .” There have been many heresies
before them, which, venturing further than they ought, have fallen into
folly; but these men by endeavouring in all their cavils to overthrow
the Divinity of the Word, have justified the other in comparison of
themselves, as approaching nearer to Antichrist. Wherefore they have
been excommunicated and anathematized by the Church. We grieve for their
destruction, and especially because, having once been instructed in the
doctrines of the Church, they have now sprung away. Yet we are not
greatly surprised, for Hymenæus and Philetus <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) did the same, and before them Judas,
who followed the Saviour, but afterwards became a traitor and an
apostate. And concerning these same persons, we have not been left
without instruction; for our Lord has forewarned us; “Take heed lest any
man deceive you: for many shall come in My name, saying, I am Christ,
and the time draweth near, and they shall deceive many: go ye not after
them <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) ;” while Paul, who was
taught these things by our Saviour, wrote that “in the latter times some
shall depart from the sound faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and
doctrines of devils, which reject the truth <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) .”

<span id="viii.ii-p44"></span>6. Since then our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ has instructed us by His own mouth, and also hath signified to us
by the Apostle concerning such men, we accordingly being personal
witnesses of their impiety, have anathematized, as we said, all such,
and declared them to be alien from the Catholic Faith and Church. And we
have made this known to your piety, dearly beloved and most honoured
fellow-ministers, in order that should any of them have the
boldness <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) to come unto you, you
may not receive them, nor comply with the desire of Eusebius, or any
other person writing in their behalf. For it becomes us who are
Christians to turn away from all who speak or think any thing against
Christ, as being enemies of God, and destroyers <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) of souls; and not even to “bid such
God speed <span id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) ,” lest we become
partakers of their sins, as the blessed John hath charged us. Salute the
brethren that are with you. They that are with me salute you.

<span id="viii.ii-p48"></span>Presbyters of Alexandria.

<span id="viii.ii-p49"></span>7. I, Colluthus, Presbyter, agree with
what is here written, and give my assent to the deposition of Arius and
his associates in impiety.

<span id="viii.ii-p50"></span>Alexander <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385) , Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p52"></span>Dioscorus <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) , Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p54"></span>Dionysius <span
id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387) , Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p56"></span>Eusebius, Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p57"></span>Alexander, Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p58"></span>Nilaras <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388) , Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p60"></span>Arpocration, Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p61"></span>Agathus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p62"></span>Nemesius, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p63"></span>Longus <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) , Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p65"></span>Silvanus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p66"></span>Peroys, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p67"></span>Apis, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p68"></span>Proterius, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p69"></span>Paulus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p70"></span>Cyrus, Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p71"></span>Deacons

<span id="viii.ii-p72"></span>Ammonius <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) , Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p74"></span>Macarius, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p75"></span>Pistus <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) , Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p77"></span>Athanasius, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p78"></span>Eumenes, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p79"></span>Apollonius <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p81"></span>Olympius, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p82"></span>Aphthonius <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p84"></span>Athanasius <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p86"></span>Macarius, Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p87"></span>Paulus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p88"></span>Petrus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p89"></span>Ambytianus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p90"></span>Gaius <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) , Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p92"></span>Alexander, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p93"></span>Dionysius, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p94"></span>Agathon, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p95"></span>Polybius, Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p96"></span>Theonas, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p97"></span>Marcus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p98"></span>Comodus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p99"></span>Serapion <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p101"></span>Nilon, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p102"></span>Romanus, Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p103"></span><span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="viii.ii-Page_72"></span>*Presbyters of the Mareotis.*

<span id="viii.ii-p104"></span>I, Apollonius, Presbyter, agree with what
is here written, and give my assent to the deposition of Arius and his
associates in impiety.

<span id="viii.ii-p105"></span>Ingenius <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) , Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p107"></span>Ammonius, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p108"></span>Dioscorus <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) , Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p110"></span>Sostras, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p111"></span>Theon <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) , Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p113"></span>Tyrannus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p114"></span>Copres, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p115"></span>Ammonas <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) , Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p117"></span>Orion, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p118"></span>Serenus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p119"></span>Didymus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p120"></span>Heracles <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) , Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p122"></span>Boccon <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) , Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p124"></span>Agathus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p125"></span>Achillas, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p126"></span>Paulus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p127"></span>Thalelæus, Presbyter

<span id="viii.ii-p128"></span>Dionysius, Presbyter, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p129"></span>Deacons

<span id="viii.ii-p130"></span>Sarapion <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) , Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p132"></span>Justus, Deacon, likewise

<span id="viii.ii-p133"></span>Didymus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p134"></span>Demetrius <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p136"></span>Maurus <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p138"></span>Alexander, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p139"></span>Marcus <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p141"></span>Comon, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p142"></span>Tryphon <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p144"></span>Ammonius <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p146"></span>Didymus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p147"></span>Ptollarion <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p149"></span>Seras, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p150"></span>Gaius <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p152"></span>Hierax <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) , Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p154"></span>Marcus, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p155"></span>Theonas, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p156"></span>Sarmaton, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p157"></span>Carpon, Deacon

<span id="viii.ii-p158"></span>Zoilus, Deacon, likewise

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_351"></span>[69:352](2040157.htm#fr_351) <span
id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span> Cf. *Apol. Ar.* §24.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[69:353](2040157.htm#fr_352) <span
id="viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span> ([Eph. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii-p10.1"></span>.)
St. Alexander in Theod. begins his Epistle to his namesake of
Constantinople with some moral reflections, concerning ambition and
avarice. Athan. indeed uses a similar introduction to his *Ep. Æg.,* but
it is not addressed to an individual.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[69:354](2040157.htm#fr_353) <span
id="viii.ii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p11.1"></span>παράνομοι</span>. vid. *Hist. Ar.* §71 init.
75 fin. 79.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[69:355](2040157.htm#fr_354) <span
id="viii.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p12.1"></span>πρόδρομον ᾽Αντιχρίστου</span>. vid *Orat.* i.
7. *Vit. Ant.* 69. note on *de Syn.* 5.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[69:356](2040157.htm#fr_355) <span
id="viii.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p13.1"></span>καὶ ἐβουλόμην μὲν σιωπῇ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p13.2"></span>….</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p13.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p13.4"></span>πειδὴ δὲ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p13.5"></span>….</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p13.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p13.7"></span>νάγκην ἔσχον</span>. vid.
*Apol. contra. Ar.* §1 init, *de Decr.* § 2. *Orat.* i. 23 init. *Orat.*
ii. init. *Orat.* iii. 1. *ad Serap.* i. 1. 16. ii. 1 init. iii. init.
iv. 8 init. *Letters* 52. 2, 59. 3 fin. 61. 1. *contra Apollin.* i. 1
init.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[69:357](2040157.htm#fr_356) <span
id="viii.ii-p13.9"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p14.1"></span>ῥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p14.2"></span>υπώσῃ</span>, and infr. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p14.4"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p14.5"></span>ύ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p14.6"></span>πον</span>. vid *Hist.
Ar.* §3. §80, *de Decr.* §2. *Ep. Æg.* 11 fin. *Orat.* i. 10.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[69:358](2040157.htm#fr_357) <span
id="viii.ii-p14.8"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p15.2"></span>κοὰς</span>, and infr. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p15.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p15.5"></span>κοὰς βύει</span>. vid.
*Ep. Æg.* §13. *Orat.* i. §7. *Hist. Ar.* §56.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[69:359](2040157.htm#fr_358) <span
id="viii.ii-p15.7"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p16.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p16.2"></span>κεραίων</span>. *Apol. contr.* Ar. §1. *Ep.
Æg.* §18. *Letters* 59. 1, 60. 2 fin. *Orat.* i. 8.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[69:360](2040157.htm#fr_359) <span
id="viii.ii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p17"></span> ἐποφθαλμίσας also used of Eusebius *Apol.
contr.* Ar. §6. *Hist. Ar.* §7.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[69:361](2040157.htm#fr_360) <span
id="viii.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p18.1"></span>ῥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p18.2"></span>ημάτια.</span> vid. *de Decr.* §8, 18. *Orat.*
i. 10. *de Sent.* §23 init S. Dionysius also uses it. Ibid. §18.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[69:362](2040157.htm#fr_361) <span
id="viii.ii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p19.1"></span>κακόνοιαν</span>. vid *Hist. Ar.* §75. *de
Decr.* §1. et al.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[70:363](2040157.htm#fr_362) <span
id="viii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p21.1"></span>οὐκ ἀεὶ πατήρ</span>. This enumeration of
Arius’s tenets, and particularly the mention of the first, corresponds
to *de Decr.* §6. *Ep. Æg.* §12. as being taken from the *Thalia. Orat.*
i. §5. and far less with Alex. ap. Theod. p. 731, 2. vid. also *Sent.
D.* §16. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p21.3"></span>καταχρηστικῶς</span>, which is found here,
occurs *de Decr.* §6.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[70:364](2040157.htm#fr_363) <span
id="viii.ii-p21.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p22.1"></span>οὐσίαν· οὐσία τοῦ λόγου</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p22.2"></span>or</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p22.3"></span>τοῦ υἱοῦ</span> is a
familiar expression with Athan. e.g. *Orat.* i. 45, ii. 7, 9, 11, 12,
13, 18 init. 22, 47 init. 56 init. &c., for which Alex. in Theod. uses
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p22.5"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p22.6"></span>πόστασις</span> e.g. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p22.8"></span>τὴν ἰδιότροπον αὐτοῦ ὑπόστασιν· τῆς ὑποστάσεως
αὐτοῦ ἀπεριεργαστοῦ· νεωτέραν τῆς ὑποστάσεως γένεσιν· ἡ τοῦ υονογενοῦς
ἀνεκδιήγητος ὑπόστασις· τὴν τοῦ λόγου υπόστασιν</span>

<span id="fn_364"></span>[70:365](2040157.htm#fr_364) <span
id="viii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p24"></span> ([2 Cor. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="viii.ii-p24.1"></span>.)
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p24.2"></span>κοινωνία
φωτί</span>. This is quoted Alex. ap. Theod. *H. E.* i. 3. p. 738; by S.
Athan. in *Letter* 47. It seems to have been a received text in the
controversy, as the Sardican Council uses it, *Apol Ar.* 49, and S.
Athan. seems to put it into the mouth of St. Anthony, *Vit. Ant.* 69.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[70:366](2040157.htm#fr_365) <span
id="viii.ii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p25.1"></span>τίς γὰρ ἤκουσε</span>. *Ep. Æg.* §7 init.
*Letter* 59. §2 init. *Orat.* i. 8. *Apol. contr. Ar.* 85 init. *Hist.
Ar.* §46 init. §73 init. §74 init. *ad Serap.* iv. 2 init.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[70:367](2040157.htm#fr_366) <span
id="viii.ii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p26"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[70:368](2040157.htm#fr_367) <span
id="viii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p27"></span> [John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="viii.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[70:369](2040157.htm#fr_368) <span
id="viii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p28"></span> [Ps.
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001), [Ps.
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)<span
id="viii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii-p28.3"></span>. and
cx. 3.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[70:370](2040157.htm#fr_369) <span
id="viii.ii-p28.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p29"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[70:371](2040157.htm#fr_370) <span
id="viii.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p30"></span> ([John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), [John
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span
id="viii.ii-p30.1"></span>.) On the concurrence of these three texts in
Athan. (though other writers use them too, and Alex. ap. Theod. has two
of them), vid. note on *Orat.* i. 34.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[70:372](2040157.htm#fr_371) <span
id="viii.ii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p31.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p31.2"></span>λογον καὶ ἄσοφον τὸν θεόν</span>. *de Decr.*
§15. *Orat.* i. §19. *Ap. Fug.* 27. note, notes on *Or.* i. 19, *de.
Decr.* 15, note 6.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[70:373](2040157.htm#fr_372) <span
id="viii.ii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p32"></span> ([John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), [John
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span
id="viii.ii-p32.1"></span>.) On the concurrence of these three texts in
Athan. (though other writers use them too, and Alex. ap. Theod. has two
of them), vid. note on *Orat.* i. 34.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[70:374](2040157.htm#fr_373) <span
id="viii.ii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p33"></span> ([John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010), [John
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span
id="viii.ii-p33.1"></span>.) On the concurrence of these three texts in
Athan. (though other writers use them too, and Alex. ap. Theod. has two
of them), vid. note on *Orat.* i. 34.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[70:375](2040157.htm#fr_374) <span
id="viii.ii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p34"></span> ([Mal. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii-p34.1"></span>.)
This text is thus applied by Athan. *Orat.* i. 30. ii. 10. In the first
of these passages he uses the same apology, nearly in the same words,
which is contained in the text.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[70:376](2040157.htm#fr_375) <span
id="viii.ii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p35"></span> <span id="viii.ii-p35.1"></span>[Heb.
xiii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span
id="viii.ii-p35.3"></span>; ii. 10.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[71:377](2040157.htm#fr_376) <span
id="viii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p37"></span> [John x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span id="viii.ii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[71:378](2040157.htm#fr_377) <span
id="viii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p39.1"></span>χαμαιλέοντες</span>. vid. *de Decr.* §1.
*Hist. Ar.* §79.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[71:379](2040157.htm#fr_378) <span
id="viii.ii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p40"></span> <span id="viii.ii-p40.1"></span>[Prov.
xviii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span
id="viii.ii-p40.3"></span> \[cf. *Orat.* iii. 1, *c. Gent.* 8. 4, &c.\]

<span id="fn_379"></span>[71:380](2040157.htm#fr_379) <span
id="viii.ii-p40.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p41"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)<span id="viii.ii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[71:381](2040157.htm#fr_380) <span
id="viii.ii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p42"></span> [Luke xxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[71:382](2040157.htm#fr_381) <span
id="viii.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p43"></span> ([1 Tim. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii-p43.1"></span>.)
Into this text which Athan. also applies to the Arians (cf. note on
*Or.* i. 9.), Athan. also introduces, like Alexander here, the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.3"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.4"></span>γιανούσης</span>, e.g.
*Ep. Æg.* §20, *Orat.* i. 8 fin. *de Decr.* 3, *Hist. Arian.* §78 init.
&c. It is quoted without the word by Origen *contr.* Cels. v. 64, but
with <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.6"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.7"></span>γίοῦς</span> *in* *Matth.*
t. xiv. 16. Epiphan, has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p43.9"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p43.10"></span>γιαινούσης διδασκαλίας</span>, *Hær*. 78. 2.
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.12"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii-p43.13"></span>γιοῦς διδ</span>. ibid.
23. p. 1055.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[71:383](2040157.htm#fr_382) <span
id="viii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p45.1"></span>προπετεύσαιντο</span>. vid. *de Decr.* §2.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[71:384](2040157.htm#fr_383) <span
id="viii.ii-p45.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p46.1"></span>φθορέας τῶν ψυχῶν</span>. but S. Alex. in
Theod. uses the compound word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p46.3"></span>φθοροποιός</span>. p. 731. Other compound or
recondite words (to say nothing of the construction of sentences) found
in S. Alexander’s Letter in Theod., and unlike the style of the Circular
under review, are such as <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p46.5"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p46.6"></span>φίλαρχος καὶ φιλάργυρος πρόθεσις·
χριστεμπορίαν· φρενοβλαβοῦς· ἰδιότροπον· ὁμοστοίχοις συλλαβαῖς·
θεηγόρους ἀποστόλους· & 135·ντιδιαστολήν τῆς πατρικῆς μαιεύσεως·
μελαγχολικήν· φιλόθεος σαφήνεια ἀνοσιουργίας· φληνάφων μύθων</span>.
Instances of theological language in S. Alex. to which the Letter in the
text contains no resemblance are <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p46.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii-p46.9"></span>χώριστα πράγματα δύο· ὁ υἱ& 232·ς τὴν κατὰ
πάντα ὁμοιότητα αὐτοῦ ἐκ φύσεως ἀπομαξάμενος· δι᾽ ἐσόπτρου ἀκηλιδώτου
καὶ ἐμψύχου θείας εἰκόνος· μεσιτεύουσα φύσις μονογενής· τὰς τῇ ὑποστάσει
δύο φύσεις</span>

<span id="fn_384"></span>[71:385](2040157.htm#fr_384) <span
id="viii.ii-p46.10"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p47"></span> [2 John
10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010)<span id="viii.ii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[71:386](2040157.htm#fr_385) <span
id="viii.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p51"></span> Vid. Presbyters, *Apol. Ar.* 73.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[71:387](2040157.htm#fr_386) <span
id="viii.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p53"></span> Vid. Presbyters, *Apol. Ar.* 73.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[71:388](2040157.htm#fr_387) <span
id="viii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p55"></span> Vid. Presbyters, *Apol. Ar.* 73.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[71:389](2040157.htm#fr_388) <span
id="viii.ii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p59"></span> Vid. Presbyters, *Apol. Ar.* 73.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[71:390](2040157.htm#fr_389) <span
id="viii.ii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p64"></span> Vid. Presbyters, *Apol. Ar.* 73.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[71:391](2040157.htm#fr_390) <span
id="viii.ii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p73"></span> Vid. Presbyters, ib.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[71:392](2040157.htm#fr_391) <span
id="viii.ii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p76"></span> Vid. Presbyters, ib.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[71:393](2040157.htm#fr_392) <span
id="viii.ii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p80"></span> Vid. Presbyters, ib.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[71:394](2040157.htm#fr_393) <span
id="viii.ii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p83"></span> Vid. Presbyters, ib.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[71:395](2040157.htm#fr_394) <span
id="viii.ii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p85"></span> Vid. Presbyters, ib.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[71:396](2040157.htm#fr_395) <span
id="viii.ii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p91"></span> Vid. Presbyters, ib.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[71:397](2040157.htm#fr_396) <span
id="viii.ii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p100"></span> Vid. Presbyters, ib.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[72:398](2040157.htm#fr_397) <span
id="viii.ii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p106"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 75.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[72:399](2040157.htm#fr_398) <span
id="viii.ii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p109"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 75.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[72:400](2040157.htm#fr_399) <span
id="viii.ii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p112"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 75.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[72:401](2040157.htm#fr_400) <span
id="viii.ii-p115.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p116"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 75.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[72:402](2040157.htm#fr_401) <span
id="viii.ii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p121"></span> Heraclius? ib.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[72:403](2040157.htm#fr_402) <span
id="viii.ii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p123"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 75.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[72:404](2040157.htm#fr_403) <span
id="viii.ii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p131"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[72:405](2040157.htm#fr_404) <span
id="viii.ii-p134.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p135"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[72:406](2040157.htm#fr_405) <span
id="viii.ii-p136.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p137"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[72:407](2040157.htm#fr_406) <span
id="viii.ii-p139.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p140"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[72:408](2040157.htm#fr_407) <span
id="viii.ii-p142.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p143"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[72:409](2040157.htm#fr_408) <span
id="viii.ii-p144.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p145"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[72:410](2040157.htm#fr_409) <span
id="viii.ii-p147.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p148"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[72:411](2040157.htm#fr_410) <span
id="viii.ii-p150.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p151"></span> Ib.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[72:412](2040157.htm#fr_411) <span
id="viii.ii-p152.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p153"></span> Ib.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of Eusebius. (Epistola Eusebii.)](2040158)
