[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040122)  [Next](2040124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxvi-p1"></span> §26. *Reasons for His rising on the
Third Day. (1) Not sooner for else His real death would be denied, nor
(2) later; to (a) guard the identity of His body, (b) not to keep His
disciples too long in suspense, nor (c) to wait till the witnesses of
His death were dispersed, or its memory faded.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxvi-p2"></span>The death on the Cross, then, for us
has proved seemly and fitting, and its cause has been shewn to be
reasonable in every respect; and it may justly be argued that in no
other way than by the Cross was it right for the salvation of all to
take place. For not even thus—not even on the Cross—did He leave Himself
concealed; but far otherwise, while He made creation witness to the
presence of its Maker, He suffered not the temple of His body to remain
long, but having merely shewn it to be dead, by the contact of death
with it, He straightway raised it up on the third day, bearing away, as
the mark of victory and the triumph over death, the incorruptibility and
impassibility which resulted to His body. 2. For He could, even
immediately on death, have raised His body and shewn it alive; but this
also the Saviour, in wise foresight, did not do. For one might have said
that He had not died at all, or that death had not come into perfect
contact with Him, if He had manifested the Resurrection at once. 3.
Perhaps, again, had the interval of His dying and rising again been one
of two days <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) only, the glory of
His incorruption would have been obscure. So in order that the body
might be proved to be dead, the Word tarried yet one intermediate day,
and on the third shewed it incorruptible to all. 4. So then, that the
death on the Cross might be proved, He raised His body on the third day.
5. But lest, by raising it up when it had remained a long time and been
completely corrupted, He should be disbelieved, as though He had
exchanged it for some other body—for a man might also from lapse of time
distrust what he saw, and forget what had taken place—for this cause He
waited not more than three days; nor did He keep long in suspense those
whom He had told about the Resurrection: 6. but while the word was still
echoing in their ears and their eyes were still expectant and their mind
in suspense, and while those who had slain Him were still living on
earth, and were on the spot and could witness to the death of the Lord’s
body, the Son of God Himself, after an interval of three days, shewed
His body, once dead, immortal and incorruptible; and it was made
manifest to all that it was not from any natural weakness of the Word
that dwelt in it that the body had died, but in order that in it death
might be done away by the power of the Saviour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_274"></span>[50:275](2040123.htm#fr_274) <span
id="vii.ii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxvi-p3"></span> Literally ‘at an even’ \[distance\],
as contrasted with (a) the same day (2, above), (b) the third day (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.xxvi-p3.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.xxvi-p3.3"></span>ν τριταί& 251·
διαστήματι</span> (6, below). <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xxvi-p3.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xxvi-p3.5"></span>ν ἴσῳ</span> must therefore be equivalent
*in sense* to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xxvi-p3.7"></span>δευτεραίου</span>. Possibly the literal
sense is ‘\[had the Resurrection taken place\] at an equal interval
between the Death and the \[actual day of\] the Resurrection.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The change wrought by the Cross in the relation of Death to
Man.](2040124)
