[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040346)  [Next](2040348) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—<span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p1.2"></span>Extracts from the Thalia of Arius</span>.
*Arius maintains that God became a Father, and the Son was not always;
the Son out of nothing; once He was not; He was not before his
generation; He was created; named Wisdom and Word after God’s
attributes; made that He might make us; one out of many powers of God;
alterable; exalted on God’s foreknowledge of what He was to be; not very
God; but called so as others by participation; foreign in essence from
the Father; does not know or see the Father; does not know Himself.*

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p2"></span>5. Now the commencement of Arius’s
Thalia and flippancy, effeminate in tune and nature, runs thus:—

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p3"></span>‘According to faith of God’s elect,
God’s prudent ones,

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p4"></span>Holy children, rightly dividing, God’s
Holy Spirit receiving,

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p5"></span>Have I learned this from the partakers
of wisdom,

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p6"></span>Accomplished, divinely taught, and wise
in all things.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p7"></span>Along their track, have I been walking,
with like opinions.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p8"></span>I the very famous, the much suffering
for God’s glory;

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p9"></span>And taught of God, I have acquired
wisdom and knowledge.’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p10"></span>And the mockeries which he utters in
it, repulsive and most irreligious, are such as these <span
id="fr_1838"></span>[1839](#fn_1838) :—‘God was not always a Father;’
but ‘once God was alone, and not yet a Father, but afterwards He became
a Father.’ ‘The Son was not always;’ for, whereas all things were made
out of nothing, and all existing creatures and works were made, so the
Word of God Himself was ‘made out of nothing,’ and ‘once He was not,’
and ‘He was not before His <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-Page_309"></span>origination,’ but He as others ‘had an
origin of creation.’ ‘For God,’ he says, ‘was alone, and the Word as yet
was not, nor the Wisdom. Then, wishing to form us, thereupon He made a
certain one, and named Him Word and Wisdom and Son, that He might form
us by means of Him.’ Accordingly, he says that there are two wisdoms,
first, the attribute co-existent with God, and next, that in this wisdom
the Son was originated, and was only named Wisdom and Word as partaking
of it. ‘For Wisdom,’ saith he, ‘by the will of the wise God, had its
existence in Wisdom.’ In like manner, he says, that there is another
Word in God besides the Son, and that the Son again, as partaking of it,
is named Word and Son according to grace. And this too is an idea proper
to their heresy, as shewn in other works of theirs, that there are many
powers; one of which is God’s own by nature and eternal; but that
Christ, on the other hand, is not the true power of God; but, as others,
one of the so-called powers, one of which, namely, the locust and the
caterpillar <span id="fr_1839"></span>[1840](#fn_1839) , is called in
Scripture, not merely the power, but the ‘great power.’ The others are
many and are like the Son, and of them David speaks in the Psalms, when
he says, ‘The Lord of hosts’ or ‘powers <span
id="fr_1840"></span>[1841](#fn_1840) .’ And by nature, as all others, so
the Word Himself is alterable, and remains good by His own free will,
while He chooseth; when, however, He wills, He can alter as we can, as
being of an alterable nature. For ‘therefore,’ saith he, ‘as foreknowing
that He would be good, did God by anticipation bestow on Him this glory,
which afterwards, as man, He attained from virtue. Thus in consequence
of His works fore-known <span id="fr_1841"></span>[1842](#fn_1841) , did
God bring it to pass that He being such, should come to be.’

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p15"></span>6. Moreover he has dared to say, that
‘the Word is not the very God;’ ‘though He is called God, yet He is not
very God,’ but ‘by participation of grace, He, as others, is God only in
name.’ And, whereas all beings are foreign and different from God in
essence, so too is ‘the Word alien and unlike in all things to the
Father’s essence and propriety,’ but belongs to things originated and
created, and is one of these. Afterwards, as though he had succeeded to
the devil’s recklessness, he has stated in his Thalia, that ‘even to the
Son the Father is invisible,’ and ‘the Word cannot perfectly and exactly
either see or know His own Father;’ but even what He knows and what He
sees, He knows and sees ‘in proportion to His own measure,’ as we also
know according to our own power. For the Son, too, he says, not only
knows not the Father exactly, for He fails in comprehension <span
id="fr_1842"></span>[1843](#fn_1842) , but ‘He knows not even His own
essence;’—and that ‘the essences of the Father and the Son and the Holy
Ghost, are separate in nature, and estranged, and disconnected, and
alien <span id="fr_1843"></span>[1844](#fn_1843) , and without
participation of each other <span id="fr_1844"></span>[1845](#fn_1844)
;’ and, in his own words, ‘utterly unlike from each other in essence and
glory, unto infinity.’ Thus as to ‘likeness of glory and essence,’ he
says that the Word is entirely diverse from both the Father and the Holy
Ghost. With such words hath the irreligious spoken; maintaining that the
Son is distinct by Himself, and in no respect partaker of the Father.
These are portions of Arius’s fables as they occur in that jocose
composition.

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p19"></span>7. Who is there that hears all this,
nay, the tune of the Thalia, but must hate, and justly hate, this Arius
jesting on such matters as on a stage <span
id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845) ? who but must regard him, when he
pretends to name God and speak of God, but as the serpent counselling
the woman? who, on reading what follows in his work, but must discern in
his irreligious doctrine that error, into which by his sophistries the
serpent in the sequel seduced the woman? who at such blasphemies is not
transported? ‘The heaven,’ as the Prophet says, ‘was astonished, and the
earth shuddered <span id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846) ’ at the
transgression of the Law. But the sun, with greater horror, impatient of
the bodily contumelies, which the common Lord of all voluntarily endured
for us, turned away, and recalling his rays made that day sunless. And
shall not all human kind at Arius’s blasphemies be struck speechless,
and stop their ears, and shut their eyes, to escape hearing them or
seeing their author? Rather, will not the Lord Himself have reason to
denounce men so irreligious, nay, so unthankful, in the words which He
has already uttered by the prophet Hosea, ‘Woe unto them, for they have
fled from Me; destruction upon <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-Page_310"></span>them, for they have transgressed
against Me; though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies
against Me <span id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) .’ And soon after,
‘They imagine mischief against Me; they turn away to nothing <span
id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848) .’ For to turn away from the Word
of God, which is, and to fashion to themselves one that is not, is to
fall to what is nothing. For this was why the Ecumenical <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849) Council, when Arius thus spoke,
cast him from the Church, and anathematized him, as impatient of such
irreligion. And ever since has Arius’s error been reckoned for a heresy
more than ordinary, being known as Christ’s foe, and harbinger <span
id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850) of Antichrist. Though then so great
a condemnation be itself of special weight to make men flee from that
irreligious heresy <span id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851) , as I
said above, yet since certain persons called Christian, either in
ignorance or pretence, think it, as I then said, little different from
the Truth, and call its professors Christians; proceed we to put some
questions to them, according to our powers, thereby to expose the
unscrupulousness of the heresy. Perhaps, when thus caught, they will be
silenced, and flee from it, as from the sight of a serpent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1838"></span>[308:1839](2040347.htm#fr_1838) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p11"></span> *de Syn.* §15. \[where the metre of
the Thalia is discussed in a note.\]

<span id="fn_1839"></span>[309:1840](2040347.htm#fr_1839) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p12"></span> *de Syn.* §18; [Joel ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p12.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1840"></span>[309:1841](2040347.htm#fr_1840) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p13"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[309:1842](2040347.htm#fr_1841) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p14"></span> *de Syn.* 26, note 7, *de Decr.* 6,
note 8.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[309:1843](2040347.htm#fr_1842) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16"></span> Vid. *de Syn.* 15, note 6. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.2"></span>κατάληψις</span> was
originally a Stoic word, and even when considered perfect, was, properly
speaking, attributable only to an imperfect being. For it is used in
contrast to the Platonic doctrine of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.4"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.5"></span>δεαι</span>, to express the hold of things
obtained by the mind through the senses; it being a Stoical maxim, nihil
esse in intellectu quod non fuerit in sensu. In this sense it is also
used by the Fathers, to mean real and certain knowledge after inquiry,
though it is also ascribed to Almighty God. As to the position of Arius,
since we are told in Scripture that none ‘knoweth the things of a man
save the spirit of man which is in him,’ if <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.7"></span>κατάληψις</span> be an exact and complete
knowledge of the object of contemplation, to deny that the Son
comprehended the Father, was to deny that He was in the Father, i.e. the
doctrine of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.9"></span>περιχώρησις</span>, *de Syn.* 15, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.11"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.12"></span>νεπιμικτοί</span>, or
to maintain that He was a distinct, and therefore a created, being. On
the other hand Scripture asserts that, as the Holy Spirit which is in
God, ‘searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God,’ so the Son, as
being ‘in the bosom of the Father,’ alone ‘hath declared Him.’ vid.
Clement. *Strom.* v. 12. And thus Athan. speaking of [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.14"></span>, ’If the Son is in the Father and the
Father in the Son, and the Father knows the day and the hour, it is
plain that the Son too, being in the Father, and knowing the things in
the Father, Himself also knows the day and the hour.” *Orat.* iii. 44.

<span id="fn_1843"></span>[309:1844](2040347.htm#fr_1843) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p16.16"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p17"></span> *de Decr.* 25, note 2.

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[309:1845](2040347.htm#fr_1844) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p18"></span> *de Syn.* 15.

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[309:1846](2040347.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p20"></span> Ep. *Encycl.* 6; Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 1.

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[309:1847](2040347.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p21"></span> [Jer. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[310:1848](2040347.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p22"></span> [Hos. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#013)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[310:1849](2040347.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p23"></span> [Hos.
7.15](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p23.1"></span>. lxx.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[310:1850](2040347.htm#fr_1849) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p24"></span> *de Decr.* 27, note 1.

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[310:1851](2040347.htm#fr_1850) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p25"></span> Ib. 3, note 1, §1, note 3.

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[310:1852](2040347.htm#fr_1851) <span
id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.i.ii-p26"></span> And so Vigilius of the heresies about
the Incarnation, Etiamsi in erroris eorum destructionem nulli
conderentur libri, hoc ipsum solum, quod hæretici sunt pronunciati,
orthodoxorum securitati sufficeret. *contr. Eutych.* i. p. 494.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Importance of the Subject. The Arians affect Scripture
language, but their doctrine new, as well as unscriptural. Statement of
the Catholic doctrine, that the Son is proper to the Father's substance,
and eternal. Restatement of Arianism in contrast, that He is a creature
with a beginning: the controversy comes to this issue, whether one whom
we are to believe in as God, can be so in name only, and is merely a
creature. What pretence then for being indifferent in the controversy?
The Arians rely on state patronage, and dare not avow their
tenets.](2040348)
