[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040029)  [Next](2040031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Fundamental ideas of man and his
redemption.*

<span id="v.iv.ii-p2"></span>To Athanasius the Incarnation of the Son of
God, and especially his Death on the Cross, is the centre of faith and
theology (*Incar.* 19, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>κεφάλαιον τῆς πίστεως</span>, cf. 9. 1 and 2,
20. 2, &c.). ‘For our salvation’ (*Incar*. 1) the Word became Man and
died. But how did Athanasius conceive of ‘salvation’? *from* what are we
saved, *to* what destiny does salvation bring us, and what idea does he
form of the efficacy of the Saviour’s death? Now it is not too much to
say that no one age of the Church’s existence has done full justice to
the profundity and manysidedness of the Christian idea of Redemption as
effected in Christ and as unfolded by S. Paul. The kingdom of God and
His Righteousness; the forgiveness of sins and the adoption of sons as a
present gift; the consummation of all at the great judgment;—Christian
men of different ages, countries, characters and mental antecedents,
while united in personal devotion to the Saviour and in the sanctifying
Power of His Grace, have interpreted these central ideas of the Gospel
in terms of their own respective categories, and have succeeded in
bringing out now one, now another aspect of the mystery of Redemption
rather than in preserving the balance of the whole. Who will claim that
the last word has yet been said on S. Paul’s deep conception of God’s
(not mercy but) Righteousness as the new and peculiar element ([Rom.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), [Rom.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)<span id="v.iv.ii-p2.2"></span>) of
the Gospel Revelation? to search out the unsearchable riches of Christ
is the prerogative of Christian faith, but is denied, save to the most
limited extent, to Christian knowledge ([1 Cor. xiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.ii-p2.3"></span>). The
onesidedness of any given age in apprehending the work of Christ is to
be recognised by us not in a censorious spirit of self-complacency, but
with reverent sympathy, and with the necessity in view of correcting our
own: <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p2.4"></span>πάντα
δοκιμάζετε</span>, <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p2.5"></span>τὸ
καλὸν κατέχετε</span>.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p3"></span>Different ages and classes have necessarily
thought under different categories. The categories of the post-apostolic
age were mainly ethical; the Gospel is the new law, and the promise of
eternal life, founded on true knowledge of God, and accepted by faith.
Those of the Asiatic fathers from Ignatius downwards were largely
physical or realistic. Mankind is brought in Christ (the physician) from
death to life, from <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>φθόρα</span> to <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p3.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p3.3"></span>φθαρσία</span> (Ign. *passim*); <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p3.4"></span>τὸ εὐαγγέλιον</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p3.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p3.6"></span>πάρτισμα ἀφθαρσίας</span>
(Ign., Melit.); human nature is changed by the Incarnation, man made
God. Tertullian introduced into Western theology forensic categories. He
applied them to the Person, not yet to the Work, of Christ: but the
latter application, pushed to a repellent length in the middle ages, and
still more so since the Reformation, may without fancifulness <span
id="page_lxx">p. lxx</span> <span id="v.iv.ii-Page_lxx"></span>be traced
back to the fact that the first Latin Father was a lawyer. Again,
Redemption was viewed by Origen and others under cosmological
categories, as the turning point in the great conflict of good with
evil, of demons with God, as the inauguration of the deliverance of the
creation and its reunion with God. The many-sidedness of Origen
combined, indeed, almost every representation of Redemption then
current, from the propitiatory and mediatorial, which most nearly
approached the thought of S. Paul, to the grotesque but widely-spread
view of a ransom due to the devil which he was induced to accept by a
stratagem. It may be said that with the exception of the last-named
every one of the above conceptions finds some point of contact in the
New Testament; even the forensic idea, thoroughly unbiblical in its
extremer forms, would not have influenced Christian thought as it has
done had it not corresponded to something in the language of S. Paul.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p4"></span>Now Athanasius does not totally ignore any
one of these conceptions, unless it be that of a transaction with the
devil, which he scarcely touches even in *Orat.* ii. 52 (see note
there). Of the forensic view he is indeed almost clear. His reference to
the ‘debt’ (<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>τὸ
ὀφειλόμενον</span>, *Incar.* 20, *Orat.* ii. 66) which had to be paid is
connected not so much with the Anselmic idea of a satisfaction due, as
with the fact that death was by the divine word ([Gen.
iii.](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#000)<span id="v.iv.ii-p4.2"></span>),
attached to sin as its penalty.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p5"></span>The aspect of the death of Christ as a
vicarious sacrifice (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p5.2"></span>ντὶ πάντων</span>, *de Incar.* 9; <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p5.3"></span>προσφορὰ</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p5.4"></span>θυσία</span>, 10) is not
passed over. But on the whole another aspect predominates. The
categories under which Athanasius again and again states the
soteriological problem are those of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p5.5"></span>ζωὴ</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p5.6"></span>θάνατος</span>, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p5.7"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p5.8"></span>φθαρσία</span>. So far as he works the problem
out in detail it is under physical categories, without doing full
justice to the ideas of guilt and reconciliation, of the reunion of
*will* between man and God. The numberless passages which bear this out
cannot be quoted in full, but the point is of sufficient importance to
demand the production of a few details.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p6"></span>(*a*) The original state of man was not one
of ‘nature,’ for man’s nature is <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>φθόρα</span>; (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p6.2"></span>τὴν ἐν θανάτῳ κατὰ φύσιν φθόραν</span>,
*Incar.* 3, cf. 8, 10, 44) the Word was imparted to them in that they
were made <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p6.3"></span>κατὰ τὴν
τοῦ θεοῦ εἰκόνα</span> (*ib*). Hence what later theology marks off as an
exclusively supernatural gift is according to Athanasius inalienable
from human nature, i.e. it can be impaired but not absolutely lost
(*Incar.* 14, and apparently *Orat.* iii. 10 *fin.*; the question of the
teaching of Athan. upon the natural endowments of man belongs specially
to the Introd. to *de Incarnatione*, where it will be briefly
discussed). Accordingly their infraction of the divine command (by
turning their minds, *c. Gent.* 3, to lower things instead of to the
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p6.4"></span>θεωρία τῶν
θείων</span>), *logically* involved them in non-existence (*de Incar.*
4), but actually, inasmuch as the likeness of God was *only gradually*
lost, in <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p6.5"></span>φθόρα</span>, regarded as a *process toward*
non-existence. This again involved men in increasing *ignorance* of God,
by the gradual obliteration of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p6.6"></span>εἰκών</span>, the indwelling Logos, by virtue
of which alone men could read the open book (*c. Gent*. 34 *fin*.) of
God’s manifestation of Himself in the Universe. It is evident that the
pathological point of view here prevails over the purely ethical: the
perversion of man’s will merges in the general idea of <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p6.7"></span>φθόρα</span>, the first
need of man is a change in his *nature;* or rather the renewed infusion
of that higher and divine nature which he has gradually lost. (Cf. *de
Incar*. 44, <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p6.8"></span>χρῃζόντων
τῆς αὐτοῦ θεότητος διὰ τοῦ ὁμοίου</span>).

<span id="v.iv.ii-p7"></span>(*b*) Accordingly the mere presence of the
Word in a human body, the mere fact of the Incarnation, is the essential
factor in our restoration (simile of the city and the king, *ib*. 9. 3,
&c., cf. *Orat*. ii. 67, 70). But if so, what was the special need of
the Cross? Athanasius felt, as we have already mentioned, the supremacy
of the Cross as the purpose of the Saviour’s coming, but he does not in
fact give to it the central place in his system of thought which it
occupies in his instincts. Man had involved himself in the sentence of
death; death must therefore take place to satisfy this sentence (*Orat.*
ii. 69; *de Incar*. 20. 2, 5); the Saviour’s death, then, put an end to
death regarded as penal and as symptomatic of man’s <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>φθόρα</span> (cf. *ib*. 21.
1, &c.). It must be confessed that Athanasius does not penetrate to the
full meaning of S. Paul. The latter also ascribed a central import to
the mere fact of the Incarnation ([Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.ii-p7.2"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p7.3"></span>πέμψας</span>), but
primarily in relation to sin (yet see Athan. c. *Apoll.* ii. 6); and the
destruction of the practical power of sin stands indissolubly correlated
([Rom. viii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p7.4"></span>) with the removal of guilt and so with the
Righteousness of God realising itself in the propitiation of the blood
of Christ (*ib*. iii. 21—26).

<span id="v.iv.ii-p8"></span>To Athanasius nature is the central, will a
secondary or implied factor in the problem. The aspect of the death of
Christ most repeatedly dwelt upon is that in it death spent its force
(<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>πληρωθείσης τῆς
ἐξουσίας ἐν τῷ κυριακῷ σώυατι</span>, *ib*. 8) against human nature,
that the ‘corruption’ of mankind might run its full course and be spent
in the Lord’s body, and so cease for the <span id="page_lxxi">p.
lxxi</span> <span id="v.iv.ii-Page_lxxi"></span>future. Of this Victory
over death and the demons the Resurrection is the trophy. His death is
therefore to us (*ib*. 10) the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p8.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p8.3"></span>ρχὴ ζωῆς</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p8.4"></span>,</span> we are henceforth <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p8.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p8.6"></span>φθαρτοὶ διὰ τῆς
ἀναστάσεως</span> (27. 2, 32. 6, cf. 34. 1, &c.), and have a portion in
the divine nature, are in fact deified (cf. *de Incarn.* 54, and note
there). This last thought, which became (Harnack, vol. ii. p. 46) the
common property of Eastern theology, goes back through Origen and
Hippolytus to Irenæus. On the whole, its presentation in Athanasius is
more akin to the Asiatic than to the Origenist form of the conception.
To Origen, man’s highest destiny could only be the return to his
original source and condition: to Irenæus and the Asiatics, man had been
created for a destiny which he had never realised; the interruption in
the history of our race introduced by sin was repaired by the
Incarnation, which carried back the race to a new head, and so carried
it forward to a destiny of which under its original head it was
incapable. To Origen the Incarnation was a *restoration to,* to Irenæus
and to Athanasius (*Or.* ii. 67), an *advance upon,* the original state
of man. (Pell, pp. 167–177, labours to prove the contrary, but he does
not convince.)

<span id="v.iv.ii-p9"></span>(*c*) This leads us to the important
observation that momentous as are to Athanasius the consequences of the
introduction of sin into the world, he yet makes no such vast difference
between the condition of fallen and unfallen men as has commonly been
assumed to exist. The latter state was inferior to that of the members
of Christ (*Orat.* ii. 67, 68), while the immense (*c. Gent.* 8, *de
Incar.* 5) consequences of its forfeiture came about only by a gradual
course of deterioration (*de Incar.* 6. 1, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p9.1"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p9.2"></span>φανίζετο</span>; observe the tense), and in
different degrees in different cases. The only difference of kind
between the two conditions is in the universal reign of Death since the
(partial) forfeiture of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p9.3"></span>τοῦ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα χάρις</span>: and even this
difference is a subtle one; for man’s existence in Paradise was not one
of <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p9.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p9.5"></span>φθαρσία</span> except
prospectively (*de Incar*. 3. 4). He enjoyed present happiness, <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p9.6"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p9.7"></span>λυπος ἀνώδυνος ἀμέριμνος
ζωή</span>, with promise of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p9.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p9.9"></span>φθαρσία</span> in heaven. That is, death would
have taken place, but not death as unredeemed mankind know it (cf. *de
Incar*. 21. 1). In other words, man was created not so much in a state
of perfection (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p9.10"></span>τέλειος κτισθείς</span>, p. 384) as with a
capacity for perfection (and for even more than perfection, p. 385
*sq.*) and with a destiny to correspond with such capacity. This
destination remains in force even after man has failed to correspond to
it, and is in fact assigned by Athanasius as the reason why the
Incarnation was a necessity on God’s part (*de Incar.* 6. 4–7, 10. 3,
13. 2–4, *Orat*. ii. 66, &c., &c.). Accordingly, while man was *created*
(*Orat*. ii. 59) through the Word, the Word became Flesh that man might
receive the yet higher dignity of Sonship <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) ; and while even before the Incarnation
some men were *de facto* pure from sin (*Orat.* iii. 33) by virtue of
the <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p10.13"></span>χάρις τῆς
κλήσεως</span> involved in <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.14"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.15"></span>τὸ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα᾽</span> (see *ib*. 10, *fin*.;
*Orat*. i. 39 is even stronger, cf. iv. 22), they were yet <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p10.16"></span>θνητοί</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p10.17"></span>φθαρτοί</span>; whereas
those in Christ die, no longer <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.18"></span>κατὰ τὴν προτέραν γένεσιν ἐν τῷ ᾽Αδάμ</span>,
but to live again <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.19"></span>λογωθείσης τῆς σαρκός</span> (*Orat.* iii.
33, *fin.,* cf. *de Incar.* 21. 1).

<span id="v.iv.ii-p11"></span>(*d*) The above slight sketch of the
Athanasian doctrine of man’s need of redemption and of the satisfaction
of that need brings to light a system free from much that causes many
modern thinkers to stumble at the current doctrine of the original state
and the religious history of mankind. That mankind did not start upon
their development with a perfect nature, but have fought their way up
from an undeveloped stage through many lower phases of development; that
this development has been infinitely varied and complex, and that sin
and its attendant consequences have a pathological aspect which
practically is as important as the forensic aspect, are commonplaces of
modern thought, resting upon the wider knowledge of our age, and hard to
reconcile with the (to us) traditional theological account of these
things. The Athanasian account of them leaves room for the results of
modern knowledge, or at least does not rudely clash with the instincts
of the modern anthropologist. The recovery of the Athanasian point of
view is *prima facie* again. At what cost is it obtained? Does its
recognition involve us in mere naturalism veiled under religious forms
of speech? That was certainly not the mind of Athanasius, nor does his
system really lend itself to such a result. To begin with, the divine
destiny of man from the first is an essential principle with our writer.
Man was made and is still exclusively destined for knowledge of and
fellowship with his Creator. Secondly the means, and the only means, to
this end is Christ the Incarnate Son of God. In Him the religious <span
id="page_lxxii">p. lxxii</span> <span
id="v.iv.ii-Page_lxxii"></span>history of mankind has its centre, and
from Him it proceeds upon its new course, or rather is enabled once more
to run the course designed for it from the first. How far Athanasius
exhausted the significance of this fact may be a question; that he
placed the fact itself in the centre is his lasting service to Christian
thought.

<span id="v.iv.ii-p12"></span>(*e*) The categories of Athanasius in
dealing with the question before us are primarily physical, i.e., on the
one hand cosmological, on the other pathological. But it is well before
leaving the subject to insist that this was not exclusively the case.
The purpose of the Incarnation was at once to renew us, and to make
known the Father (*de Incarn.* 16); or as he elsewhere puts it (*ib.* 7
*fin.*), <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p12.2"></span>νακτίσαι τὰ ὅλα, ὑπερ πάντων, παθεῖν</span>,
and <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p12.3"></span>περὶ πάντων
πρεσβεῦσυι πρὸς τὸν Πατέρα</span>. The idea of ἀφθαρσία which so often
stands with him for the *summum bonum* <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) imparted to us in Christ, involves a
moral and spiritual restoration of our nature, not merely the physical
supersession of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p13.2"></span>φθόρα</span> by ἀθανασία (*de Incarn*. 47, 51,
52, &c., &c.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_90"></span>[lxxi:91](2040030.htm#fr_90) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p9.11"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p10"></span> The above is strikingly illustrated by
the discussion (pp. 381–383) of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.2"></span>πρωτότοκος πάσης κτίσεως</span> ([Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.ii-p10.3"></span>).
At first sight Ath. appears to contradict himself, explaining <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p10.5"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> as he
does first solely of the Saviour as *Incarnate,* and then of the
*cosmic* and *creative* function of the Word. But closer examination
brings out his view of creation itself (p. 383) as an act of Grace,
demanding not (as the current Eastern theology held, in common with
Arius) the mediation of a subordinate Creator, but an act of absolutely
Divine condescension analogous to, and anticipatory of, the Incarnation.
The apparently disturbing persistence in the argument of the
cosmological explanation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.7"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> is really therefore due to a
subtle change in it, by virtue of which it comes into relation with the
Soteriological idea,—which is the pivot of the entire anti-Arian
position of Athanasius on this question,—and with the ultimate scheme in
which (cf. [Rom. viii](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.ii-p10.9"></span>.) the effects of the Incarnation are to
embrace the whole creation. Because creation as such involves the
promise of adoption, and tends to deification as its goal, the Son is
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.ii-p10.11"></span>πρωτότοκος</span>
in the region of Grace and of Creation alike.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[lxxii:92](2040030.htm#fr_91) <span
id="v.iv.ii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.ii-p13"></span> On the subject of §2, see also Pell.
*Lehre des h. Athan.* and Shedd ii. pp. 37, *sqq.,* 237, *sqq.* The
former demonstrates his full accord with modern Roman Catholic teaching,
the latter, his exact harmony with the modern Protestant view of the
doctrine. It is at least a tribute to the greatness of Athan. that
advocates of all sides are so eager to claim him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fundamental Ideas of God, the World, and Creation.](2040031)
