[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040150)  [Next](2040152) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.liv"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.liv-p1"></span> §54. *The Word Incarnate, as is the
case with the Invisible God, is known to us by His works. By them we
recognise His deifying mission. Let us be content to enumerate a few of
them, leaving their dazzling plentitude to him who will behold.*

<span id="vii.ii.liv-p2"></span>As, then, if a man should wish to see
God, Who is invisible by nature and not seen at all, he may know and
apprehend Him from His works: so let him who fails to see Christ with
his understanding, at least apprehend Him by the works of His body, and
test whether they be human works or God’s works. 2. And if they be
human, let him scoff; but if they are not human, but of God, let him
recognise it, and not laugh at what is no matter for scoffing; but
rather let him marvel that by so ordinary a means things divine have
been manifested to us, and that by death immortality has reached to all,
and that by the Word becoming man, the universal Providence has been
known, and its Giver and Artificer the very Word of God. 3. For He was
made man that we might be made God <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) ; and He manifested Himself by a body
that we might receive the idea of the unseen Father; and He endured the
insolence of men that we might inherit immortality. For while He Himself
was in no way injured, being impossible and incorruptible and very Word
and God, men who were suffering, and for whose sakes He endured all
this, He maintained and preserved in His own impassibility. 4. And, in a
word, the achievements of the Saviour, resulting from His becoming man,
are of such kind and number, that if one should wish to enumerate them,
he may be compared to men who gaze at the expanse of the sea and wish to
count its waves. For as one cannot take in the whole of the waves with
his eyes, for those which are coming on baffle the sense of him <span
id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span id="vii.ii.liv-Page_66"></span>that
attempts it; so for him that would take in all the achievements of
Christ in the body, it is impossible to take in the whole, even by
reckoning them up, as those which go beyond his thought are more than
those he thinks he has taken in. 5. Better is it, then, not to aim at
speaking of the whole, where one cannot do justice even to a part, but,
after mentioning one more, to leave the whole for you to marvel at. For
all alike are marvellous, and wherever a man turns his glance, he may
behold on that side the divinity of the Word, and be struck with
exceeding great awe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_346"></span>[65:347](2040151.htm#fr_346) <span
id="vii.ii.liv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.liv-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.liv-p3.1"></span>θεοποιηθῶμεν</span>. See *Orat.* ii. 70,
note 1, and many other passages in those Discourses, as well as
*Letters* 60. 4, 61. 2. (Eucharistic reference), *de Synodis* 51, note
7. (Compare also Iren. IV. xxxviii. 4, ‘non ab initio dii facti sumus,
sed primo quidem homines, tunc demum dii,’ cf. *ib.* præf. 4. *fin.*
also V. ix. 2, ‘sublevat in vitam Dei.’ Origen *Cels.* iii. 28 *fin.*
touches the same thought, but Ath. is here in closer affinity to the
idea of Irenæus than to that of Origen.) The New Test. reference is [2
Pet. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004)<span
id="vii.ii.liv-p3.3"></span>, rather than [Heb. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#009)<span id="vii.ii.liv-p3.5"></span>
sqq; the Old Test., [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="vii.ii.liv-p3.7"></span>,
which seems to underlie *Orat*. iii. 25 (note 5). In spite of the last
mentioned passage, ‘God’ is far preferable as a rendering, in most
places, to ‘gods,’ which has heathenish associations. To us (<span
id="vii.ii.liv-p3.9"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="vii.ii.liv-p3.11"></span>)
there are no such things as ‘gods.’ (The best summary of patristic
teaching on this subject is given by Harnack *Dg.* ii. p. 46 note.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Summary of foregoing. Cessation of pagan oracles, &c.:
propagation of the faith. The true King has come forth and silenced all
usurpers.](2040152)
