[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040338)  [Next](2040340) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c8"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>Part VI.</span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c40"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p2.1"></span>Persecution and Lapse of Hosius</span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p3"></span>42. But although they had done all this,
yet these impious men thought they had accomplished nothing, so long as
the great Hosius escaped their wicked machinations. And now <span
id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span id="xx.ii.vi-Page_285"></span>they
undertook to extend their fury <span
id="fr_1647"></span>[1648](#fn_1647) to that great old man. They felt no
shame at the thought that he is the father <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648) of the Bishops; they regarded not
that he had been a Confessor <span id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649)
; they reverenced not the length of his Episcopate, in which he had
continued more than sixty years; but they set aside everything, and
looked only to the interests of their heresy, as being of a truth such
as neither fear God, nor regard man <span
id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650) . Accordingly they went to
Constantius, and again employed such arguments as the following: ‘We
have done everything; we have banished the Bishop of the Romans; and
before him a very great number of other Bishops, and have filled every
place with alarm. But these strong measures of yours are as nothing to
us, nor is our success at all more secure, so long as Hosius remains.
While he is in his own place, the rest also continue in their Churches,
for he is able by his arguments and his faith to persuade all men
against us. He is the president of Councils <span
id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651) , and his letters are everywhere
attended to. He it was who put forth the Nicene Confession, and
proclaimed everywhere that the Arians were heretics. If therefore he is
suffered to remain, the banishment of the rest is of no avail, for our
heresy will be destroyed. Begin then to persecute him also and spare him
not, ancient as he is. Our heresy knows not to honour even the hoary
hairs of the aged.’

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p9"></span>43. *Brave resistance of Hosius.*

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p10"></span>Upon hearing this, the Emperor no longer
delayed, but knowing the man, and the dignity of his years, wrote to
summon him. This was when he first <span
id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652) began his attempt upon Liberius.
Upon his arrival he desired him, and urged him with the usual arguments,
with which he thought also to deceive the others, that he would
subscribe against us, and hold communion with the Arians. But the old
man, scarcely bearing to hear the words, and grieved that he had even
ventured to utter such a proposal, severely rebuked him, and after
gaining his consent, withdrew to his own country and Church. But the
heretics still complaining, and instigating him to proceed (he had the
eunuchs also to remind him and to urge him further), the Emperor again
wrote in threatening terms; but still Hosius, while he endured their
insults, was unmoved by any fear of their designs against him, and
remaining firm to his purpose, as one who had built the house of his
faith upon the rock, he spake boldly against the heresy, regarding the
threats held out to him in the letters but as drops of rain and blasts
of wind. And although Constantius wrote frequently, sometimes flattering
him with the title of Father, and sometimes threatening and recounting
the names of those who had been banished, and saying, ‘Will you continue
the only person to oppose the heresy? Be persuaded and subscribe against
Athanasius; for whoever subscribes against him thereby embraces with us
the Arian cause;’ still Hosius remained fearless, and while suffering
these insults, wrote an answer in such terms as these. We have read the
letter, which is placed at the end <span
id="fr_1653"></span>[1654](#fn_1653) .

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p13"></span>44. ‘Hosius to Constantius the Emperor
sends health in the Lord.’

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p14"></span>I was a Confessor at the first, when a
persecution arose in the time of your grandfather Maximian; and if you
shall persecute me, I am ready now, too, to endure anything rather than
to shed innocent blood and to betray the truth. But I cannot approve of
your conduct in writing after this threatening manner. Cease to write
thus; adopt not the cause of Arius, nor listen to those in the East, nor
give credit to Ursacius, Valens and their fellows. For whatever they
assert, it is not on account of Athanasius, but for the sake of their
own heresy. Believe my statement, O Constantius, who am of an age to be
your grandfather. I was present at the Council of Sardica, when you and
your brother Constans of blessed memory assembled us all together; and
on my own account I challenged the enemies of Athanasius, when they came
to the church where I abode <span id="fr_1654"></span>[1655](#fn_1654) ,
that if they had anything against him they might declare it; desiring
them to have confidence, and not to expect otherwise than that a right
judgment would be passed in all things. This I did once and again,
requesting them, if they were unwilling to appear before the whole
Council, yet to appear before me alone; promising them also, that if he
should be proved guilty, he should certainly be rejected by us; but if
he should be found to be blameless, and should prove them to be
calumniators, that if they should then refuse to hold communion with
him, I would persuade him to go with me into the Spains. Athanasius was
willing to comply with these conditions, and made no objection to my
proposal; but they, altogether distrusting their cause, would not
consent. And on another occasion Athanasius came to your Court <span
id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655) , when you wrote for him, and his
enemies being at the time in Antioch, he requested that they might be
summoned either altogether or separately, in order that they might
either con<span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="xx.ii.vi-Page_286"></span>vict him, or be convicted <span
id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656) , and might either in his presence
prove him to be what they represented, or cease to accuse him when
absent. To this proposal also you would not listen, and they equally
rejected it. Why then do you still give ear to them that speak evil of
him? How can you endure Valens and Ursacius, although they have
retracted and made a written confession of their calumnies <span
id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657) ? For it is not true, as they
pretend, that they were forced to confess; there were no soldiers at
hand to influence them; your brother was not cognizant of the
matter <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658) . No, such things were
not done under his government, as are done now; God forbid. But they
voluntarily went up to Rome, and in the presence of the Bishop and
Presbyters wrote their recantation, having previously addressed to
Athanasius a friendly and peaceable letter. And if they pretend that
force was employed towards them, and acknowledge that this is an evil
thing, which you also disapprove of; then do you cease to use force;
write no letters, send no Counts; but release those that have been
banished, lest while you are complaining of violence, they do but
exercise greater violence. When was any such thing done by Constans?
What Bishop suffered banishment? When did he appear as arbiter of an
Ecclesiastical trial? When did any Palatine of his compel men to
subscribe against any one, that Valens and his fellows should be able to
affirm this? Cease these proceedings, I beseech you, and remember that
you are a mortal man. Be afraid of the day of judgment, and keep
yourself pure thereunto. Intrude not yourself into Ecclesiastical
matters, neither give commands unto us concerning them; but learn them
from us. God has put into your hands the kingdom; to us He has entrusted
the affairs of His Church; and as he who would steal the empire from you
would resist the ordinance of God, so likewise fear on your part lest by
taking upon yourself the government of the Church, you become guilty of
a great offence. It is written, “Render unto Cæsar the things that are
Cæsar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s <span
id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659) .” Neither therefore is it
permitted unto us to exercise an earthly rule, nor have you, Sire, any
authority to burn incense <span id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660) .
These things I write unto you out of a concern for your salvation. With
regard to the subject of your letters, this is my determination; I will
not unite myself to the Arians; I anathematize their heresy. Neither
will I subscribe against Athanasius, whom both we and the Church of the
Romans and the whole Council pronounced to be guiltless. And yourself
also, when you understood this, sent for the man, and gave him
permission to return with honour to his country and his Church. What
reason then can there be for so great a change in your conduct? The same
persons who were his enemies before, are so now also; and the things
they now whisper to his prejudice (for they do not declare them openly
in his presence), the same they spoke against him, before you sent for
him; the same they spread abroad concerning him when they come to the
Council. And when I required them to come forward, as I have before
said, they were unable to produce their proofs; had they possessed any,
they would not have fled so disgracefully. Who then persuaded you so
long after to forget your own letters and declarations? Forbear, and be
not influenced by evil men, lest while you act for the mutual advantage
of yourself and them, you render yourself responsible. For here you
comply with their desires, hereafter in the judgment you will have to
answer for doing so alone. These men desire by your means to injure
their enemy, and wish to make you the minister of their wickedness, in
order that through your help they may sow the seeds <span
id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661) of their accursed heresy in the
Church. Now it is not a prudent thing to cast one’s self into manifest
danger for the pleasure of others. Cease then, I beseech you, O
Constantius, and be persuaded by me. These things it becomes me to
write, and you not to despise.’

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p23"></span>45. *Lapse of Hosius, due to cruel
persecution.*

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p24"></span>Such were the sentiments, and such the
letter, of the Abraham-like old man, Hosius, truly so called <span
id="fr_1662"></span>[1663](#fn_1662) . But the Emperor desisted not from
his designs, nor ceased to seek an occasion against him; but continued
to threaten him severely, with a view either to bring him over by force,
or to banish him if he refused to comply. And as the Officers and
Satraps of Babylon <span id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663) , seeking
an occasion against Daniel, found none except in the law of his God; so
likewise these present Satraps of impiety were unable to invent any
charge against the old man (for this true Hosius, and his blameless life
were known to all), except the charge of hatred to their heresy. They
<span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="xx.ii.vi-Page_287"></span>therefore proceeded to accuse him; though
not under the same circumstances as those others accused Daniel to
Darius, for Darius was grieved to hear the charge, but as Jezebel
accused Naboth, and as the Jews applied themselves to Herod. And they
said, ‘He not only will not subscribe against Athanasius, but also on
his account condemns us; and his hatred to the heresy is so great, that
he also writes to others, that they should rather suffer death, than
become traitors to the truth. For, he says, our beloved Athanasius also
is persecuted for the Truth’s sake, and Liberius, Bishop of Rome, and
all the rest, are treacherously assailed.’ When this patron of impiety,
and Emperor of heresy <span id="fr_1664"></span>[1665](#fn_1664) ,
Constantius, heard this, and especially that there were others also in
the Spains of the same mind as Hosius, after he had tempted them also to
subscribe, and was unable to compel them to do so, he sent for Hosius,
and instead of banishing him, detained him a whole year in Sirmium.
Godless, unholy, without natural affection, he feared not God, he
regarded not his father’s affection for Hosius, he reverenced not his
great age, for he was now a hundred years old <span
id="fr_1665"></span>[1666](#fn_1665) ; but all these things this modern
Ahab, this second Belshazzar of our times, disregarded for the sake of
impiety. He used such violence towards the old man, and confined him so
straitly, that at last, broken by suffering, he was brought, though
hardly, to hold communion with Valens, Ursacius, and their fellows,
though he would not subscribe against Athanasius. Yet even thus he
forgot not his duty, for at the approach of death, as it were by his
last testament, he bore witness to the force which had been used towards
him, and anathematized the Arian heresy, and gave strict charge that no
one should receive it.

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p29"></span>46. *Arbitrary expulsion of so many
bishops.*

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p30"></span>Who that witnessed these things, or that
has merely heard of them, will not be greatly amazed, and cry aloud unto
the Lord, saying, ‘Wilt Thou make a full end of Israel <span
id="fr_1666"></span>[1667](#fn_1666) ?’ Who that is acquainted with
these proceedings, will not with good reason cry out and say, ‘A
wonderful and horrible thing is done in the land;’ and, ‘The heavens are
astonished at this, and the earth is even more horribly afraid <span
id="fr_1667"></span>[1668](#fn_1667) .’ The fathers of the people and
the teachers of the faith are taken away, and the impious are brought
into the Churches? Who that saw when Liberius, Bishop of Rome, was
banished, and when the great Hosius, the father <span
id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668) of the Bishops, suffered these
things, or who that saw so many Bishops banished out of Spain and the
other parts, could fail to perceive, however little sense he might
possess, that the charges <span id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669)
against Athanasius also and the rest were false, and altogether mere
calumny? For this reason those others also endured all suffering,
because they saw plainly that the conspiracies laid against these were
founded in falsehood. For what charge was there against Liberius? or
what accusation against the aged Hosius? who bore even a false witness
against Paulinus, and Lucifer, and Dionysius, and Eusebius? or what sin
could be lain to the account of the rest of the banished Bishops, and
Presbyters, and Deacons? None whatever; God forbid. There were no
charges against them on which a plot for their ruin might be formed; nor
was it on the ground of any accusation that they were severally
banished. It was an insurrection of impiety against godliness; it was
zeal for the Arian heresy, and a prelude to the coming of Antichrist,
for whom Constantius is thus preparing the way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1647"></span>[285:1648](2040339.htm#fr_1647) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p4.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p4.2"></span>κτεῖναι τὴν μανίαν</span>

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[285:1649](2040339.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p5"></span> *Ap. Fug.* 5.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[285:1650](2040339.htm#fr_1649) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p6"></span> Under Maximian.

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[285:1651](2040339.htm#fr_1650) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p7"></span> [Luke xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#002)<span id="xx.ii.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[285:1652](2040339.htm#fr_1651) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p8"></span> Of Nicæa and Sardica (*Ap. Fug.* 5).

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[285:1653](2040339.htm#fr_1652) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p11"></span> i.e. two years before his fall.

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[285:1654](2040339.htm#fr_1653) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p12"></span> Transferred by copyists hither.

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[285:1655](2040339.htm#fr_1654) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p15"></span> \[i.e. at Sardica, cf. *Apol. Ar.* 36.\]

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[285:1656](2040339.htm#fr_1655) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p16"></span> Cf. §22.

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[286:1657](2040339.htm#fr_1656) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p17"></span> *Apol. Const.* 5.

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[286:1658](2040339.htm#fr_1657) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p18"></span> *Apol. Ar.* 58.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[286:1659](2040339.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p19"></span> §29.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[286:1660](2040339.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p20"></span> <span id="xx.ii.vi-p20.1"></span>[Matt.
xxii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#021)<span
id="xx.ii.vi-p20.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[286:1661](2040339.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p20.4"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p21"></span> \[The language of Hosius is figurative.
The first mention of incense as a rite in Christian worship is in
ps.-Dionys., about <span class="c10"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p21.2"></span>a.d.</span> 500, cf. D.C.A. p. 830 *sq.*\]

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[286:1662](2040339.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p21.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p22"></span> Vid. *de Decr.* 2, note 6. It is
remarkable, this letter having so much its own character, and being so
unlike Athanasius’s writings in style, that a phrase characteristic of
him should here occur in it. Did Athan. translate it from Latin?

<span id="fn_1662"></span>[286:1663](2040339.htm#fr_1662) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p25.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p25.2"></span>ἀληθῶς ῞Οσιος. κατάσκοποι, οὐ γὰρ
ἐπίσκοποι</span>, supr. §3. infr. §§48, 76 fin. and so <span
class="Greek"><span id="xx.ii.vi-p25.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xx.ii.vi-p25.5"></span>ληθῶς Εὐσέβιε</span>,
Theod. *Hist.* i. 4. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p25.7"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p25.8"></span>Ονήσιμον, τόν ποτέ σοι ἄχρηστον, νυνὶ δὲ
εὔχρηστον</span>, [Philem. 10](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#010)<span
id="xx.ii.vi-p25.10"></span>. *De Syn*. 26, note 6.

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[286:1664](2040339.htm#fr_1663) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p25.11"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p26"></span> [Dan. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#005)<span id="xx.ii.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1664"></span>[287:1665](2040339.htm#fr_1664) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p27"></span> §§9, 30, 54.

<span id="fn_1665"></span>[287:1666](2040339.htm#fr_1665) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xx.ii.vi-p28.1"></span>οὔτε τὸν Θεὸν φοβηβεὶς ὁ ἄθεος, οὔτε τοῦ
πατρὸς τὴν διάθεσιν αἰδεσθεὶς ὁ ἀνόσιος, οὔτε τὸ γῆρας αἰσχυνθεὶς ὁ
ἄστοργος</span>.

<span id="fn_1666"></span>[287:1667](2040339.htm#fr_1666) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p31"></span> [Ez. xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013)<span id="xx.ii.vi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1667"></span>[287:1668](2040339.htm#fr_1667) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p32"></span> <span id="xx.ii.vi-p32.1"></span>[Jer.
v. 30](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#030)<span
id="xx.ii.vi-p32.3"></span>; ii. 12.

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[287:1669](2040339.htm#fr_1668) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p32.4"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p33"></span> Cf. §15.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[287:1670](2040339.htm#fr_1669) <span
id="xx.ii.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii.vi-p34"></span> Vid. in *Apol. contr. Ar.* and *ad
Const.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Persecution at Alexandria.](2040340)
