[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040037)  [Next](2040039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Applications*.

<span id="v.v.iii-p2"></span>(a) *Death of Alexander and Election of
Athanasius*. That the latter took place on June 8, 328, is established
by the agreement of our sources, together with the numbering of the
Festal Letters. Theodoret (*H. E.* i. 26) and others, misled by some
words of Athanasius (*Apol. c. Ar*. 59), handed down to later ages the
statement that Alexander died five months after the Council of Nicæa. It
had long been seen that this must be a mistake (Tillemont, vi. 736,
Montfaucon, *Monit. in Vit. S. Athan*.) and various suggestions <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) were made as to the *terminus a quo* for
the ‘five months’ mentioned by Athanasius; that of Montfaucon remains
the most probable (see ch. ii. §3 (1), p. xxi.). But the field was left
absolutely clear for the precise and concordant statement of our
chroniclers, which, therefore, takes undisputed possession. (Further
details, *supr*. p. xx. *sq*.; Introd. to *Letters*, pp. 495, 303).

<span id="v.v.iii-p4"></span>(b) *The first exile of Athanasius*. The
duration is fixed by the *Hist. Aceph*. (see Introd. p. 495, *sq*.) as
two years, four months, and eleven days, and this exactly coincides with
the dates given by the *Index* for his departure for Tyre, July 11, 335,
and his return from exile Nov. 23, 337 (not 338; for the Diocletian year
began at the end of August). Although, therefore, the *Hist. Aceph*. is
not available for the date, the constructive agreement between it and
the *Index* is complete. But it has been contended that the year of the
return from this exile must still be placed in 338, in spite of the new
evidence to the contrary. The reasons alleged are very weak. (1) The
letter of Constantine II., dated Treveri, June 17, so far from making
against the year 337, clinches the argument in its favour. Constantine
is still only ‘Cæsar’ when he writes it (pp. 146, 272); he was
proclaimed Augustus on Sep. 9, 337 (Montf. *in ann*. 338 tries in vain
to parry this decisive objection to the later date. He appeals to
Maximin in Eus. *H. E*. ix. 10, but overlooks the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.v.iii-p4.1"></span>σεβαστός</span> there. Is
it conceivable that a disappointed eldest son, as sensitive about his
claims as Constantine was, would within so short a time of becoming
‘Augustus’ be content to call himself merely ‘Cæsar’?) The objection as
to the distance of Treveri from Nicomedia has no weight, as we show
elsewhere (p. xli., note 4); Constantine might have heard of his
father’s death a fortnight before the date of this letter. (2) The law
(*Cod. Th*. X. x. 4) dated Viminacium, June 12, 338, if correctly
ascribed to Constantius, would certainly lend plausibility to the view
that it was at that time that Athanasius met Constantius at Viminacium
(p. 240). But the names are so often con<span id="page_lxxxii">p.
lxxxii</span> <span id="v.v.iii-Page_lxxxii"></span>fused in <span
class="c10"><span id="v.v.iii-p4.2"></span>mss.</span>, and the text of
the Theodosian Code requires such frequent correction, that there is no
solid objection to set against the extremely cogent proofs (Gwatkin, p.
138) that the law belongs to Constantine, who in that case cannot have
been at Trier on June 17, 338. As to Constantius, there is no reason
against his having been in Pannonia at some time in the summer of 337.
(3) The statement of Theodoret (*H. E*. ii. 1) that Ath. ‘stayed at
Treveri two years and four months’ seems to reproduce that of the *Hist.
Aceph*. as to the length of the exile, and is only verbally inexact in
applying it to the period actually spent in Trier. (4) The language of
*Letter* 10, the Festal letter for 338, is not absolutely decisive, but
§§3, 11 certainly imply that when it was written, whether at Alexandria
or elsewhere, the durance of Athanasius was at an end. There can, we
submit, be no reasonable doubt that the first exile of Athanasius began
with his departure from Alexandria on July 11, 335, and ended with his
return thither on Nov. 23, 337.

<span id="v.v.iii-p5"></span>(c) *Commencement of the second exile*.
Here again the agreement of our chronicles is constructive only, owing
to the loss of the earlier part of the *Hist. Aceph*.; but it is none
the less certain. The exile ended, as everyone now admits and as both
chronicles tell us, on Paoph. 24 (Oct. 21), 346: it lasted, according to
the *H. A*., seven years, six months, and three days. This carries us
back to Phar. 21 (April 16), 339. Now we learn from the *Index* that he
left the Church of Theonas on the night of Mar. 18<span
id="v.v.iii-p5.1"></span>–19, and from the *Encyclical*, 4, 5, that he
took refuge first in another church, then in some secret place till over
Easter Sunday (Apr. 15). This fits exactly with Apr. 16 as the date of
his flight to Rome. To this there is only one serious objection, viz.,
that Ath. was summoned (p. 239) to Milan by Constantius after the end of
three years from his leaving Alexandria. It has been assumed (without
any proof) that this took place ‘just before’ the council of Sardica. As
a matter of fact, Constans left Athan. in Milan, and (apparently after
his summer campaign) ordered him to follow him to Trier, in order to
travel thence to the Council. Athanasius does not state either how long
he remained at Milan, or when he was ordered to Trier; for a
chronological inference, in opposition to explicit evidence, he
furnishes no basis whatever. I agree with Mr. Gwatkin (whom his Reviewer
quite misunderstands) in placing the Milan interview about May, 342, and
the journey from Trier to Sardica after Easter (probably later still) in
343 (Constans was in Britain in the spring of 343, and had returned to
Trier before June 30, *Cod. Th*. XII. i. 36, see also *supr*. p. xlv.).
A more reasonable objection to the statement of the *Index* is that of
Dr. Bright (p. xv. note 5), who sets against its information that Athan.
fled from ‘Theonas’ four days before Gregory’s arrival, the statement of
the *Encyclical* that he left a certain church *after* Gregory’s
outrages at Eastertide. But clearly Athan. first escaped from the church
of Theonas, afterwards (between Good Friday and Easter) from some other
church (<span class="Greek"><span id="v.v.iii-p5.2"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.v.iii-p5.3"></span>λλη ἐκκλησία</span>), not
named by him (‘Quirinus,’ cf. p. 95, note 1), and finally from the City
itself. (Dr. Bright’s arguments in favour of 340 are vitiated in part by
his placing Easter on April 9, i.e. on a Wednesday, instead of the
proper day, Sunday, Mar. 30<span id="v.v.iii-p5.4"></span>). The date,
April 16, 339, is, therefore, well established as the beginning of the
second exile, and there is no tangible evidence against it. It is,
moreover, supported by the subscription to the letter to Serapion, which
stands in the stead of the Easter letter for 340, and which states that
the letter was written from Rome.

<span id="v.v.iii-p6"></span>(d) *Council of Sardica and death of
Gregory*. The confusion into which the whole chronology of the
surrounding events was thrown by the supposition (which was naturally
taken without question upon the authority of Socrates and Sozomen) that
the Sardican council met in 347, is reflected in the careful digest of
opinions made by Newman (*Arians*, Appendix, or better, Introduction to
*Hist. Treatises of S. Ath*. p. xxvi.; cf. also Hefele, Eng. Tra., vol.
2, p. 188, *sq*., notes), and especially in the difficulties caused by
the necessity of placing the Council of Milan in 345 before Sardica, and
the mission of Euphrates of Cologne to Antioch as late as 348. Now the
*Hist. Aceph*., by giving October, 346, as the date of the return of
Athanasius from his second exile, at once challenged the received date
for Sardica, and J. D. Mansi, the learned editor of the ‘Collectio
Amplissima’ of the Councils, used this fact as the key to unlock the
chronological tangle of the period. He argued that the Council of
Sardica must be put back at least as early as 344; but the natural
conservatism of learning resisted his conclusions until the year 1852,
when the *Festal Letters*, discovered ten years earlier, were made
available for the theological public of Europe. The date 347 was then
finally condemned. Not only did *Letter* 18, written at Easter, 345,
refer to the Council’s decision about Easter, and *Letter* 19 refer to
his restoration as an accomplished fact; the Index most positively dated
the synod in the year 343, which year has now taken its place as the
accepted date, although the month and duration of the assembly are still
open to doubt (*Supr*. p. xlv., note 6). In any case it is certain that
the Easter at which the <span id="page_lxxxiii">p. lxxxiii</span> <span
id="v.v.iii-Page_lxxxiii"></span>deputies from Constans and the Council
reached Antioch was Easter, 344. This brings us to the question of the
date of Gregory’s death. Mr. Gwatkin rightly connects the Council which
deposed Stephen for his behaviour to the Western deputies, and elected
Leontius, with the issue of the ‘Macrostich’ creed ‘three years’ (*de
Syn.* 26) after the Council of the Dedication, i.e., in the summer of
344. This is our only notice of time for the Council in question, and it
is not very precise; but the Council may fairly be placed in the early
summer, which would allow time for the necessary preliminaries after
Easter, and for the meeting of the fathers at reasonable notice.
(Perhaps Stephen was *promptly and informally* deposed (Thdt.) after
Easter, but a regular council would be required to ratify this act and
to elect his successor.) After the Council (we are again not told how
long after) Constantius writes a public letter to Alexandria forbidding
further persecution of the orthodox (277, note 3). This may well have
been in the later summer of 344. Then ‘about ten months later’ (*ib*.)
Gregory dies. This would bring us ‘about’ to the early summer of 345;
and this rough calculation <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) is
curiously confirmed by the precise statement of the *Index* xviii., that
Gregory died on June 26 (345, although the *Index*, in accordance with
its principle of arrangement, which will be explained in the proper
place, puts the notice under the following year). Of course the date of
the letter of Constantius, which Athanasius gives as the *terminus a
quo* of the ‘ten months,’ cannot be fixed except by conjecture, and the
date given by the *Index* is (1) the only precise statement we have, (2)
is likely enough in itself, and (3) agrees perfectly with the datum of
*de Synod* 26. That is to say, as far as our evidence goes it appears to
be correct.

<span id="v.v.iii-p8"></span>(e) *Return of Athanasius in* 346. Here the
precise statements of the *Index* and *Hist*. *Aceph*. agree, and are
confirmed by *Letter* 19, which was written after his return. The date
therefore requires no discussion. But it is important as a signal
example of the high value to be assigned to the *united* witness of our
two chronicles. For this is the pivot date which, in the face of all
previously accepted calculations, has taken its place as unassailably
correct, and has been the centre from which the recovery of the true
chronology of the period has proceeded. The difficulty in dating the
interview with Constantius at Antioch is briefly discussed p. xlvii.
note 10.

<span id="v.v.iii-p9"></span>(f) *Irruption of Syrianus and Intrusion of
George*. The former event is dated without any room for doubt on the
night of Thursday, Feb. 8 (Mechir 13), 356 (see p. 301, also *Index* and
*Hist. Aceph.*). Here again the accuracy of our chronicles *on points
where they agree* comes out strongly. It should be noted that an
ill-informed writer could hardly have avoided a blunder here; for 356
was a leap-year: and in consequence of this (1) all the months from
Thoth to Phamenoth, inclusive, began a day later, owing to the
additional *Epagomenon* before the first day of Thoth: the 13th Mechir
would, therefore, in these years correspond to Feb. 8, not as usual to
Feb. 7. (2) Owing to the Roman calendar inserting its intercalary day at
the end of February, Feb. 8 would fall on the Thursday, not on the
Friday (reckoning back from Easter on Apr. 7: see Tables C, D., pp. 501
sq.). This date, then, may rank as one of the absolutely fixed points of
our chronology. After the above examples of the value of the
*concordant* testimony of the two chronicles, we must demand positive
and circumstantial proof to the contrary before rejecting their united
testimony that George made his entry into Alexandria in the Lent of 357,
not 356. As a matter of fact all the *positive* evidence (supr., p.
lii., note 11) is the other way, and when weighed against it, the
feather-weight of an inference from *a priori* probability, and from the
assumed silence of Athanasius (*Ap. Fug*. 6), kicks the beam.

<span id="v.v.iii-p10"></span>(g) *Athanasius in* 362. The difficulty
here is that Athanasius clearly returned *after* the murder of George,
which, according to Amm. Marc. XXII. xi., took place upon the receipt at
Alexandria of the news of the execution of Artemius at Antioch, which
latter event must be placed in July. Therefore Athanasius would not have
returned till August, 362. On the other hand the *Hist. Aceph*. makes
George *arrested four days after his return* to Alexandria, and
immediately upon the proclamation of the new Emperor, Nov. 30, 361. On
Dec. 24 George is murdered, on Feb. 9 the edict for the return of the
exiles is promulged, and on Feb. 21 Athanasius returns, to take flight
again ‘eight months’ later, on Oct. 24. The difficulty is so admirably
sifted by Mr. Gwatkin (pp. 220, 221) that I refer to his discussion
instead of giving one here. His conclusion is clearly right, viz., that
Ammianus here, as occasionally elsewhere, has missed the right order of
events, and that George was really murdered at the time stated in *Hist.
Aceph*. The only addition to be made to Mr. Gwatkin’s decisive argument
is that <span id="page_lxxxiv">p. lxxxiv</span> <span
id="v.v.iii-Page_lxxxiv"></span>Ammianus is inconsistent with himself,
and in agreement with the *Hist. Aceph*., in dating the arrest of George
*shortly after his return from court*. As George would not have been at
*Julian’s* court, this notice implies that the arrest took place only
shortly after the death of Constantius. Moreover, George, who even under
Constantius was not over-ready to visit his see, and who knew well
enough the state of heathen feeling against him, would not be likely to
return to Alexandria after Julian had been six months on the throne. We
have then not so much to balance Ammianus against the *Hist. Aceph*., as
to balance one of his statements, not otherwise confirmed, against
another which is supported by the *Hist. Aceph*., and by other
authorities as well, especially Epiph. *Hær*. 76. 1. (The *Festal Index*
gives no precise date here, except Oct. 24, for the flight of
Athanasius, which so far as it goes confirms the *Hist. Aceph*.)
Moreover, “on the side of Ammianus there is at worst an oversight;
whereas the *Hist. Aceph*. would need to be re-written.” The murder of
George, Dec. 24, 361, return of Athanasius, Feb. and his flight, Oct.
24, 362, may therefore be taken as firmly-established dates.

<span id="v.v.iii-p11"></span>(h) *Supposed Council at Alexandria in*
363. This Synod assumed by Baronius, Montfaucon (*Vit. in Ann*. 363. 3)
and others, after Theodoret (*H. E*. iv. 2) must be pronounced
fictitious (so already Vales. in Thdt. *l.c*.). (1) The letter of Ammon
(extract printed in this volume, p. 487) tells us on the authority of
Athanasius that when Pammon and Theodore miraculously announced the
death of Julian, they informed Athan. that the new Emperor was to be a
Christian, but that his reign would be short; that Athanasius must go at
once and secretly to the Emperor, whom he would meet on his journey
before the army reached Antioch, that he would be favourably received by
him, and that he would obtain an order for his restoration. Now (apart
from the possibility of a grain of truth in the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.v.iii-p11.1"></span>φήμη</span> of the death
of Julian) all these details bear the unmistakeable character of a
*vaticinium post eventum*, in other words, we have the story as it was
current when Ammon drew up the document in question at the request of
Archbishop Theophilus (see also p. 567, note 1). At that time, then, the
received account was that Athan. hastened secretly to meet Jovian as
soon as he knew of his accession, and that he met him between Antioch
and Nisibis. Now this native Egyptian account is transmitted
independently by two other channels. (2) The *Hist. Aceph*. viii. tells
us that the bishop entered Alexandria secretly ‘adventu eius non
pluribus cognito,’ went by ship to Jovian, and returned with letters
from him. (3) The *Festal Index* tells us that eight months (i.e., Oct.
24–June 26) after the flight of Ath. Julian died. On his death *being
published*, Athan. returned secretly by night to Alexandria. Then on
Sept. 6 he crossed the Euphrates (this seems to be the meaning of
‘embarked at the Eastern Hierapolis,’ the celebrated city, perhaps the
ancient Karkhemish, which commanded the passage of the river, though
some miles from its W. bank) and met the Emperor Jovian, by whom he was
eventually dismissed with honour, returning to Alexandria Feb. 20, 364.
Jovian was at Edessa Sept. 27, at Antioch Oct. 23.

<span id="v.v.iii-p12"></span>The agreement of the three documents is
most striking, and the more so since the chronicles are clearly
independent both of one another and especially of the letter of Ammon,
as is clear from the fact that neither mentions the <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.v.iii-p12.1"></span>φήμη</span>, while the
*Festal Index* implicitly contradicts it. This appears to be a crucial
case in many ways. *Firstly*, the three narratives are all consistent in
excluding the possibility of any such council as is supposed to have
been summoned (see above, p. lx.). Against this there is nothing but the
hasty inference of Thdt. (corrected by Valois, see above, *ib*.); the
valueless testimony of the *Libellus Synodicus* (9th cent.); the
marvellous tale of Sozom. v. 7 (referred to this time by Tillem. viii.
219, but by Soz. to the death of George: probably an amplification of
*Hist. Aceph.* ‘visus est’) that Athanasius suddenly to the delight of
his people was found enthroned in his Church; and the more vague
statement of Socr. (iii. 24) that he regained his church ‘at once after
Julian’s death.’ As the three fifth-century writers are implicitly
contradicted by three writers of Alexandria at the end of the previous
century, the latter must be believed against the former. *Secondly*, the
*Index*, the later as it appears, of the two chronicles, would seem to
represent a form of the story less marvellous and therefore earlier than
that of the *Narratio*. Now the latter certainly belongs to the
Episcopate of Theophilus. The *Index* therefore can scarcely be placed
later, and the *Hist. Aceph*. would fall, as Sievers, *Einl*. 2, had
independently placed it at the *beginning* of the Episcopate of
Theophilus. *Thirdly*, we have here an excellent example not only of the
value of the *combined* evidence of the two chronicles, but also of
their character as representing in many important respects the
Alexandrian tradition of the last third of the fourth century. Before
leaving this question it will be well to consider the dates a little
more closely. Hierapolis was counted eight days’ journey from Antioch.
From Alexandria to Antioch by sea was about 500 miles, i.e. with a fair
wind scarcely more than four days’ sail (it might be less, cf. Conybeare
and Howson, *St. Paul*, vol. 2, p. 376, *sq*. ed. 1877). This <span
id="page_lxxxv">p. lxxxv</span> <span
id="v.v.iii-Page_lxxxv"></span>allows about twelve days for Athan. to
reach the Euphrates from Alexandria, remembering that southerly winds
prevail in the Eastern Mediterranean at this season (Sievers, *Einl*.
28). Now Athan. reached Hierapolis on Sept. 6 (Thoth 8, Egyptian
leap-year). But according to the *Index*, he reached Alex. after
Julian’s death was published, and this according to *Hist. Aceph*. was
on Mesori 26, i.e. Aug. 19. From that day to Sept. 6 are eighteen days,
leaving about a week’s margin for Ath. to hear the news, reach
Alexandria, and perhaps for delay in finding a vessel, &c. But a far
wider margin is really available, for the official announcement must
have been preceded by many rumours, and was probably not despatched till
more than a fortnight after Julian’s death (as is observed by Mr.
Gwatkin, p. 221). If we remember that Athanasius, according to the
Letter of Ammon, was making all possible haste (*supra*, §9) we shall
again realise the subtle cohesion of these three sources, and the
impossibility of the ‘large Synod’ imagined by some historians for the
year 363.

<span id="v.v.iii-p13"></span>(k) *Exile under Valens*. The date of this
is discussed by Tillem. (*note* 96) and Montf. *Vit*. who, on the
unstable basis of a computation of Theophanes (about 800 <span
class="c10"><span id="v.v.iii-p13.1"></span>a.d.</span>) and of the
vague and loose sequences of events in Socr. and Sozom., tentatively
refer the exile to the year 367. The only show of solid support for this
date was that Tatianus (of later and unfortunate celebrity), whom the
Photian Life and that by the Metaphrast connected with the expulsion,
was known from *Cod. Theod*. to have been Prefect of Egypt in 367. But
this airy fabric now gives place to the precise and accurate data of the
Theophilan chronicles. Both *Index* and *Hist. Aceph*. place the
occurrence not under Tatian but under Flavian, governor of Egypt
364–366. Both fix the year 365. The *Hist. Aceph*. (used by Soz. vi. 12,
who however makes no use of the dates) gives May 5, 365, for the
Imperial order against bishops restored by Julian, June 8 for the
reference to the Emperor (*supra*, ch. ii. §9), Oct. 5 for the retreat
of Athan. and search for him by Flavian and *Duke Victorinus*, Feb. 1
for the return of Athanasius. This detailed chronology is corroborated
in two ways; first by a letter of Libanius (*Ep*. 569) to Flavian,
thanking him for a present of \[Egyptian\] doves, and congratulating him
on his ‘victory’ (a play on the name *Victorinus* is added), but with a
satirical hint that if only Victorinus had any prisoners to shew for his
pains (a clear allusion to the escape of Ath.) he (Libanius) would think
him a finer fellow even than Cleon (Siev. *Einl*. 31). Secondly, the
restoration of Ath. by Valens becomes historically intelligible, in view
of the danger from Procopius, as pointed out *supr*. p. lxi., *fin*. We
cannot then doubt that the chronicles are here once more the channels of
the genuine chronological tradition.

<span id="v.v.iii-p14"></span>(1) *Death of Athanasius*. It is
superfluous to discuss this date at the present day, but it may be worth
while to point out for the last time how admirably the combined
testimony of our chronicles confirms the judgment of the best critics
(Montfaucon, Tillemont, &c.) antecedent to their discovery, and how
clearly the secondary value to be assigned to the chronological
statements of Socrates and Sozomen once more comes out (Socr. iv. 21
puts the date at 371, and was followed by Papebroke, Petavius and others
(fuller details and discussion of the question on its ancient footing in
Newman’s preface to *Hist. Tracts of St. Athan*., pp. xx., *sqq*.). But
no one any longer questions the date of May 2–3, 373. The fact that the
*Hist. Aceph*. gives May 3 and the *Index* May 2 (the date observed in
the later calendars) vouches for the independence of the two documents
and for the very early date of the former: probably, as Sievers and
others suggest, the true date is the night between May 2 and May 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[lxxxi:98](2040038.htm#fr_97) <span
id="v.v.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p3"></span> E.g. that he died five months after *his
return home* from the council (Tillem.), or after the *reconciliation of
Meletius* (Montf.). As neither event is dated, both hypotheses render
the ‘five months’ useless for chronology.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[lxxxiii:99](2040038.htm#fr_98) <span
id="v.v.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.v.iii-p7"></span> The above *resumé* of the details of the
evidence makes it clear that Mr. Gwatkin’s alleged oversights are in
reality those of his critic. The proposal of the latter to correct
‘Epiph.’ in *Fest. Ind.* to ‘Pharmuthi’ is especially gratuitous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table I](2040039)
