[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040377)  [Next](2040379) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX</span>.—<span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p1.2"></span>Objections continued,
as in Chapters vii.—x.</span> *Whether the Son is begotten of the
Father’s will? This virtually the same as whether once He was not? and
used by the Arians to introduce the latter question. The Regula Fidei
answers it at once in the negative by contrary texts. The Arians follow
the Valentinians in maintaining a precedent will; which really is only
exercised by God towards creatures. Instances from Scripture.
Inconsistency of Asterius. If the Son by will, there must be another
Word before Him. If God is good, or exist, by His will, then is the Son
by His will. If He willed to have reason or wisdom, then is His Word and
Wisdom at His will. The Son is the Living Will, and has all titles which
denote connaturality. That will which the Father has to the Son, the Son
has to the Father. The Father wills the Son and the Son wills the
Father.*

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p2"></span>58. (*continued*). But <span
id="fr_3202"></span>[3203](#fn_3202) , as it seems, a heretic is a
wicked thing in truth, and in every respect his heart is depraved <span
id="fr_3203"></span>[3204](#fn_3203) and irreligious. For behold, though
convicted on all points, and shewn to be utterly bereft of
understanding, they feel no shame; but as the hydra of Gentile fable,
when its former serpents were destroyed, gave birth to fresh ones,
contending against the slayer of the old by the production of new, so
also they, hostile <span id="fr_3204"></span>[3205](#fn_3204) and
hateful to God <span id="fr_3205"></span>[3206](#fn_3205) , as
hydras <span id="fr_3206"></span>[3207](#fn_3206) , losing their life in
the objections which they advance, invent for themselves other questions
Judaic and foolish, and new expedients, as if Truth were their enemy,
thereby to shew the rather that they are Christ’s opponents in all
things.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p8"></span>59. After so many proofs against
them, at which even the devil who is their father <span
id="fr_3207"></span>[3208](#fn_3207) had himself been abashed and gone
back, again as from their perverse heart they mutter forth other
expedients, sometimes in whispers, sometimes with the drone <span
id="fr_3208"></span>[3209](#fn_3208) of gnats; ‘Be it so,’ say they;
‘interpret these places thus, and gain the victory in reasonings and
proofs; still you must say that the Son has received being from the
Father at His will and pleasure;’ for thus they deceive many, putting
forward the will and the pleasure of God. Now if any of those who
believe aright <span id="fr_3209"></span>[3210](#fn_3209) were to say
this in <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-Page_426"></span>simplicity, there would be no cause
to be suspicious of the expression, the right intention <span
id="fr_3210"></span>[3211](#fn_3210) prevailing over that somewhat
simple use of words <span id="fr_3211"></span>[3212](#fn_3211) . But
since the phrase is from the heretics <span
id="fr_3212"></span>[3213](#fn_3212) and the words of heretics are
suspicious, and, as it is written, ‘The wicked are deceitful,’ and ‘The
words of the wicked are deceit <span
id="fr_3213"></span>[3214](#fn_3213) ,’ even though they but make
signs <span id="fr_3214"></span>[3215](#fn_3214) , for their heart is
depraved, come let us examine this phrase also, lest, though convicted
on all sides, still, as hydras, they invent a fresh word, and by such
clever language and specious evasion, they sow again that irreligion of
theirs in another way. For he who says, ‘The Son came to be at the
Divine will,’ has the same meaning as another who says, ‘Once He was
not,’ and ‘The Son came to be out of nothing,’ and ‘He is a creature.’
But since they are now ashamed of these phrases, these crafty ones have
endeavoured to convey their meaning in another way, putting forth the
word ‘will,’ as cuttlefish their blackness, thereby to blind the
simple <span id="fr_3215"></span>[3216](#fn_3215) , and to keep in mind
their peculiar heresy. For whence <span
id="fr_3216"></span>[3217](#fn_3216) bring they ‘by will and pleasure?’
or from what Scripture? let them say, who are so suspicious in their
words and so inventive of irreligion. For the Father who revealed from
heaven His own Word, declared, ‘This is My beloved Son;’ and by David He
said, ‘My heart uttered a good Word;’ and John He bade say, ‘In the
beginning was the Word;’ and David says in the Psalm, ‘With Thee is the
well of life, and in Thy light shall we see light;’ and the Apostle
writes, ‘Who being the Radiance of Glory,’ and again, ‘Who being in the
form of God,’ and, ‘Who is the Image of the invisible God <span
id="fr_3217"></span>[3218](#fn_3217) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p20"></span>60. All everywhere tell us of the
being of the Word, but none of His being ‘by will,’ nor at all of His
making; but they, where, I ask, did they find will or pleasure
‘precedent <span id="fr_3218"></span>[3219](#fn_3218) ’ to the Word of
God, unless forsooth, leaving the Scriptures, they simulate the
perverseness of Valentinus? For Ptolemy the Valentinian said that the
Unoriginate had a pair of attributes, Thought and Will, and first He
thought and then He willed; and what He thought, He could not put
forth <span id="fr_3219"></span>[3220](#fn_3219) , unless when the power
of the Will was added. Thence the Arians taking a lesson, wish will and
pleasure to precede the Word. For them then, let them rival the doctrine
of Valentinus; but we, when we read the divine discourses, found ‘He
was’ applied to the Son, but of Him only did we hear as being in the
Father and the Father’s Image; while in the case of things originate
only, since also by nature these things once were not, but afterwards
came to be <span id="fr_3220"></span>[3221](#fn_3220) , did we recognise
a precedent will and pleasure, David saying in the hundred and
thirteenth Psalm, ‘As for our God He is in heaven, He hath done
whatsoever pleased Him,’ and in the hundred and tenth, ‘The works of the
Lord are great, sought out unto all His good pleasure;’ and again, in
the hundred and thirty-fourth, ‘Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did He
in heaven, and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places <span
id="fr_3221"></span>[3222](#fn_3221) .’ If then He be work and thing
made, and one among others, let Him, as others, be said ‘by will’ to
have come to be, and Scripture shews that these are thus brought into
being. And Asterius, the advocate <span
id="fr_3222"></span>[3223](#fn_3222) for the heresy, acquiesces, when he
thus writes, ‘For if it be unworthy of <span id="page_427">p. 427</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-Page_427"></span>the Framer of all, to make at
pleasure, let His being pleased be removed equally in the case of all,
that His Majesty be preserved unimpaired. Or if it be befitting God to
will, then let this better way obtain in the case of the first
Offspring. For it is not possible that it should be fitting for one and
the same God to make things at His pleasure, and not at His will also.’
In spite of the Sophist having introduced abundant irreligion in his
words, namely, that the Offspring and the thing made are the same, and
that the Son is one offspring out of all offsprings that are, He ends
with the conclusion that it is fitting to say that the works are by will
and pleasure.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p26"></span>61. Therefore if He be other than
all things, as has been above shewn <span
id="fr_3223"></span>[3224](#fn_3223) , and through Him the works rather
came to be, let not ‘by will’ be applied to Him, or He has similarly
come to be as the things consist which through Him come to be. For Paul,
whereas he was not before, became afterwards an Apostle ‘by the will of
God <span id="fr_3224"></span>[3225](#fn_3224) ;’ and our own calling,
as itself once not being, but now taking place afterwards, is preceded
by will, and, as Paul himself says again, has been made ‘according to
the good pleasure of His will <span id="fr_3225"></span>[3226](#fn_3225)
.’ And what Moses relates, ‘Let there be light,’ and ‘Let the earth
appear,’ and ‘Let Us make man,’ is, I think, according to what has gone
before <span id="fr_3226"></span>[3227](#fn_3226) , significant of the
will of the Agent. For things which once were not but happened
afterwards from external causes, these the Framer counsels to make; but
His own Word begotten from Him by nature, concerning Him He did not
counsel beforehand; for in Him the Father makes, in Him frames, other
things whatever He counsels; as also James the Apostle teaches, saying,
‘Of His own will begat He us with the Word of truth <span
id="fr_3227"></span>[3228](#fn_3227) .’ Therefore the Will of God
concerning all things, whether they be begotten again or are brought
into being at the first, is in His Word, in whom He both makes and
begets again what seems right to Him; as the Apostle <span
id="fr_3228"></span>[3229](#fn_3228) again signifies, writing to
Thessalonica; ‘for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning
you.’ But if, in whom He makes, in Him also is the will, and in Christ
is the pleasure of the Father, how can He, as others, come into being by
will and pleasure? For if He too came to be as you maintain, by will, it
follows that the will concerning Him consists in some other Word,
through whom He in turn comes to be; for it has been shewn that God’s
will is not in the things which He brings into being, but in Him through
whom and in whom all things made are brought to be. Next, since it is
all one to say ‘By will’ and Once He was not,’ let them make up their
minds to say, ‘Once He was not,’ that, perceiving with shame that times
are signified by the latter, they may understand that to say ‘by will’
is to place times before the Son; for counselling goes before things
which once were not, as in the case of all creatures. But if the Word is
the Framer of the creatures, and He coexists with the Father, how can to
counsel precede the Everlasting as if He were not? for if counsel
precedes, how through Him are all things? For rather He too, as one
among others is by will begotten to be a Son, as we too were made sons
by the Word of Truth; and it rests, as was said, to seek another Word,
through whom He too has come to be, and was begotten together with all
things, which were according to God’s pleasure.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p33"></span>62. If then there is another Word
of God, then be the Son originated by a word; but if there be not, as is
the case, but all things by Him have come to be, which the Father has
willed, does not this expose the many-headed <span
id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229) craftiness of these men? that
feeling shame at saying ‘work,’ and ‘creature,’ and ‘God’s Word was not
before His generation,’ yet in another way they assert that He is a
creature, putting forward ‘will,’ and saying, ‘Unless He has by will
come to be, therefore God had a Son by necessity and against His good
pleasure.’ And who is it then who imposes necessity on Him, O men most
wicked, who draw everything to the purpose of your heresy? for what is
contrary to will they see; but what is greater and transcends it has
escaped their perception. For as what is beside purpose is contrary to
will, so what is according to nature transcends and precedes
counselling <span id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230) . A man by
counsel builds a house, but by nature he begets a son; and what is in
building began to come into being at will, and is external to the maker;
but the son is proper offspring of the father’s essence, and is not
external to him; wherefore neither does he counsel concerning him, lest
he appear to counsel about himself. As far then as the Son transcends
the creature, by so much does what is by nature transcend the will <span
id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231) . And they, on hearing of Him,
ought <span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-Page_428"></span>not to measure by will what is by
nature; forgetting however that they are hearing about God’s Son, they
dare to apply human contrarieties in the instance of God, ‘necessity’
and ‘beside purpose,’ to be able thereby to deny that there is a true
Son of God. For let them tell us themselves,—that God is good and
merciful, does this attach to Him by will or not? if by will, we must
consider that He began to be good, and that His not being good is
possible; for to counsel and choose implies an inclination two ways, and
is incidental to a rational nature. But if it be too unseemly that He
should be called good and merciful upon will, then what they have said
themselves must be retorted on them,—‘therefore by necessity and not at
His pleasure He is good;’ and, ‘who is it that imposes this necessity on
Him?’ But if it be unseemly to speak of necessity in the case of God,
and therefore it is by nature that He is good, much more is He, and more
truly, Father of the Son by nature and not by will.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p37"></span>63. Moreover let them answer us
this:—(for against their shamelessness I wish to urge a further
question, bold indeed, but with a religious intent; be propitious, O
Lord <span id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232) !)—the Father Himself,
does He exist, first having counselled, then being pleased, or before
counselling? For since they are so bold in the instance of the Word,
they must receive the like answer, that they may know that this their
presumption reaches even to the Father Himself. If then they shall
themselves take counsel about will, and say that even He is from will,
what then was He before He counselled, or what gained He, as ye
consider, after counselling? But if such a question be unseemly and
self-destructive, and shocking even to ask (for it is enough only to
hear God’s Name for us to know and understand that He is He that Is),
will it not also be against reason to have parallel thoughts concerning
the Word of God, and to make pretences of will and pleasure? for it is
enough in like manner only to hear the Name of the Word, to know and
understand that He who is God not by will, has not by will but by nature
His own Word. And does it not surpass all conceivable madness, to
entertain the thought only, that God Himself counsels and considers and
chooses and proceeds to have a good pleasure, that He be not without
Word and without Wisdom, but have both? for He seems to be considering
about Himself, who counsels about what is proper to His Essence. There
being then much blasphemy in such a thought, it will be religious to say
that things originate have come to be ‘by favour and will,’ but the Son
is not a work of will, nor has come after <span
id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233) , as the creation, but is by nature
the own Offspring of God’s Essence. For being the own Word of the
Father, He allows us not to account <span
id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234) of will as before Himself, since He
is Himself the Father’s Living Counsel <span
id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235) , and Power, and Framer of the
things which seemed good to the Father. And this is what He says of
Himself in the Proverbs; ‘Counsel is mine and security, mine is
understanding, and mine strength <span
id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236) .’ For as, although Himself the
‘Understanding,’ in which He prepared the heavens, and Himself ‘Strength
and Power’ (for Christ is ‘God’s Power and God’s Wisdom’ <span
id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237) ), He here has altered the terms
and said, ‘Mine is understanding’ and ‘Mine strength,’ so while He says,
‘Mine is counsel,’ He must Himself be the Living <span
id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238) Counsel of the Father; as we have
learned from the Prophet also, that He becomes ‘the Angel of great
Counsel <span id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239) ,’ and was called the
good pleasure of the Father; for thus we must refute them, using human
illustrations <span id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240) concerning God.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p47"></span>64. Therefore if the works subsist
‘by will and favour,’ and the whole creature is made ‘at God’s good
pleasure,’ and Paul was called to be an Apostle ‘by the will of God,’
and our calling has come about ‘by His good pleasure and will,’ and all
things have come into being through the Word, He is external to the
things which have come to be by will, but rather is Himself the Living
<span id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-Page_429"></span>Counsel of the Father, by which all
these things have come to be; by which David also gives thanks in the
seventy-second Psalm. ‘Thou hast holden me by my right hand; Thou shalt
guide me with Thy Counsel <span id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241) .’
How then can the Word, being the Counsel and Good Pleasure of the
Father, come into being Himself ‘by good pleasure and will,’ like every
one else? unless, as I said before, in their madness they repeat that He
has come into being through Himself, or through some other <span
id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242) . Who then is it through whom He
has come to be? let them fashion another Word; and let them name another
Christ, rivalling the doctrine of Valentinus <span
id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243) ; for Scripture it is not. And
though they fashion another, yet assuredly he too comes into being
through some one; and so, while we are thus reckoning up and
investigating the succession of them, the many-headed <span
id="fr_3244"></span>[3245](#fn_3244) heresy of the Atheists <span
id="fr_3245"></span>[3246](#fn_3245) is discovered to issue in
polytheism <span id="fr_3246"></span>[3247](#fn_3246) and madness
unlimited; in the which, wishing the Son to be a creature and from
nothing, they imply the same thing in other words by pretending the
words will and pleasure, which rightly belong to things originate and
creatures. Is it not irreligious then to impute the characteristics of
things originate to the Framer of all? and is it not blasphemous to say
that will was in the Father before the Word? for if will precedes in the
Father, the Son’s words are not true, ‘I in the Father;’ or even if He
is in the Father, yet He will hold but a second place, and it became Him
not to say ‘I in the Father,’ since will was before Him, in which all
things were brought into being and He Himself subsisted, as you hold.
For though He excel in glory, He is not the less one of the things which
by will come into being. And, as we have said before, if it be so, how
is He Lord and they servants <span id="fr_3247"></span>[3248](#fn_3247)
? but He is Lord of all, because He is one with the Father’s Lordship;
and the creation is all in bondage, since it is external to the Oneness
of the Father, and, whereas it once was not, was brought to be.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p55"></span>65. Moreover, if they say that the
Son is by will, they should say also that He came to be by
understanding; for I consider understanding and will to be the same. For
what a man counsels, about that also he has understanding; and what he
has in understanding, that also he counsels. Certainly the Saviour
Himself has made them correspond, as being cognate, when He says,
‘Counsel is mine and security; mine is understanding, and mine
strength <span id="fr_3248"></span>[3249](#fn_3248) .’ For as strength
and security are the same (for they mean one attribute), so we may say
that Understanding and Counsel are the same, which is the Lord. But
these irreligious men are unwilling that the Son should be Word and
Living Counsel; but they fable that there is with God <span
id="fr_3249"></span>[3250](#fn_3249) , as if a habit <span
id="fr_3250"></span>[3251](#fn_3250) , coming and going <span
id="fr_3251"></span>[3252](#fn_3251) , after the manner of men,
understanding, counsel, wisdom; and they leave nothing undone, and they
put forward the ‘Thought’ and ‘Will’ of Valentinus, so that they may but
separate the Son from the Father, and may call Him a creature instead of
the proper Word of the Father. To them then must be said what was said
to Simon Magus; ‘the irreligion of Valentinus perish with you <span
id="fr_3252"></span>[3253](#fn_3252) ;’ and let every one rather trust
to Solomon, who says, that the Word is Wisdom and Understanding. For he
says, ‘The Lord by Wisdom founded the earth, by Understanding He
established the heavens.’ And as here by Understanding, so in the
Psalms, ‘By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made.’ And as by the
Word the heavens, so ‘He hath done whatsoever pleased Him.’ And as the
Apostle writes to Thessalonians, ‘the will of God is in Christ
Jesus <span id="fr_3253"></span>[3254](#fn_3253) .’ The Son of God then,
He is the ‘Word’ and the ‘Wisdom;’ He the ‘Understanding’ and the Living
‘Counsel;’ and in Him is the ‘Good Pleasure of the Father;’ He is
‘Truth’ and ‘Light’ and ‘Power’ of the Father. But if the Will of God is
Wisdom and Understanding, and the Son is Wisdom, he who says that the
Son is ‘by will,’ says virtually that Wisdom has come into being in
wisdom, and the Son is made in a son, and the Word created through the
Word <span id="fr_3254"></span>[3255](#fn_3254) ; which is incompatible
with God and is opposed to His Scriptures. For the Apostle proclaims the
Son to be the own Radiance and Expression, not of the Father’s
will <span id="fr_3255"></span>[3256](#fn_3255) , but of His
Essence <span id="fr_3256"></span>[3257](#fn_3256) Itself, saying, ‘Who
being the Radiance of His glory and the Expression of His <span
id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-Page_430"></span>Subsistence <span
id="fr_3257"></span>[3258](#fn_3257) .’ But if, as we have said before,
the Father’s Essence and Subsistence be not from will, neither, as is
very plain, is what is proper to the Father’s Subsistence from will; for
such as, and so as, that Blessed Subsistence, must also be the proper
Offspring from It. And accordingly the Father Himself said not, ‘This is
the Son originated at My will,’ nor ‘the Son whom I have by My favour,’
but simply ‘My Son,’ and more than that, ‘in whom I am well pleased;’
meaning by this, This is the Son by nature; and ‘in Him is lodged My
will about what pleases Me.’

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p66"></span>66. Since then the Son is by nature
and not by will, is He without the pleasure of the Father and not with
the Father’s will? No, verily; but the Son is with the pleasure of the
Father, and, as He says Himself, ‘The Father loveth the Son, and sheweth
Him all things <span id="fr_3258"></span>[3259](#fn_3258) .’ For as not
‘from will’ did He begin to be good, nor yet is good without will and
pleasure (for what He is, that also is His pleasure), so also that the
Son should be, though it came not ‘from will,’ yet it is not without His
pleasure or against His purpose. For as His own Subsistence is by His
pleasure, so also the Son, being proper to His Essence, is not without
His pleasure. Be then the Son the object of the Father’s pleasure and
love; and thus let every one religiously account of <span
id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259) the pleasure and the
not-unwillingness of God. For by that good pleasure wherewith the Son is
the object of the Father’s pleasure, is the Father the object of the
Son’s love, pleasure, and honour; and one is the good pleasure which is
from Father in Son, so that here too we may contemplate the Son in the
Father and the Father in the Son. Let no one then, with Valentinus,
introduce a precedent will; nor let any one, by this pretence of
‘counsel,’ intrude between the Only Father and the Only Word; for it
were madness to place will and consideration between them. For it is one
thing to say, ‘Of will He came to be,’ and another, that the Father has
love and good pleasure towards His Son who is His own by nature. For to
say, ‘Of will He came to be,’ in the first place implies that once He
was not; and next it implies an inclination two ways, as has been said,
so that one might suppose that the Father could even not will the Son.
But to say of the Son, ‘He might not have been,’ is an irreligious
presumption reaching even to the Essence of the Father, as if what is
His own might not have been. For it is the same as saying, ‘The Father
might not have been good.’ And as the Father is always good by nature,
so He is always generative <span id="fr_3260"></span>[3261](#fn_3260) by
nature; and to say, ‘The Father’s good pleasure is the Son,’ and ‘The
Word’s good pleasure is the Father,’ implies, not a precedent will, but
genuineness of nature, and propriety and likeness of Essence. For as in
the case of the radiance and light one might say, that there is no will
preceding radiance in the light, but it is its natural offspring, at the
pleasure of the light which begat it, not by will and consideration, but
in nature and truth, so also in the instance of the Father and the Son,
one might rightly say, that the Father has love and good pleasure
towards the Son, and the Son has love and good pleasure towards the
Father.

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p70"></span>67. Therefore call not the Son a
work of good pleasure; nor bring in the doctrine of Valentinus into the
Church; but be He the Living Counsel, and Offspring in truth and nature,
as the Radiance from the Light. For thus has the Father spoken, ‘My
heart uttered a good Word;’ and the Son conformably, ‘I in the Father
and the Father in Me <span id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261) .’ But
if the Word be in the heart, where is will? and if the Son in the
Father, where is good pleasure? and if He be Will Himself, how is
counsel in Will? it is unseemly; lest the Word come into being in a
word, and the Son in a son, and Wisdom in a wisdom, as has been
repeatedly <span id="fr_3262"></span>[3263](#fn_3262) said. For the Son
is the Father’s All; and nothing was in the Father before the Word; but
in the Word is will also, and through Him the objects of will are
carried into effect, as holy Scriptures have shewn. And I could wish
that the irreligious men, having fallen into such want of reason <span
id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263) as to be considering about will,
would now ask their childbearing women no more, whom they used to ask,
‘Hadst thou a son before conceiving him <span
id="fr_3264"></span>[3265](#fn_3264) ?’ but the father, ‘Do ye become
fathers by counsel, or by the natural law of your will?’ or ‘Are your
children like your nature and essence <span
id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265) ?’ that, even from fathers they may
learn shame, from whom they assumed this proposition <span
id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266) about birth, and from whom they
hoped to gain knowledge in point. For they will reply to them, ‘What we
beget, is like, not our good pleasure <span
id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267) , but like ourselves; nor become we
parents by previous counsel, but to beget is proper to our nature; since
we too are images of our fathers.’ Either <span id="page_431">p.
431</span> <span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-Page_431"></span>then let them
condemn themselves <span id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) , and
cease asking women about the Son of God, or let them learn from them,
that the Son is begotten not by will, but in nature and truth. Becoming
and suitable to them is a refutation from human instances <span
id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) , since the perverse-minded men
dispute in a human way concerning the Godhead. Why then are Christ’s
enemies still mad? for this, as well as their other pretences, is shewn
and proved to be mere fantasy and fable; and on this account, they
ought, however late, contemplating the precipice of folly down which
they have fallen, to rise again from the depth and to flee the snare of
the devil, as we admonish them. For Truth is loving unto men and cries
continually, ‘If because of My clothing of the body ye believe Me not,
yet believe the works, that ye may know that “I am in the Father and the
Father in Me,” and “I and the Father are one,” and “He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father <span id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270) .”’ But
the Lord according to His wont is loving to man, and would fain ‘help
them that are fallen,’ as the praise of David <span
id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271) says; but the irreligious men, not
desirous to hear the Lord’s voice, nor bearing to see Him acknowledged
by all as God and God’s Son, go about, miserable men, as beetles,
seeking with their father the devil pretexts for irreligion. What
pretexts then, and whence will they be able next to find? unless they
borrow blasphemies of Jews and Caiaphas, and take atheism from Gentiles?
for the divine Scriptures are closed to them, and from every part of
them they are refuted as insensate and Christ’s enemies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3202"></span>[425:3203](2040378.htm#fr_3202) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p3"></span> This chapter is in a very different
style from the foregoing portions of this Book, and much more resembles
the former two; not only in its subject and the mode of treating it, but
in the words introduced, e.g. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p3.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p3.3"></span>πισπείρουσι, ἐπινοοῦσι, γογγύζουσι, καθ᾽
ὑμᾶς, ἄτοπον, λεξείδιον, εἷς τῶν πάντων</span>, &c. And the references
are to the former Orations.

<span id="fn_3203"></span>[425:3204](2040378.htm#fr_3203) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p4"></span> See 50, n. 10; *Serap.* i. 18.

<span id="fn_3204"></span>[425:3205](2040378.htm#fr_3204) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>θεομάχοι</span>, *de Decr.* 3, n. 1;
*Or.* ii. 32, n. 4. Vid. Dissert. by Bucher on the word in [Acts v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#039)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p5.3"></span>. *ap. Thesaur. Theol. Phil. N. T.* t.
2.

<span id="fn_3205"></span>[425:3206](2040378.htm#fr_3205) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p6.1"></span>θεοστυγεῖς</span>, §40.

<span id="fn_3206"></span>[425:3207](2040378.htm#fr_3206) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p7"></span> §64, note.

<span id="fn_3207"></span>[425:3208](2040378.htm#fr_3207) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p9"></span> *Or.* ii. 73, n. 7.

<span id="fn_3208"></span>[425:3209](2040378.htm#fr_3208) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>περιβομβοῦσι</span>. *De Decr.* 14, n.
1; also *de Fug.* 2, 6. Naz. *Orat.* 27, 2. c.

<span id="fn_3209"></span>[425:3210](2040378.htm#fr_3209) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11"></span> S. Ignatius speaks of our Lord as
‘Son of God according to the will (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.2"></span>θέλημα</span>) and power of God.’ *ad
Smyrn.* 1. S. Justin as ‘God and Son according to His will, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.4"></span>βουλήν</span>.’
*Tryph.* 127, and ‘begotten from the Father at His will, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.6"></span>θελήσει</span>.’
ibid. 61. and he says, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.7"></span>δυνάμει καὶ βουλῇ αὐτοῦ</span>. ibid.
128. S. Clement ‘issuing from the Father’s will itself quicker than
light.’ *Gent.* 10 fin. S. Hippolytus, ‘Whom God the Father, willing,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.9"></span>βουληθείς</span>, begat as He willed,
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.11"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.12"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.13"></span>ἠθέλησεν</span>. *contr.* Noet. 16.
Origen, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.15"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.16"></span>κ θελήματος</span>. ap. Justin. *ad.
Menn.* vid. also cum filius charitatis etiam voluntatis. *Periarch.* iv.
28.

<span id="fn_3210"></span>[426:3211](2040378.htm#fr_3210) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p11.18"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>διανοίας</span> interpretation, §26, n.
9.

<span id="fn_3211"></span>[426:3212](2040378.htm#fr_3211) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p13"></span> Cf. *Ep. Æg.* 8. and *supr.* ii.
3. Also *Letter* 54 fin. Vid. *supr. de Decr.* 10, n. 3. And vid. Leont.
*contr.* *Nest.* iii. 41. (p. 581. Canis.) He here seems alluding to the
Semi-Arians, Origen, and perhaps the earlier Fathers.

<span id="fn_3212"></span>[426:3213](2040378.htm#fr_3212) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p14"></span> Tatian had said <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p14.1"></span>θελήματι προπηδᾷ ὁ
λόγος</span>. *Gent.* 5. Tertullian had said, ‘Ut primum voluit Deus ea
edere, ipsum primum protulit sermonem. *adv. Prax.* 6. Novatian, Ex quo,
quando ipse voluit, Sermo filius natus est. *de Trin.* 31. And Constit.
Apost. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p14.3"></span>τὸν
πρὸ αἰ& 240·νων εὐδοκί& 139· τοῦ πατρὸς γεννηθέντα</span>. vii. 41.
Pseudo-Clem. Genuit Deus voluntate præcedente. *Recognit.* iii. 10.
Eusebius, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p14.5"></span>κατὰ γνώμην καὶ προαίρεσιν βουληθεὶς ὁ
θεός· ἐκ τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς βουλῆς καὶ δυνάμεως</span>. *Dem.* iv. 3. Arius,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p14.7"></span>θελήματι καὶ
βουλῇ ὑπέστη</span>. ap. Theod. *H. E.* i. 4. p. 750. vid. also *de
Syn.* 16.

<span id="fn_3213"></span>[426:3214](2040378.htm#fr_3213) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p14.9"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p15"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>[Prov.
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p15.3"></span>. LXX.

<span id="fn_3214"></span>[426:3215](2040378.htm#fr_3214) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p16"></span> *De Decr.* 20.

<span id="fn_3215"></span>[426:3216](2040378.htm#fr_3215) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p17"></span> p. 69. n. 8.

<span id="fn_3216"></span>[426:3217](2040378.htm#fr_3216) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18"></span> And so *supr. de Decr.* 18, ‘by
what Saint have they been taught “at will?”’ That is, no one ever taught
it in the sense in which *they* explained it; that he has just said, ‘He
who says “at will” has the same meaning as he who says “Once He was
not.”’ Cf. below §§61, 64, 66. Certainly as the earlier Fathers had used
the phrase, so those who came after Arius. Thus Nyssen in the passage in
*contr.* *Eun.* vii. referred to in the next note. And Hilar. *Syn.* 37.
The same father says, unitate Patris et virtute. <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.2"></span>[Psalm xci.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.4"></span>. and ut voluit, ut potuit, ut scit qui
genuit. *Trin.* iii. 4. And he addresses Him as non invidum bonorum
tuorum in Unigeniti tui nativitate. ibid. vi. 21. S. Basil too speaks of
our Lord as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.6"></span>αὐτοζωὴν καὶ αὐτοάγαθον</span>, ‘from
the quickening Fountain, the Father’s goodness, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.9"></span>γαθότητος</span>.’
*contr.* *Eun.* ii. 25. And Cæsarius calls Him <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.11"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.12"></span>γάπην πατρός</span>. *Quæst.* 39. Vid.
Ephrem. Syr. *adv. Scrut. R.* vi. 1. *Oxf. Tra.* and note there. Maximus
Taurin. says, that God is per omnipotentiam Pater. *Hom. de trad. Symb.*
p. 270. ed. 1784, vid. also Chrysol. *Serm.* 61. Ambros. *de Fid.* iv.
8. Petavius refers in addition to such passages as one just quoted from
S. Hilary, which speak of God as not invidus, so as not to communicate
Himself, since He was able. Si non potuit, infirmus; si non voluit,
invidus. August. *contr.* *Maxim.* iii. 7.

<span id="fn_3217"></span>[426:3218](2040378.htm#fr_3217) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p18.14"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.1"></span>[Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.3"></span>; [Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.4"></span>; [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.5"></span>; [Ps. xxxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.6"></span>; [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.7"></span>; [Phil. ii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#026)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.8"></span>; [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p19.9"></span>.

<span id="fn_3218"></span>[426:3219](2040378.htm#fr_3218) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.1"></span>προηγουμένην</span> and 61 fin. The
antecedens voluntas has been mentioned in *Recogn. Clem. supr.* note 11.
For Ptolemy vid. Epiph. *Hær.* p. 215. The Catholics, who allowed that
our Lord was <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.3"></span>θελήσει</span>, explained it as a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.4"></span>σύνδρομος
θέλησις</span>, and not a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.6"></span>προηγουμένη</span>; as Cyril. *Trin.*
ii. p. 56. And with the same meaning S. Ambrose, nec voluntas ante
Filium nec potestas. *de Fid.* v. 224. And S. Gregory Nyssen, ‘His
immediate union, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.8"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.9"></span>μεσος συνάφεια</span>, does not exclude
the Father’s will, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.10"></span>βούλησιν</span>, nor does that will
separate the Son from the Father.’ *contr. Eunom.* vii. p. 206, 7. vid.
the whole passage. The alternative which these words, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.12"></span>σύνδρομος</span>
and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.13"></span>προηγουμένη</span>, expressed was
this; whether an act of Divine Purpose or Will took place *before* the
Generation of the Son, or whether both the Will and the Generation were
eternal, as the Divine Nature was eternal. Hence Bull says, with the
view of exculpating Novatian, Cum Filius dicitur ex Patre, quando ipse
voluit, nasci. Velle illud Patris æternum fuisse intelligendum. *Defens.
F. N.* iii. 8. §8.

<span id="fn_3219"></span>[426:3220](2040378.htm#fr_3219) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p21.15"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p22.1"></span>προβάλλειν</span>, *de Syn.* 16, n. 8.

<span id="fn_3220"></span>[426:3221](2040378.htm#fr_3220) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p23.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p23.2"></span>πιγέγονε</span>, *Or.* i. 25, 28 fin.
iii. 6.

<span id="fn_3221"></span>[426:3222](2040378.htm#fr_3221) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p24"></span> [Ps.
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003), [Ps.
111:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#002), [Ps.
135:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>[Ps. cxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p24.3"></span>; cxi. 2. LXX.; cxxxv. 6.

<span id="fn_3222"></span>[426:3223](2040378.htm#fr_3222) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p24.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p25"></span> Cf. ii. n. 1.

<span id="fn_3223"></span>[427:3224](2040378.htm#fr_3223) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p27"></span> Cf. ii. 18–43.

<span id="fn_3224"></span>[427:3225](2040378.htm#fr_3224) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p28"></span> [1 Cor. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p28.1"></span>, &c.

<span id="fn_3225"></span>[427:3226](2040378.htm#fr_3225) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p29"></span> [Eph. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3226"></span>[427:3227](2040378.htm#fr_3226) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p30"></span> ii. 31 seqq.

<span id="fn_3227"></span>[427:3228](2040378.htm#fr_3227) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p31"></span> [James i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3228"></span>[427:3229](2040378.htm#fr_3228) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p32"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p32.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p32.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[427:3230](2040378.htm#fr_3229) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p34"></span> 64, note 4.

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[427:3231](2040378.htm#fr_3230) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p35"></span> Thus he makes the question a
nugatory one, as if it did not go to the point, and could not be
answered, or might be answered either way, as the case might be. Really
Nature and Will go together in the Divine Being, but in order, as we
regard Him, Nature is first, Will second, and the generation belongs to
Nature, not to Will. And so *supr.* *Or.* i. 29; ii. 2. In like manner
S. Epiphanius, *Hær.* 69, 26. vid. also *Ancor.* 51. vid. also Ambros.
*de Fid.* iv. 4. vid. others, as collected in Petav. *Trin.* vi. 8.
§§14–16.

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[427:3232](2040378.htm#fr_3231) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36"></span> Two distinct meanings may be
attached to ‘by will’ (as Dr. Clark observes, *Script. Doct.* p. 142.
ed. 1738), either a concurrence or acquiescence, or a positive act. S.
Cyril uses it in the former sense, when he calls it <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.2"></span>σύνδρομος</span>,
as quoted §60, n. 1; and when he says (with Athan. *infr.*) that ‘the
Father wills His own subsistence, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.4"></span>θεληγής ἐστι</span>, but is not what He
is from any will, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.6"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.7"></span>κ βουλήσεως τινός</span>,’ *Thes.* p.
56; Dr. Clark would understand it in the latter sense, with a view of
inferring that the Son was subsequent to a Divine act, i.e. not eternal;
but what Athan. says leads to the conclusion, that it does not matter
which sense is taken. He does not meet the Arian objection, ‘if not by
will therefore by necessity,’ by speaking of a concomitant will, or
merely saying that the Almighty exists or is good, by will, with S.
Cyril, but he says that ‘nature *transcends* will and necessity also.’
Accordingly, Petavius is even willing to allow that the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.10"></span>κ βουλῆς</span> is
to be ascribed to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.12"></span>γέννησις</span> in the sense which Dr.
Clark wishes, i.e. he grants that it may precede the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p36.14"></span>γέννησις</span>,
i.e. in *order,* not in time, in the succession of our ideas, *Trin.*
vi. 8, §§20, 21; and follows S. Austin, *Trin.* xv. 20. in preferring to
speak of our Lord rather as voluntas de voluntate, than, as Athan. is
led to do, as the voluntas Dei.

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[428:3233](2040378.htm#fr_3232) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p38"></span> Vid. *Or.* i. 25, n. 2. Also
*Serap.* i. 15, 16 init. 17, 20; iv. 8, 14. *Ep. Æg.* 11 fin. Didym.
*Trin.* iii. 3. p. 341. Ephr. Syr. *adv. Hær. Serm.* 55 init. (t. 2. p.
557.) Facund. *Tr. Cap.* iii. 3 init.

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[428:3234](2040378.htm#fr_3233) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p39.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p39.2"></span>πιγεγονώς</span>, §60, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[428:3235](2040378.htm#fr_3234) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p39.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p40.1"></span>λογίσασθαί τινα βούλησιν</span>, as §66
(Latin version inexact).

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[428:3236](2040378.htm#fr_3235) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p41.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p41.2"></span>γαθοῦ πατρὸς ἀγαθὸν βούλημα</span>.
Clem. *Ped.* iii. circ. fin. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p41.4"></span>σοφία, χρηστότης, δύναμις, θέλημα
παντοκρατορικόν</span>. *Strom.* v. p. 547. Voluntas et potestas patris.
Tertull. *Orat.* 4. Natus ex Patri quasi voluntas ex mente procedens.
Origen. *Periarch.* i. 2. §6. S. Jerome notices the same interpretation
of ‘by the will of God’ in the beginning of Comment. *in Ephes.* But cf.
Aug. *Trin.* xv. 20. And so Cæsarius, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p41.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p41.7"></span>γάπη ἐξ ἀγάπης</span>. *Qu.* 39.

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[428:3237](2040378.htm#fr_3236) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p41.9"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p42"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p42.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p42.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[428:3238](2040378.htm#fr_3237) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p42.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p43"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[428:3239](2040378.htm#fr_3238) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.1"></span>ζῶσα βουλή</span>. *supr.* *<span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.3"></span>Ορ</span>*. ii. 2.
Cyril *in Joan.* p. 213. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.5"></span>ζῶσα δύναμις</span>. Sabell. *Greg.* 5.
c. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.7"></span>ζῶσα
εἴκων</span>. Naz. *Orat.* 30, 20. c. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.9"></span>ζῶσα ἐνέργεια</span>. Syn. Antioch.
*ap. Routh. Reliqu.* t. 2. p. 469. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.11"></span>ζῶσα ἴσχυς</span>. Cyril. *in Joan.*
p. 951. <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.13"></span>ζῶσα
σοφία</span>. Origen. *contr. Cels.* iii. fin. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.15"></span>ζῶν λόγος</span>. Origen. ibid. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.17"></span>ζῶν ὄργανον</span>
(heretically) Euseb. *Dem.* iv. 2.

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[428:3240](2040378.htm#fr_3239) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p44.19"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p45"></span> [Is. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[428:3241](2040378.htm#fr_3240) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p46"></span> *Or.* ii. 33, n. 12.

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[429:3242](2040378.htm#fr_3241) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p48"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p48.1"></span>[Ps.
73:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p48.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[429:3243](2040378.htm#fr_3242) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p48.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p49.1"></span>δι᾽ ἑτέρου τινος</span>. This idea has
been urged against the Arians again and again, as just above, §61; e.g.
*de Decr.* 8, 24; *Or.* i. 15, below 65, *sub. fin.* vid. also Epiph.
*Hær.* 76. p. 951. Basil. *contr. Eunom.* ii. 11. c. 17, a. &c.

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[429:3244](2040378.htm#fr_3243) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p50"></span> §60.

<span id="fn_3244"></span>[429:3245](2040378.htm#fr_3244) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p51.1"></span>πολυκέφαλος αἵρεσις</span>. And so
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p51.3"></span>πολυκ.
πανουργία</span>, §62. The allusion is to the hydra, with its
ever-springing heads, as introduced §58, n. 5. and with a special
allusion to Asterius who is mentioned, §60, and in *de Syn.* 18. is
called <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p51.5"></span>πολυκ.
σοφιστής</span>.

<span id="fn_3245"></span>[429:3246](2040378.htm#fr_3245) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p51.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p52"></span> *Or.* ii. 43, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3246"></span>[429:3247](2040378.htm#fr_3246) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p53"></span> §16, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3247"></span>[429:3248](2040378.htm#fr_3247) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p54"></span> *Or.* i. 57; ii. 23.

<span id="fn_3248"></span>[429:3249](2040378.htm#fr_3248) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p56"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p56.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#014)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p56.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_3249"></span>[429:3250](2040378.htm#fr_3249) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p56.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p57.1"></span>περὶ τὸν θεόν</span>. vid. *de Decr.*
22, n. 1; *Or.* i. 15. Also *Orat.* i. 27, where (n. 2 a.), it is
mistranslated. Euseb. *Eccl. Theol.* iii. p. 150. vid. *de Syn.* 34, n.
7.

<span id="fn_3250"></span>[429:3251](2040378.htm#fr_3250) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p57.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p58.1"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p58.2"></span>ξιν</span>. vid. *Or.* ii. 38, n. 6;
iv. 2, n. 7.

<span id="fn_3251"></span>[429:3252](2040378.htm#fr_3251) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p58.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p59.1"></span>συμβαινούσαν καὶ
ἀποσυμβαινούσαν</span>, vid. *de Decr.* 11, n. 7, and 22, n. 9, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p59.3"></span>σύμβαμα</span>,
Euseb. *Eccl. Theol.* iii. p. 150. in the same, though a technical
sense. vid. also *Serap.* i. 26; Naz. *Orat.* 31, 15 fin.

<span id="fn_3252"></span>[429:3253](2040378.htm#fr_3252) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p59.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p60"></span> [Acts viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#020)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3253"></span>[429:3254](2040378.htm#fr_3253) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p61"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p61.1"></span>[Prov. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p61.3"></span>; [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p61.4"></span>; cxxxv. 6, cxv. 3; [1 Thess. v.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p61.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_3254"></span>[429:3255](2040378.htm#fr_3254) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p61.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p62"></span> Read ‘a word,’ cf. p. 394, n. 6.

<span id="fn_3255"></span>[429:3256](2040378.htm#fr_3255) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p63"></span> *De Syn.* 53, n. 9.

<span id="fn_3256"></span>[429:3257](2040378.htm#fr_3256) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.1"></span>οὐσία</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.3"></span>πόστασις</span> are
in these passages made synonymous; and so *infr. Orat.* iv. 1, f. And in
iv. 33 fin. to the Son is attributed <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.5"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.6"></span>πατρικὴ ὑπόστασις</span>. Vid. also *ad
Afros.* 4. quoted *supr. Exc. A,* pp. 77, *sqq.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.8"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.9"></span>Υ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.10"></span>π</span>. might
have been expected too in the discussion in the beginning of *Orat.*
iii. did Athan. distinguish between them. It is remarkable how seldom it
occurs at all in these Orations, except as contained in [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.12"></span>. Vid. also p. 70, note 13. Yet the
phrase <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.13"></span>τρεῖς
ὑποστάσεις</span> is certainly found in *Illud Omn.* fin. and in
*Incarn. c. Arian.* 10. (if genuine) and apparently in *Expos. Fid.* 2.
Vid. also *Orat.* iv. 25 init.

<span id="fn_3257"></span>[430:3258](2040378.htm#fr_3257) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p64.15"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p65"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3258"></span>[430:3259](2040378.htm#fr_3258) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p67"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p67.1"></span>[John iii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#035)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p67.3"></span>; v. 20.

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[430:3260](2040378.htm#fr_3259) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p67.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p68"></span> 63, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3260"></span>[430:3261](2040378.htm#fr_3260) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p69"></span> *Or.* i. 14, n. 4; ii. 2, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[430:3262](2040378.htm#fr_3261) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p71"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p71.1"></span>[Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p71.3"></span>; [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p71.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3262"></span>[430:3263](2040378.htm#fr_3262) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p71.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p72"></span> §2, n. 6, &c.

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[430:3264](2040378.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p73"></span> *De Decr.* i. n. 6.

<span id="fn_3264"></span>[430:3265](2040378.htm#fr_3264) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p74"></span> *Or.* i. 26.

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[430:3266](2040378.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p75.1"></span>τῆς οὐσίας ὅμοια</span>, vid. *Or.* i.
21, n. 8. Also ii. 42, b. iii. 11, 14 *sub. fin.*, 17, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[430:3267](2040378.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p75.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p76"></span> *Or.* ii. 1, n. 13.

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[430:3268](2040378.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p77"></span> 65, n. 8.

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[431:3269](2040378.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p78"></span> *De Decr.* 3, n. 2; *Orat.* i. 27,
ii. 4; *Apol. c. Ar.* 36.

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[431:3270](2040378.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p79"></span> Cf. 63, n. 9.

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[431:3271](2040378.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p80"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p80.1"></span>[John
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p80.3"></span>; xiv. 9; cf. §5, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[431:3272](2040378.htm#fr_3271) <span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p80.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p81"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.iv.viii-p81.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Excursus C. Introductory to the Fourth Discourse against the
Arians.](2040379)
