[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040435)  [Next](2040437) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>From Letter XXXIX</span>.—*(For 367.)
Of the particular books and their number, which are accepted by the
Church. From the thirty-ninth Letter of Holy Athanasius, Bishop of
Alexandria, on the Paschal festival; wherein he defines canonically what
are the divine books which are accepted by the Church.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p2"></span>…1. They have <span
id="fr_4538"></span>[4539](#fn_4538) fabricated books which they call
books of tables <span id="fr_4539"></span>[4540](#fn_4539) , in which
they shew stars, to which they give the names of Saints. And therein of
a truth they have inflicted on themselves a double reproach: those who
have written such books, because they have perfected themselves in a
lying and contemptible science; and as to the ignorant and simple, they
have led them astray by evil thoughts concerning the right faith
established in all truth and upright in the presence of God.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p5"></span>…2. But <span
id="fr_4540"></span>[4541](#fn_4540) since we have made mention of
heretics as dead, but of ourselves as possessing the Divine Scriptures
for salvation; and since I fear lest, as Paul wrote to the
Corinthians <span id="fr_4541"></span>[4542](#fn_4541) , some few of the
simple should be beguiled from their simplicity and purity, by the
subtilty of certain men, and should henceforth read other books—those
called apocryphal—led astray by the similarity of their names with the
true books; I beseech you to bear patiently, if I also write, by way of
remembrance, of matters with which you are acquainted, influenced by the
need and advantage of the Church.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p8"></span>3. In proceeding to make mention of
these things, I shall adopt, to commend my undertaking, the pattern of
Luke the Evangelist, saying on my own account: ‘Forasmuch as some have
taken in hand <span id="fr_4542"></span>[4543](#fn_4542) ,’ to reduce
into order for themselves the books termed apocryphal, and to mix them
up with the divinely inspired Scripture, concerning which we have been
fully persuaded, as they who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and
ministers of the Word, delivered to the fathers; it seemed <span
id="page_552">p. 552</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-Page_552"></span>good to me also, having been urged
thereto by true brethren, and having learned from the beginning, to set
before you the books included in the Canon, and handed down, and
accredited as Divine; to the end that any one who has fallen into error
may condemn those who have led him astray; and that he who has continued
stedfast in purity may again rejoice, having these things brought to his
remembrance.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p10"></span>4. There are, then, of the Old
Testament, twenty-two books in number; for, as I have heard, it is
handed down that this is the number of the letters among the Hebrews;
their respective order and names being as follows. The first is Genesis,
then Exodus, next Leviticus, after that Numbers, and then Deuteronomy.
Following these there is Joshua, the son of Nun, then Judges, then Ruth.
And again, after these four books of Kings, the first and second being
reckoned as one book, and so likewise the third and fourth as one book.
And again, the first and second of the Chronicles are reckoned as one
book. Again Ezra, the first and second <span
id="fr_4543"></span>[4544](#fn_4543) are similarly one book. After these
there is the book of Psalms, then the Proverbs, next Ecclesiastes, and
the Song of Songs. Job follows, then the Prophets, the twelve being
reckoned as one book. Then Isaiah, one book, then Jeremiah with Baruch,
Lamentations, and <span id="fr_4544"></span>[4545](#fn_4544) the
epistle, one book; afterwards, Ezekiel and Daniel, each one book. Thus
far constitutes the Old Testament.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p13"></span>5. Again it is not tedious to
speak of the \[books\] of the New Testament. These are, the four
Gospels, according to Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Afterwards, the
Acts of the Apostles and Epistles (called Catholic), seven, viz. of
James, one; of Peter, two; of John, three; after these, one of Jude. In
addition, there are fourteen Epistles of Paul, written in this order.
The first, to the Romans; then two to the Corinthians; after these, to
the Galatians; next, to the Ephesians; then to the Philippians; then to
the Colossians; after these, two to the Thessalonians, and that to the
Hebrews; and again, two to Timothy; one to Titus; and lastly, that to
Philemon. And besides, the Revelation of John.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p14"></span>6. These are fountains of
salvation, that they who thirst may be satisfied with the living words
they contain. In these alone is proclaimed the doctrine of godliness.
Let no man add to these, neither let him take ought from these. For
concerning these the Lord put to shame the Sadducees, and said, ‘Ye do
err, not knowing the Scriptures.’ And He reproved the Jews, saying,
‘Search the Scriptures, for these are they that testify of Me <span
id="fr_4545"></span>[4546](#fn_4545) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p16"></span>7. But for greater exactness I add
this also, writing of necessity; that there are other books besides
these not indeed included in the Canon, but appointed by the Fathers to
be read by those who newly join us, and who wish for instruction in the
word of godliness. The Wisdom of Solomon, and the Wisdom of Sirach, and
Esther, and Judith, and Tobit, and that which is called the Teaching of
the Apostles, and the Shepherd. But the former, my brethren, are
included in the Canon, the latter being \[merely\] read; nor is there in
any place a mention of apocryphal writings. But they are an invention of
heretics, who write them when they choose, bestowing upon them their
approbation, and assigning to them a date, that so, using them as
ancient writings, they may find occasion to lead astray the simple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4538"></span>[551:4539](2040436.htm#fr_4538) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p3"></span> This section is preserved in the
Coptic (Memphitic) Life of S. Theodore (Amélineau *Ann. du Musée
Guimet.* xvii. p. 239). Its contents and the context in which it is
quoted appear decisive for its identification as part of *Letter* 39.
But the Letter from which the fragment comes is stated in the context to
have been received by Theodore in the spring previous to his death. If
Theodore died in 364, as seems probable on other grounds (see p. 569,
note 3), the speech from which our fragment comes must have been written
for him by his biographer. This is not unlikely, nor does it throw any
suspicion on the genuineness of the fragment itself.

<span id="fn_4539"></span>[551:4540](2040436.htm#fr_4539) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p4"></span> Copt. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p4.2"></span>πογράμμων</span>: astrological charts
or tables appear to be meant.

<span id="fn_4540"></span>[551:4541](2040436.htm#fr_4540) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p6"></span> The remainder of the thirty-ninth
Letter has long been before the world, having been preserved, with the
heading of the Letter, in the original Greek, by Theodorus Balsamon. It
may be found in the first volume of the Benedictine edition of the works
of S. Athan. tom. i. p. 767. ed. 1777. \[Migne, *ubi supra*\]. A Syriac
translation of it was discovered by Cureton in an anonymous Commentary
on the Scriptures in the collection of the British Museum (*Cod.* 12,
168). This translation commences only at the quotation from S. Luke. The
Syriac is apparently the work of a different translator.

<span id="fn_4541"></span>[551:4542](2040436.htm#fr_4541) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p7"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4542"></span>[551:4543](2040436.htm#fr_4542) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p9"></span> [Luke i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4543"></span>[552:4544](2040436.htm#fr_4543) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p11"></span> i.e. Ezra and Nehemiah.

<span id="fn_4544"></span>[552:4545](2040436.htm#fr_4544) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p12"></span> i.e. Baruch vi<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p12.1"></span>.—The Syriac has the conjunction,
which is rejected by the Benedictine editors.

<span id="fn_4545"></span>[552:4546](2040436.htm#fr_4545) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p15"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p15.1"></span>[Matt. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#029)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p15.3"></span>; [John v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.xxv-p15.4"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (For 368.)](2040437)
