[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040108)  [Next](2040110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xii-p1"></span> §12. *For though man was created in
grace, God, foreseeing his forgetfulness, provided also the works of
creation to remind man of him. Yet further, He ordained a Law and
Prophets, whose ministry was meant for all the world. Yet men heeded
only their own lusts.*

<span id="vii.ii.xii-p2"></span>For whereas the grace of the Divine
Image was in itself sufficient to make known God the Word, and through
Him the Father; still God, knowing the weakness of men, made provision
even for their carelessness: so that if they cared not to know God of
themselves, they might be enabled through the works of creation to avoid
ignorance of the Maker. 2. But since men’s carelessness, by little and
little, descends to lower things, God made provision, once more, even
for this weakness of theirs, by sending a law, and prophets, men such as
they knew, so that even if they were not ready to look up to heaven and
know their Creator, they might have their instruction from those near at
hand. For men are able to learn from men more directly about higher
things. 3. So it was open to them, by looking into the height of heaven,
and perceiving the <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span
id="vii.ii.xii-Page_43"></span>harmony of creation, to know its Ruler,
the Word of the Father, Who, by His own providence over all things makes
known the Father to all, and to this end moves all things, that through
Him all may know God. 4. Or, if this were too much for them, it was
possible for them to meet at least the holy men, and through them to
learn of God, the Maker of all things, the Father of Christ; and that
the worship of idols is godlessness, and full of all impiety. 5. Or it
was open to them, by knowing the law even, to cease from all lawlessness
and live a virtuous life. For neither was the law for the Jews alone,
nor were the Prophets sent for them only, but, though sent to the Jews
and persecuted by the Jews, they were for all the world a holy school of
the knowledge of God and the conduct of the soul. 6. God’s goodness then
and loving-kindness being so great—men nevertheless, overcome by the
pleasures of the moment and by the illusions and deceits sent by demons,
did not raise their heads toward the truth, but loaded themselves the
more with evils and sins, so as no longer to seem rational, but from
their ways to be reckoned void of reason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Here again, was God to keep silence? to allow to false gods the
worship He made us to render to Himself? A king whose subjects had
revolted would, after sending letters and messages, go to them in
person. How much more shall God restore in us the grace of His image.
This men, themselves but copies, could not do. Hence the Word Himself
must come (1) to recreate, (2) to destroy death in the Body.](2040110)
