[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040394)  [Next](2040396) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>Part III. <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p1.2"></span>On the Symbols ‘Of the Essence’ And
‘Coessential.’</span></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p2"></span>We must look at the sense not the
wording. The offence excited is at the sense; meaning of the Symbols;
the question of their not being in Scripture. Those who hesitate only at
‘coessential,’ not to be considered Arians. Reasons why ‘coessential’ is
better than ‘like-in-essence,’ yet the latter may be interpreted in a
good sense. Explanation of the rejection of ‘coessential’ by the Council
which condemned the Samosatene; use of the word by Dionysius of
Alexandria; parallel variation in the use of Unoriginate; quotation from
Ignatius and another; reasons for using ‘coessential;’ objections to it;
examination of the word itself; further documents of the Council of
Ariminum.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p3"></span>33. But since they are thus minded both
towards each other and towards those who preceded them, proceed we to
ascertain from them what absurdity they have seen, or what they complain
of in the received phrases, that they have proved ‘disobedient to
parents’ ([Rom. i. 30](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#030)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>), and contend against an Ecumenical
Council <span id="fr_3602"></span>[3603](#fn_3602) ? ‘The phrases “of
the essence” and “coessential,”’ say they, ‘do not please us, for they
are an offence to some and a trouble to many.’ This then is what they
allege in their writings; but one may reasonably answer them thus: If
the very words were by themselves a cause of offence to them, it must
have followed, not that some only should have been offended, and many
troubled, but that we also and all the rest should have been affected by
them in the same way; but if on the contrary all men are well content
with the words, and they who wrote them were no ordinary persons but men
who came together from the whole world, and to these testify in addition
the 400 Bishops and more who now met at Ariminum, does not this plainly
prove against those who accuse the Council, that the terms are not in
fault, but the perverseness of those who misinterpret them? How many men
read divine Scripture wrongly, and as thus conceiving it, find fault
with the Saints? such were the former Jews, who rejected the Lord, and
the present Manichees who blaspheme the Law <span
id="fr_3603"></span>[3604](#fn_3603) ; yet are not the Scriptures the
cause to them, but their own evil humours. If then ye can shew the terms
to be actually unsound, do so and let the proof proceed, and drop the
pretence of offence created, lest you come into the condition of the
Pharisees of old. For when they pretended offence at the Lord’s
teaching, He said, ‘Every plant, which My heavenly Father hath not
planted, shall be rooted up’ ([Matt. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p5.2"></span>). By which He shewed that not the words of
the Father planted by Him were really an offence to them, but that they
misinterpreted what was well said, and offended themselves. And in like
manner they who at that time blamed the Epistles of the Apostle,
impeached, not Paul, but their own deficient learning and distorted
minds.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p6"></span>34. For answer, what is much to the
purpose, Who are they whom you pretend are offended and troubled at
these terms? of those who are religious towards Christ not one; on the
contrary they defend and maintain them. But if they are Arians who thus
feel, what wonder they should be distressed at words which destroy their
heresy? for it is not the terms which offend them, but the proscription
of their irreligion which afflicts them. Therefore let us have no more
murmuring against the Fathers, nor pretence of this kind; or next <span
id="fr_3604"></span>[3605](#fn_3604) you will be making complaints of
the Lord’s Cross, because it is ‘to Jews an offence and to Gentiles
foolishness,’ as said the Apostle <span
id="fr_3605"></span>[3606](#fn_3605) ([1 Cor.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p8.2"></span>). But as the Cross is not faulty, for to
us who believe it is ‘Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God,’
though Jews rave, so neither are the terms of the Fathers faulty, but
profitable to those who honestly read, and subversive of all irreligion,
though the Arians so often burst with rage as being condemned by them.
Since then the pretence that persons are offended does not hold, tell us
yourselves, why is it you are <span id="page_469">p. 469</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_469"></span>not pleased with the phrase ‘of the
essence’ (this must first be enquired about), when you yourselves have
written that the Son is generated from the Father? If when you name the
Father, or use the word ‘God,’ you do not signify essence, or understand
Him according to essence, who is that He is, but signify something else
about Him <span id="fr_3606"></span>[3607](#fn_3606) , not to say
inferior, then you should not have written that the Son was from the
Father, but from what is about Him or in Him <span
id="fr_3607"></span>[3608](#fn_3607) ; and so, shrinking from saying
that God is truly Father, and making Him compound who is simple, in a
material way, you will be authors of a newer blasphemy. And, with such
ideas, you must needs consider the Word, and the title ‘Son,’ not as an
essence but as a name <span id="fr_3608"></span>[3609](#fn_3608) only,
and in consequence hold your own views as far as names only, and be
talking, not of what you believe to exist, but of what you think not to
exist.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p12"></span>35. But this is more like the crime of
the Sadducees, and of those among the Greeks who had the name of
Atheists. It follows that you will deny that even creation is the
handy-work of God Himself that is; at least, if ‘Father’ and ‘God’ do
not signify the very essence of Him that is, but something else, which
you imagine: which is irreligious, and most shocking even to think of.
But if, when we hear it said, ‘I am that I am,’ and, ‘In the beginning
God created the heaven and the earth,’ and, ‘Hear, O Israel, the Lord
our God is one Lord,’ and, ‘Thus saith the Lord Almighty’ ([Exod.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014), [Gen.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001), [Deut.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p12.1"></span>), we understand nothing else than the
very simple, and blessed, and incomprehensible essence itself of Him
that is, (for though we be unable to master what He is, yet hearing
‘Father,’ and ‘God,’ and ‘Almighty,’ we understand nothing else to be
meant than the very essence of Him that is <span
id="fr_3609"></span>[3610](#fn_3609) ); and if ye too have said, that
the Son is from God, it follows that you have said that He is from the
‘essence’ of the Father. And since the Scriptures precede you which say,
that the Lord is Son of the Father, and the Father Himself precedes
them, who says, ‘This is My beloved Son’ ([Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p13.2"></span>), and a son is no other than the
offspring from his father, is it not evident that the Fathers have
suitably said that the Son is from the Father’s essence? considering
that it is all one to say rightly ‘from God,’ and to say ‘from the
essence.’ For all the creatures, though they be said to have come into
being from God, yet are not from God as the Son is; for they are not
offsprings in their nature, but works. Thus, it is said, ‘in the
beginning God,’ not ‘generated,’ but ‘made the heaven and the earth, and
all that is in them’ ([Gen. i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p13.3"></span>). And not, ‘who generates,’ but ‘who
maketh His angels spirits, and His ministers a flame of fire’ ([Ps. civ.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p13.4"></span>). And though the Apostle has said, ‘One
God, from whom all things’ ([1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p13.5"></span>), yet he says not this, as reckoning the
Son with other things; but, whereas some of the Greeks consider that the
creation was held together by chance, and from the combination of
atoms <span id="fr_3610"></span>[3611](#fn_3610) ; and spontaneously
from elements of similar structure <span
id="fr_3611"></span>[3612](#fn_3611) , and has no cause; and others
consider that it came from a cause, but not through the Word; and each
heretic has imagined things at his will, and tells his fables about the
creation; on this account the Apostle was obliged to introduce ‘from
God,’ that he might thereby certify the Maker, and shew that the
universe was framed at His will. And accordingly he straightway
proceeds: ‘And one Lord Jesus Christ, through whom all things’ ([1 Cor.
viii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>), by way of excepting the Son from that
‘all’ (for what is called God’s work, is all done through the Son; and
it is not possible that the things framed should have one origin with
their Framer), and by way of teaching that the phrase ‘of God,’ which
occurs in the passage, has a different sense in the case of the works,
from what it bears when used of the Son; for He is offspring, and they
are works: and therefore He, the Son, is the proper offspring of His
essence, but they are the handywork of his will.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p16"></span>36. The Council, then, comprehending
this <span id="fr_3612"></span>[3613](#fn_3612) , and aware of the
different senses of the same word, that none should suppose, that the
Son was said to be ‘from God’ like the creation, wrote with greater
explicitness, that the Son was ‘from the essence.’ For this betokens the
true genuineness of the Son towards the Father; whereas, by the simple
phrase ‘from God,’ only the Creator’s will in framing is signified. If
then they too had this meaning, when they wrote that the Word was ‘from
the Father,’ they had nothing to complain of in the Council; but if they
meant ‘of God,’ in the instance of the Son, as it is used of the
creation, then as understanding it of the creation, they should not name
the Son, or they will be manifestly mingling blasphemy with
religiousness; but either they have to cease reckoning the Lord with the
creatures, or at least to refrain from unworthy and unbecoming
statements about <span id="page_470">p. 470</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_470"></span>the Son. For if He is a Son, He is not
a creature; but if a creature, then not a Son. Since these are their
views, perhaps they will be denying the Holy Laver also, because it is
administered into Father and into Son and not into Creator and Creature,
as they account it. ‘But,’ they say, ‘all this is not written: and we
reject these words as unscriptural.’ But this, again, is an unblushing
excuse in their mouths. For if they think everything must be rejected
which is not written, wherefore, when the Arian party invent such a heap
of phrases, not from Scripture <span
id="fr_3613"></span>[3614](#fn_3613) , ‘Out of nothing,’ and ‘the Son
was not before His generation,’ and ‘Once He was not,’ and ‘He is
alterable,’ and ‘the Father is ineffable and invisible to the Son,’ and
‘the Son knows not even His own essence;’ and all that Arius has vomited
in his light and irreligious Thalia, why do not they speak against
these, but rather take their part, and on that account contend with
their own Fathers? And, in what Scripture did they on their part find
‘Unoriginate,’ and ‘the term essence,’ and ‘there are three
subsistences,’ and ‘Christ is not very God,’ and ‘He is one of the
hundred sheep,’ and ‘God’s Wisdom is ingenerate and without beginning,
but the created powers are many, of which Christ is one?’ Or how, when
in the so-called Dedication, Acacius and Eusebius and their fellows used
expressions not in Scripture, and said that ‘the First-born of the
creation’ was ‘the exact Image of the essence and power and will and
glory,’ do they complain of the Fathers, for making mention of
unscriptural expressions, and especially of essence? For they ought
either to complain of themselves, or to find no fault with the Fathers.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p19"></span>37. Now, if certain others made
excuses of the expressions of the Council, it might perhaps have been
set down, either to ignorance or to caution. There is no question, for
instance, about George of Cappadocia <span
id="fr_3614"></span>[3615](#fn_3614) , who was expelled from Alexandria;
a man, without character in years past, nor a Christian in any respect;
but only pretending to the name to suit the times, and thinking
‘religion to be a’ means of ‘gain’ ([1 Tim. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#005)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>). And therefore there is no reason to
complain of his making mistakes about the faith, considering he knows
neither what he says, nor whereof he affirms; but, according to the
text, ‘goeth after all, as a bird’ ([1 Tim.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007), [Prov.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#023)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p20.2"></span>, not LXX.?) But when Acacius, and
Eudoxius, and Patrophilus say this, do not they deserve the strongest
reprobation? for while they write what is unscriptural themselves, and
have accepted many times the term ‘essence’ as suitable, especially on
the ground of the letter <span id="fr_3615"></span>[3616](#fn_3615) of
Eusebius, they now blame their predecessors for using terms of the same
kind. Nay, though they say themselves, that the Son is ‘God from God,’
and ‘Living Word,’ ‘Exact Image of the Father’s essence;’ they accuse
the Nicene Bishops of saying, that He who was begotten is ‘of the
essence’ of Him who begat Him, and ‘Coessential’ with Him. But what
marvel if they conflict with their predecessors and their own Fathers,
when they are inconsistent with themselves, and fall foul of each other?
For after publishing, in the so-called Dedication at Antioch, that the
Son is exact Image of the Father’s essence, and swearing that so they
held and anathematizing those who held otherwise, nay, in Isauria,
writing down, ‘We do not decline the authentic faith published in the
Dedication at Antioch <span id="fr_3616"></span>[3617](#fn_3616) ,’
where the term ‘essence’ was introduced, as if forgetting all this,
shortly after, in the same Isauria, they put into writing the very
contrary, saying, We reject the words ‘coessential,’ and
‘like-in-essence,’ as alien to the Scriptures, and abolish the term
‘essence,’ as not contained therein <span
id="fr_3617"></span>[3618](#fn_3617) .

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p24"></span>38. Can we then any more account such
men Christians? or what sort of faith have they who stand neither to
word nor writing, but alter and change every thing according to the
times? For if, O Acacius and Eudoxius, you ‘do not decline the faith
published at the Dedication,’ and in it is written that the Son is
‘Exact Image of God’s essence,’ why is it ye write in Isauria, ‘we
reject the Like in essence?’ for if the Son is not like the Father
according to essence, how is He ‘exact image of the essence?’ But if you
are dissatisfied at having written ‘Exact Image of the essence,’ how is
it that ye ‘anathematize those who say that the Son is Unlike?’ for if
He be not according to essence like, He is surely unlike: and the Unlike
cannot be an Image. And if so, then it does not hold that ‘he that hath
seen the Son, hath seen the Father’ ([John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p24.1"></span>), there being then the greatest possible
difference between Them, or rather the One being wholly Unlike the
Other. And Unlike cannot possibly be called Like. By what artifice then
do you call Unlike like, and consider Like to be unlike, and pretend to
say that the Son is the Father’s Image? for if the Son be not like the
Father in essence, something is wanting to the Image, and it is not a
complete Image, nor a perfect radiance <span
id="fr_3618"></span>[3619](#fn_3618) . <span id="page_471">p. 471</span>
<span id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_471"></span>How then read you, ‘In Him
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily?’ and, ‘from His fulness
all we received’ ([Col. 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009), [John
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.9"></span>)? how is it that you expel the Arian
Aetius as an heretic, though ye say the same with him? for he is your
companion, O Acacius, and he became Eudoxius’s master in this so great
irreligion <span id="fr_3619"></span>[3620](#fn_3619) ; which was the
reason why Leontius the Bishop made him deacon, that using the name of
the diaconate as sheep’s clothing, he might be able with impunity to
pour forth the words of blasphemy.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p27"></span>39. What then has persuaded you to
contradict each other, and to procure to yourselves so great a disgrace?
You cannot give any good account of it; this supposition only remains,
that all you do is but outward profession and pretence, to secure the
patronage of Constantius and the gain from thence accruing. And ye make
nothing of accusing the Fathers, and ye complain outright of the
expressions as being unscriptural; and, as it is written, ‘opened your
legs to every one that passed by’ ([Ez. xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p27.1"></span>); so as to change as often as they wish,
in whose pay and keep you are. Yet, though a man use terms not in
Scripture, it makes no difference so that his meaning be religious <span
id="fr_3620"></span>[3621](#fn_3620) . But the heretic, though he use
scriptural terms, yet, as being equally dangerous and depraved, shall be
asked in the words of the Spirit, ‘Why dost thou preach My laws, and
takest My covenant in thy mouth’ ([Ps. l.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p28.2"></span>)? Thus whereas the devil, though speaking
from the Scriptures, is silenced by the Saviour, the blessed Paul,
though he speaks from profane writers, ‘The Cretans are always liars,’
and, ‘For we are His offspring,’ and, ‘Evil communications corrupt good
manners,’ yet has a religious meaning, as being holy,—is ‘doctor of the
nations, in faith and verity,’ as having ‘the mind of Christ’ ([Titus
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012), [Acts
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028), [1 Cor.
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033), [1 Tim.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#007), [1 Cor.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#016)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p28.3"></span>), and what he speaks, he utters
religiously. What then is there even plausible, in the Arian terms, in
which the ‘caterpillar’ ([Joel ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p28.4"></span>) and the ‘locust’ are preferred to the
Saviour, and He is reviled with ‘Once Thou wast not,’ and ‘Thou wast
created,’ and ‘Thou art foreign to God in essence,’ and, in a word, no
irreverence is unused among them? But what did the Fathers omit in the
way of reverence? or rather, have they not a lofty view and a
Christ-loving religiousness? And yet these, they wrote, ‘We reject;’
while those others they endure in their insults towards the Lord, and
betray to all men, that for no other cause do they resist that great
Council but that it condemned the Arian heresy. For it is on this
account again that they speak against the term Coessential, about which
they also entertain wrong sentiments. For if their faith was right, and
they confessed the Father as truly Father, believed the Son to be
genuine Son, and by nature true Word and Wisdom of the Father, and as to
saying that the Son is ‘from God,’ if they did not use the words of Him,
as of themselves, but understood Him to be the proper offspring of the
Father’s essence, as the radiance is from light, they would not every
one of them have found fault with the Fathers; but would have been
confident that the Council wrote suitably; and that this is the right
faith concerning our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p29"></span>40. ‘But,’ say they, ‘the sense of
such expressions is obscure to us;’ for this is another of their
pretences,—‘We reject them <span id="fr_3621"></span>[3622](#fn_3621) ,’
say they, ‘because we cannot master their meaning.’ But if they were
true in this profession, instead of saying, ‘We reject them,’ they
should ask instruction from the well informed; else ought they to reject
whatever they cannot understand in divine Scripture, and to find fault
with the writers. But this were the venture of heretics rather than of
us Christians; for what we do not understand in the sacred oracles,
instead of rejecting, we seek from persons to whom the Lord has revealed
it, and from them we ask for instruction. But since they thus make a
pretence of the obscurity of such expressions, let them at least confess
what is annexed to the Creed, and anathematize those who hold that ‘the
Son is from nothing,’ and ‘He was not before His generation,’ and ‘the
Word of God is a creature and work,’ and ‘He is alterable by nature,’
and ‘from another subsistence;’ and in a word let them anathematize the
Arian heresy, which has originated such irreligion. Nor let them say any
more, ‘We reject the terms,’ but that ‘we do not yet understand them;’
by way of having some reason to shew for declining them. But I know
well, and am sure, and they know it too, that if they could confess all
this and anathematize the Arian heresy, they would no longer deny those
terms of the Council. For on this account it was that the Fathers, after
declaring that the Son was begotten from the Father’s essence, and
Co-essential with Him, thereupon added, ‘But those who say’—what has
just been quoted, <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_472"></span>the symbols of the Arian heresy,—‘we
anathematize;’ I mean, in order to shew that the statements are
parallel, and that the terms in the Creed imply the disclaimers
subjoined, and that all who confess the terms, will certainly understand
the disclaimers. But those who both dissent from the latter and impugn
the former, such men are proved on every side to be foes of Christ.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p31"></span>41. Those who deny the Council
altogether, are sufficiently exposed by these brief remarks; those,
however, who accept everything else that was defined at Nicæa, and doubt
only about the Coessential, must not be treated as enemies; nor do we
here attack them as Ario-maniacs, nor as opponents of the Fathers, but
we discuss the matter with them as brothers with brothers <span
id="fr_3622"></span>[3623](#fn_3622) , who mean what we mean, and
dispute only about the word. For, confessing that the Son is from the
essence of the Father, and not from other subsistence, and that He is
not a creature nor work, but His genuine and natural offspring, and that
He is eternally with the Father as being His Word and Wisdom, they are
not far from accepting even the phrase, ‘Coessential.’ Now such is
Basil, who wrote from Ancyra concerning the faith <span
id="fr_3623"></span>[3624](#fn_3623) . For only to say ‘like according
to essence,’ is very far from signifying ‘of the essence,’ by which,
rather, as they say themselves, the genuineness of the Son to the Father
is signified. Thus tin is only like to silver, a wolf to a dog, and gilt
brass to the true metal; but tin is not from silver, nor could a wolf be
accounted the offspring of a dog. <span
id="fr_3624"></span>[3625](#fn_3624) But since they say that He is ‘of
the essence’ and ‘Like-in-essence,’ what do they signify by these but
‘Coessential <span id="fr_3625"></span>[3626](#fn_3625) ?’ For, while to
say only ‘Like-in-essence,’ does not necessarily convey ‘of the
essence,’ on the contrary, to say ‘Coessential,’ is to signify the
meaning of both terms, ‘Like-in-essence,’ and ‘of the essence.’ And
accordingly they themselves in controversy with those who say that the
Word is a creature, instead of allowing Him to be genuine Son, have
taken their proofs against them from human illustrations of son and
father <span id="fr_3626"></span>[3627](#fn_3626) , with this exception
that God is not as man, nor the generation of the Son as issue of man,
but such as may be ascribed to God, and is fit for us to think. Thus
they have called the Father the Fount of Wisdom and Life, and the Son
the Radiance of the Eternal Light, and the Offspring from the Fountain,
as He says, ‘I am the Life,’ and, ‘I Wisdom dwell with Prudence’ ([John
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006), [Prov.
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#012)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p36.2"></span>). But the Radiance from the Light, and
Offspring from Fountain, and Son from Father, how can these be so fitly
expressed as by ‘Coessential?’ And is there any cause of fear, lest,
because the offspring from men are coessential, the Son, by being called
Coessential, be Himself considered as a human offspring too? perish the
thought! not so; but the explanation is easy. For the Son is the
Father’s Word and Wisdom; whence we learn the impassibility and
indivisibility of such a generation from the Father <span
id="fr_3627"></span>[3628](#fn_3627) . For not even man’s word is part
of him, nor proceeds from him according to passion <span
id="fr_3628"></span>[3629](#fn_3628) ; much less God’s Word; whom the
Father has declared to be His own Son, lest, on the other hand, if we
merely heard of ‘Word,’ we should suppose Him, such as is the word of
man, impersonal; but that, hearing that He is Son, we may acknowledge
Him to be living Word and substantive Wisdom.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p39"></span>42. Accordingly, as in saying
‘offspring,’ we have no human thoughts, and, though we know God to be a
Father, we entertain no material ideas concerning Him, but while we
listen to these illustrations and terms, we think suitably of God, for
He is not as man, so in like manner, when we hear of ‘coessential,’ we
ought to transcend all sense, and, according to the Proverb, ‘understand
by the understanding what is set before us’ ([Prov. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#001)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p39.1"></span>); so as to know, that not by will, but in
truth, is He genuine from the Father, as Life from Fountain, and
Radiance from Light. Else <span id="fr_3629"></span>[3630](#fn_3629) why
should we understand ‘offspring’ and ‘son,’ in no corporeal way, while
we conceive of ‘coessential’ as after the manner of bodies? especially
since these terms are not here used about different subjects, but of
whom ‘offspring’ is predicated, of Him is ‘coessential’ also. <span
id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_473"></span>And
it is but consistent to attach the same sense to both expressions as
applied to the Saviour, and not to interpret ‘offspring’ in a good
sense, and ‘coessential’ otherwise; since to be consistent, ye who are
thus minded and who say that the Son is Word and Wisdom of the Father,
should entertain a different view of these terms also, and understand
Word in another sense, and Wisdom in yet another. But, as this would be
absurd (for the Son is the Father’s Word and Wisdom, and the Offspring
from the Father is one and proper to His essence), so the sense of
‘Offspring’ and ‘Coessential’ is one, and whoso considers the Son an
offspring, rightly considers Him also as ‘coessential.’

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p41"></span>43. This is sufficient to shew that
the meaning of the beloved ones <span
id="fr_3630"></span>[3631](#fn_3630) is not foreign nor far from the
‘Coessential.’ But since, as they allege <span
id="fr_3631"></span>[3632](#fn_3631) (for I have not the Epistle in
question), the Bishops who condemned the Samosatene <span
id="fr_3632"></span>[3633](#fn_3632) have said in writing that the Son
is not coessential with the Father, and so it comes to pass that they,
for caution and honour towards those who have so said, thus feel about
that expression, it will be to the purpose cautiously to argue with them
this point also. Certainly it is unbecoming to make the one conflict
with the others; for all are fathers; nor is it religious to settle,
that these have spoken well, and those ill; for all of them fell asleep
in Christ. Nor is it right to be disputatious, and to compare the
respective numbers of those who met in the Councils, lest the three
hundred seem to throw the lesser into the shade; nor to compare the
dates, lest those who preceded seem to eclipse those that came after.
For all, I say, are fathers; and yet not even the three hundred laid
down nothing new, nor was it in any self-confidence that they became
champions of words not in Scripture, but they fell back upon fathers, as
did the others, and used their words. For there have been two of the
name of Dionysius, much older than the seventy who deposed the
Samosatene, of whom one was of Rome, and the other of Alexandria. But a
charge had been laid by some persons against the Bishop of Alexandria
before the Bishop of Rome, as if he had said that the Son was made, and
not coessential with the Father. And, the synod at Rome being indignant,
the Bishop of Rome expressed their united sentiments in a letter to his
namesake. And so the latter, in defence, wrote a book with the title ‘of
Refutation and Defence;’ and thus he writes to the other:

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p45"></span>44. And <span
id="fr_3633"></span>[3634](#fn_3633) I wrote in another Letter a
refutation of the false charge which they bring against me, that I deny
that Christ is coessential with God. For though I say that I have not
found or read this term anywhere in holy Scripture, yet my remarks which
follow, and which they have not noticed, are not inconsistent with that
belief. For I instanced a human production, which is evidently
homogeneous, and I observed that undeniably fathers differed from their
children, only in not being the same individuals; otherwise there could
be neither parents nor children. And my Letter, as I said before, owing
to present circumstances, I am unable to produce, or I would have sent
you the very words I used, or rather a copy of it all; which, if I have
an opportunity, I will do still. But I am sure from recollection, that I
adduced many parallels of things kindred with each other, for instance,
that a plant grown from seed or from root, was other than that from
which it sprang, and yet altogether one in nature with it; and that a
stream flowing from a fountain, changed its appearance and its name, for
that neither the fountain was called stream, nor the stream fountain,
but both existed, and that the fountain was as it were father, but the
stream was what was generated from the fountain.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p47"></span>45. Thus the Bishop. If then any one
finds fault with those who met at Nicæa, as if they contradicted the
decisions of their predecessors, he might reasonably find fault also
with the seventy, because they did not keep to the statements of their
own predecessors; but such were the Dionysii and the Bishops assembled
on that occasion at Rome. But neither these nor those is it pious to
blame; for all were charged with the embassy of Christ, and all have
given diligence against the heretics, and the one party condemned the
Samosatene, while the other condemned the Arian heresy. And rightly have
both these and those written, and suitably to the matter in hand. And as
the blessed Apostle, writing to the Romans, said, ‘The Law is spiritual,
the Law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and good’ ([Rom.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p47.1"></span>); and soon after, ‘What the Law could not
do, in that it was weak’ ([Rom.
8.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p47.2"></span>), but wrote to the Hebrews, ‘The Law has
made no one perfect’ ([Heb. vii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#019)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p47.3"></span>); and to the Galatians, ‘By the Law no
one is justified’ ([Gal. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p47.4"></span>), but to Timothy, ‘The Law is good, if a
man use it lawfully’ ([1 Tim. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#008)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p47.5"></span>); and no one would accuse the Saint of
inconsistency and variation in writing, but rather would admire how
suitably he wrote to each, to teach the Romans and the others to turn
from the letter to the spirit, but to instruct the Hebrews and Galatians
to place their hopes, not in the Law, but in the Lord who had given the
Law;—so, if the Fathers of the two Councils made different mention of
the Coessential, we ought not in any respect to differ from them, but to
investigate their meaning, and this will fully <span id="page_474">p.
474</span> <span id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_474"></span>show us the agreement
of both the Councils. For they who deposed the Samosatene took
Coessential in a bodily sense, because Paul had attempted sophistry and
said, ‘Unless Christ has of man become God, it follows that He is
Coessential with the Father; and if so, of necessity there are three
essences, one the previous essence, and the other two from it;’ and
therefore guarding against this they said with good reason, that Christ
was not Coessential <span id="fr_3634"></span>[3635](#fn_3634) . For the
Son is not related to the Father as he imagined. But the Bishops who
anathematized the Arian heresy, understanding Paul’s craft, and
reflecting that the word ‘Coessential’ has not this meaning when used of
things immaterial <span id="fr_3635"></span>[3636](#fn_3635) , and
especially of God, and acknowledging that the Word was not a creature,
but an offspring from the essence, and that the Father’s essence was the
origin and root and fountain of the Son, and that he was of very truth
His Father’s likeness, and not of different nature, as we are, and
separate from the Father, but that, as being from Him, He exists as Son
indivisible, as radiance is with respect to Light, and knowing too the
illustrations used in Dionysius’s case, the ‘fountain,’ and the defence
of ‘Coessential’ and before this the Saviour’s saying, symbolical of
unity <span id="fr_3636"></span>[3637](#fn_3636) , ‘I and the Father are
one’ and ‘he that hath seen Me hath seen the Father’ ([John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p50.1"></span>), on these grounds reasonably asserted on
their part, that the Son was Coessential. And as, according to a former
remark, no one would blame the Apostle, if he wrote to the Romans about
the Law in one way, and to the Hebrews in another; in like manner,
neither would the present Bishops find fault with the ancient, having
regard to their interpretation, nor again in view of theirs and of the
need of their so writing about the Lord, would the ancient censure their
successors. Yes surely, each Council has a sufficient reason for its own
language; for since the Samosatene held that the Son was not before
Mary, but received from her the origin of His being, therefore those who
then met deposed him and pronounced him heretic; but concerning the
Son’s Godhead writing in simplicity, they arrived not at accuracy
concerning the Coessential, but, as they understood the word, so spoke
they about it. For they directed all their thoughts to destroy the
device of the Samosatene, and to shew that the Son was before all
things, and that, instead of becoming God from man, He, being God, had
put on a servant’s form, and being Word, had become flesh, as John says
([Phil. 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007), [John
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p50.2"></span>). This is how they dealt with the
blasphemies of Paul; but when Eusebius, Arius, and their fellows said
that though the Son was before time, yet was He made and one of the
creatures, and as to the phrase ‘from God,’ they did not believe it in
the sense of His being genuine Son from Father, but maintained it as it
is said of the creatures, and as to the oneness <span
id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637) of likeness <span
id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638) between the Son and the Father, did
not confess that the Son is like the Father according to essence, or
according to nature as a son resembles his father, but because of Their
agreement of doctrines and of teaching <span
id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639) ; nay, when they drew a line and an
utter distinction between the Son’s essence and the Father, ascribing to
Him an origin of being, other than the Father, and degrading Him to the
creatures, on this account the Bishops assembled at Nicæa, with a view
to the craft of the parties so thinking, and as bringing together the
sense from the Scriptures, cleared up the point, by affirming the
‘Coessential;’ that both the true genuineness of the Son might thereby
be known, and that to things originate might be ascribed nothing in
common with Him. For the precision of this phrase detects their
pretence, whenever they use the phrase ‘from God,’ and gets rid of all
the subtleties with which they seduce the simple. For whereas they
contrive to put a sophistical construction on all other words at their
will, this phrase only, as detecting their heresy, do they dread; which
the Fathers set down as a bulwark <span
id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640) against their irreligious notions
one and all.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p55"></span>46. Let then all contention cease, nor
<span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_475"></span>let us any longer conflict, though the
Councils have differently taken the phrase ‘Coessential,’ for we have
already assigned a sufficient defence of them; and to it the following
may be added:—We have not derived the word ‘Unoriginate’ from Scripture,
(for no where does Scripture call God Unoriginate,) yet since it has
many authorities in its favour, I was curious about the term, and found
that it too has different senses <span
id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641) . Some, for instance, call what is,
but is neither generated, nor has any personal cause at all,
unoriginate; and others, the uncreate. As then a person, having in view
the former of these senses, viz. ‘that which has no personal cause,’
might say that the Son was not unoriginate, yet would not blame any one
whom he perceived to have in view the other meaning, ‘not a work or
creature but an eternal offspring,’ and to affirm accordingly that the
Son was unoriginate, (for both speak suitably with a view to their own
object); so, even granting that the Fathers have spoken variously
concerning the Coessential, let us not dispute about it, but take what
they deliver to us in a religious way, when especially their anxiety was
directed in behalf of religion.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p57"></span>47. Ignatius, for instance, who was
appointed Bishop in Antioch after the Apostles, and became a martyr of
Christ, writes concerning the Lord thus: ‘There is one physician,
fleshly and spiritual, originate and unoriginate <span
id="fr_3642"></span>[3643](#fn_3642) ,’ God in man, true life in death,
both from Mary and from God;’ whereas some teachers who followed
Ignatius, write in their turn, ‘One is the Unoriginate, the Father, and
one the genuine Son from Him, true offspring, Word and Wisdom of the
Father <span id="fr_3643"></span>[3644](#fn_3643) .’ If therefore we
have hostile feelings towards these writers, then have we right to
quarrel with the Councils; but if, knowing their faith in Christ, we are
persuaded that the blessed Ignatius was right in writing that Christ was
originate on account of the flesh (for He became flesh), yet
unoriginate, because He is not in the number of things made and
originated, but Son from Father; and if we are aware too that those who
have said that the Unoriginate is One, meaning the Father, did not mean
to lay down that the Word was originated and made, but that the Father
has no personal cause, but rather is Himself Father of Wisdom, and in
Wisdom has made all things that are originated; why do we not combine
all our Fathers in religious belief, those who deposed the Samosatene as
well as those who proscribed the Arian heresy, instead of making
distinctions between them and refusing to entertain a right opinion of
them? I repeat, that those, in view of the sophistical explanation of
the Samosatene, wrote, ‘He is not coessential <span
id="fr_3644"></span>[3645](#fn_3644) ;’ and these, with an apposite
meaning, said that He was. For myself, I have written these brief
remarks, from my feeling towards persons who were religious to
Christ-ward; but were it possible to come by the Epistle which we are
told that the former wrote, I consider we should find further grounds
for the aforesaid proceeding of those blessed men. For it is right and
meet thus to feel, and to maintain a good conscience toward the Fathers,
if we be not spurious children, but have received the traditions from
them, and the lessons of religion at their hands.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p61"></span>48. Such then, as we confess and
believe, being the sense of the Fathers, proceed we even in their
company to examine once more the matter, calmly and with a kindly
sympathy, with reference to what has been said before, viz. whether the
Bishops collected at Nicæa do not really prove to have thought aright.
For if the Word be a work and foreign to the Father’s essence, so that
He is separated from the Father by the difference of nature, He cannot
be one in essence with Him, but rather He is homogeneous by nature with
the works, though He surpass them in grace <span
id="fr_3645"></span>[3646](#fn_3645) . On the other hand, if we confess
that He is not a work but the genuine offspring of the Father’s essence,
it would follow that He is inseparable from the Father, being
connatural, because He is begotten from Him. And being such, good reason
He should be called Coessential. <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_476"></span>Next, if the Son be not such from
participation, but is in His essence the Father’s Word and Wisdom, and
this essence is the offspring of the Father’s essence <span
id="fr_3646"></span>[3647](#fn_3646) , and its likeness as the radiance
is of the light, and the Son says, ‘I and the Father are One,’ and, ‘he
that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father’ ([John
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p63.1"></span>), how must we understand these words? or
how shall we so explain them as to preserve the oneness of the Father
and the Son? Now as to its consisting in agreement <span
id="fr_3647"></span>[3648](#fn_3647) of doctrines, and in the Son’s not
disagreeing with the Father, as the Arians say, such an interpretation
is a sorry one; for both the Saints, and still more Angels and
Archangels, have such an agreement with God, and there is no
disagreement among them. For he who disagreed, the devil, was beheld to
fall from the heavens, as the Lord said. Therefore if by reason of
agreement the Father and the Son are one, there would be things
originated which had this agreement with God, and each of these might
say, ‘I and the Father are One.’ But if this be absurd, and so it truly
is, it follows of necessity that we must conceive of Son’s and Father’s
oneness in the way of essence. For things originate, though they have an
agreement with their Maker, yet possess it only by influence <span
id="fr_3648"></span>[3649](#fn_3648) , and by participation, and through
the mind; the transgression of which forfeits heaven. But the Son, being
an offspring from the essence, is one by essence, Himself and the Father
that begat Him.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p66"></span>49. This is why He has equality with
the Father by titles expressive of unity <span
id="fr_3649"></span>[3650](#fn_3649) , and what is said of the Father,
is said in Scripture of the Son also, all but His being called
Father <span id="fr_3650"></span>[3651](#fn_3650) . For the Son Himself
said, ‘All things that the Father hath are Mine’ ([John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p68.6"></span>); and He says to the Father, ‘All Mine
are Thine, and Thine are Mine’ ([John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p68.7"></span>),—as for instance <span
id="fr_3651"></span>[3652](#fn_3651) , the name God; for ‘the Word was
God;’—Almighty, ‘Thus saith He that is, and that was, and that is to
come, the Almighty’ ([John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), [Rev.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p69.2"></span>):—the being Light, ‘I am,’ He says, ‘the
Light’ ([John viii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p69.3"></span>):—the Operative Cause, ‘All things were
made by Him,’ and, ‘whatsoever I see the Father do, I do also’ ([John
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [John
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p69.4"></span>):—the being Everlasting, ‘His eternal
power and godhead,’ and, ‘In the beginning was the Word,’ and, ‘He was
the true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the
world;’—the being Lord, for, ‘The Lord rained fire and brimstone from
the Lord,’ and the Father says, ‘I am the Lord,’ and, ‘Thus saith the
Lord, the Almighty God;’ and of the Son Paul speaks thus, ‘One Lord
Jesus Christ, through whom all things’ ([Rom.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020), [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009), [Gen.
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024), [Isa.
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#005), [Amos
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016), [1 Cor.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p69.5"></span>). And on the Father Angels wait, and
again the Son too is worshipped by them, ‘And let all the Angels of God
worship Him;’ and He is said to be Lord of Angels, for ‘the Angels
ministered unto Him,’ and ‘the Son of Man shall send His Angels.’ The
being honoured as the Father, for ‘that they may honour the Son,’ He
says, ‘as they honour the Father;’—being equal to God, ‘He counted it
not a prize to be equal with God’ ([Heb.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006), [Matt.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011), [Matt.
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031), [John
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023), [Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p69.6"></span>):— the being Truth from the True, and
Life from the Living, as being truly from the Fountain, even the
Father;—the quickening and raising the dead as the Father, for so it is
written in the Gospel. And of the Father it is written, ‘The Lord thy
God is One Lord,’ and, ‘The God of gods, the Lord, hath spoken, and hath
called the earth;’ and of the Son, ‘The Lord God hath shined upon us,’
and, ‘The God of gods shall be seen in Sion.’ And again of God, Isaiah
says, ‘Who is a God like unto Thee, taking away iniquities and passing
over unrighteousness?’ ([Deut. 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004),
[Ps. 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001), [Ps.
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027), [Ps.
84:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007),
[70](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#070), [Mic.
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p69.7"></span>). But the Son said to whom He would, ‘Thy
sins are forgiven thee;’ for instance, when, on the Jews murmuring, He
manifested the remission by His act, saying to the paralytic, ‘Rise,
take up thy bed, and go unto thy house.’ And of God Paul says, ‘To the
King eternal;’ and again of the Son, David in the Psalm, ‘Lift up your
gates, O ye rulers, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King
of glory shall come in.’ And Daniel heard it said, ‘His Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and His Kingdom shall not be destroyed’ ([Matt.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#005), [Mark
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#011), [1 Tim.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017), [Ps.
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007), [Dan.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#003), [Dan.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p69.8"></span>). And in a word, all that you find said
of the Father, so much will you find said of the Son, all but His being
Father, as has been said.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p70"></span>50. If then any think of other
beginning, and other Father, considering the equality of these
attributes, it is a mad thought. But if, since the Son is from the
Father, all that is the Father’s is the Son’s as in an image and
Expression, let it be considered dispassionately, whether an essence
foreign from the <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_477"></span>Father’s essence admit of such
attributes; and whether such a one be other in nature and alien in
essence, and not coessential with the Father. For we must take reverent
heed, lest transferring what is proper to the Father to what is unlike
Him in essence, and expressing the Father’s godhead by what is unlike in
kind and alien in essence, we introduce another essence foreign to Him,
yet capable of the properties of the first essence <span
id="fr_3652"></span>[3653](#fn_3652) , and lest we be silenced by God
Himself, saying, ‘My glory I will not give to another,’ and be
discovered worshipping this alien God, and be accounted such as were the
Jews of that day, who said, ‘Wherefore dost Thou, being a man, make
Thyself God?’ referring, the while, to another source the things of the
Spirit, and blasphemously saying, ‘He casteth out devils through
Beelzebub’ ([Isa. 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008), [John
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#033), [Luke
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#015)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p71.8"></span>). But if this is shocking, plainly the
Son is not unlike in essence, but coessential with the Father; for if
what the Father has is by nature the Son’s, and the Son Himself is from
the Father, and because of this oneness of godhead and of nature He and
the Father are one, and He that hath seen the Son hath seen the Father,
reasonably is He called by the Fathers ‘Coessential;’ for to what is
other in essence, it belongs not to possess such prerogatives.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p72"></span>51. And again, if, as we have said
before, the Son is not such by participation, but, while all things
originated have by participation the grace of God, He is the Father’s
Wisdom and Word of which all things partake <span
id="fr_3653"></span>[3654](#fn_3653) , it follows that He, being the
deifying and enlightening power of the Father, in which all things are
deified and quickened, is not alien in essence from the Father, but
coessential. For by partaking of Him, we partake of the Father; because
that the Word is the Father’s own. Whence, if He was Himself too from
participation, and not from the Father His essential Godhead and Image,
He would not deify <span id="fr_3654"></span>[3655](#fn_3654) , being
deified Himself. For it is not possible that He, who merely possesses
from participation, should impart of that partaking to others, since
what He has is not His own, but the Giver’s; and what He has received,
is barely the grace sufficient for Himself. However, let us fairly
examine the reason why some, as is said, decline the ‘Coessential,’
whether it does not rather shew that the Son is coessential with the
Father. They say then, as you have written, that it is not right to say
that the Son is coessential with the Father, because he who speaks of
‘coessential’ speaks of three, one essence pre-existing, and that those
who are generated from it are coessential: and they add, ‘If then the
Son be coessential with the Father, then an essence must be previously
supposed, from which they have been generated; and that the One is not
Father and the Other Son, but they are brothers together. <span
id="fr_3655"></span>[3656](#fn_3655) ’ As to all this, though it be a
Greek interpretation, and what comes from them does not bind us <span
id="fr_3656"></span>[3657](#fn_3656) , still let us see whether those
things which are called coessential and are collateral, as derived from
one essence presupposed, are coessential with each other, or with the
essence from which they are generated. For if only with each other, then
are they other in essence and unlike, when referred to that essence
which generated them; for other in essence is opposed to coessential;
but if each be coessential with the essence which generated them, it is
thereby confessed that what is generated from any thing, is coessential
with that which generated it; and there is no need of seeking for three
essences, but merely to seek whether it be true that this is from
that <span id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657) . For should it happen
that there were not two brothers, but that only one had come of that
essence, he that was generated would not be called alien in essence,
merely because there was no other from the essence than he; but though
alone, he must be coessential with him that begat him. For what shall we
say about Jephtha’s daughter; because she was only-begotten, and ‘he had
not,’ says Scripture, ‘other child’ ([Jud. xi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p77.2"></span>); and again, concerning the widow’s son,
whom the Lord raised from the dead, because he too had no brother, but
was only-begotten, was on that account neither of these coessential with
him that begat? Surely they were, for they were children, and this is a
property of children with reference to their parents. And <span
id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_478"></span>in
like manner also, when the Fathers said that the Son of God was from His
essence, reasonably have they spoken of Him as coessential. For the like
property has the radiance compared with the light. Else it follows that
not even the creation came out of nothing. For whereas men beget with
passion <span id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658) , so again they work
upon an existing subject matter, and otherwise cannot make. But if we do
not understand creation in a human way <span
id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659) , when we attribute it to God, much
less seemly is it to understand generation in a human way, or to give a
corporeal sense to Coessential; instead of receding from things
originate, casting away human images, nay, all things sensible, and
ascending <span id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660) to the Father <span
id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661) , lest we rob the Father of the Son
in ignorance, and rank Him among His own creatures.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p82"></span>52. Further, if, in confessing Father
and Son, we spoke of two beginnings or two Gods as Marcion and
Valentinus <span id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662) , or said that the
Son had any other mode of godhead, and was not the Image and Expression
of the Father, as being by nature born from Him, then He might be
considered unlike; for such essences are altogether unlike each other.
But if we acknowledge that the Father’s godhead is one and sole, and
that of Him the Son is the Word and Wisdom; and, as thus believing, are
far from speaking of two Gods, but understand the oneness of the Son
with the Father to be, not in likeness of their teaching, but according
to essence and in truth, and hence speak not of two Gods but of one God;
there being but one Form <span id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663) of
Godhead, as the Light is one and the Radiance; (for this was seen by the
Patriarch Jacob, as Scripture says, ‘The sun rose upon him when the Form
of God passed by,’ [Gen. xxxii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#031)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.8"></span>, LXX.); and beholding this, and
understanding of whom He was Son and Image, the holy Prophets say, ‘The
Word of the Lord came to me;’ and recognising the Father, who was beheld
and revealed in Him, they made bold to say, ‘The God of our fathers hath
appeared unto me, the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob’ ([Exod. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.9"></span>); this being so, wherefore scruple we to
call Him coessential who is one with the Father, and appears as doth the
Father, according to likeness and oneness of godhead? For if, as has
been many times said, He has it not to be proper to the Father’s
essence, nor to resemble, as a Son, we may well scruple: but if this be
the illuminating and creative Power, specially proper to the Father,
without Whom He neither frames nor is known (for all things consist
through Him and in Him); wherefore, perceiving the fact, do we decline
to use the phrase conveying it? For what is it to be thus connatural
with the Father, but to be one in essence with Him? for God attached not
to Him the Son from without <span id="fr_3664"></span>[3665](#fn_3664) ,
as needing a servant; nor are the works on a level with the Creator, and
honoured as He is, or to be thought one with the Father. Or let a man
venture to make the distinction, that the sun and the radiance are two
lights, or different essences; or to say that the radiance accrued to it
over and above, and is not a simple and pure offspring from the sun;
such, that sun and radiance are two, but the light one, because the
radiance is an offspring from the Sun. But, whereas not more divisible,
nay less divisible is the nature <span
id="fr_3665"></span>[3666](#fn_3665) of the Son towards the Father, and
the godhead not accruing to the Son, but the Father’s godhead being in
the Son, so that he that hath seen the Son hath seen the Father in Him;
wherefore should not such a one be called Coessential?

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p87"></span>53. Even this is sufficient to
dissuade you from blaming those who have said that the Son was
coessential with the Father, and yet let us examine the very term
‘Coessential,’ in itself, by way of seeing whether we ought to use it at
all, and whether it be a proper term, and is suitable to apply to the
Son. For you know yourselves, and no one can dispute it, that Like is
not predicated of essence, but of habits, and qualities; for in the case
of essences we speak, not of likeness, but of identity. Man, for
instance, is said to be like man, not in essence, but according to habit
and character; for in essence men are of one nature. And again, man is
not said to be unlike dog, but to be of different nature. <span
id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_479"></span>Accordingly while the former are of one
nature and coessential, the latter are different in both. Therefore, in
speaking of Like according to essence, we mean like by participation;
(for Likeness is a quality, which may attach to essence), and this would
be proper to creatures for they, by partaking, are made like to God. For
‘when He shall appear,’ says Scripture, ‘we shall be like Him’ ([1 John
iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p87.1"></span>), like, that is, not in essence but in
sonship, which we shall partake from Him. If then ye speak of the Son as
being by participation, then indeed call Him Like-in-essence; but thus
spoken of, He is not Truth, nor Light at all, nor in nature God. For
things which are from participation, are called like, not in reality,
but from resemblance to reality; so that they may swerve, or be taken
from those who share them. And this, again, is proper to creatures and
works. Therefore, if this be out of place, He must be, not by
participation, but in nature and truth Son, Light, Wisdom, God; and
being by nature, and not by sharing, He would properly be called, not
Like-in-essence, but Coessential. But what would not be asserted, even
in the case of others (for the Like has been shewn to be inapplicable to
essences), is it not folly, not to say violence, to put forward in the
case of the Son, instead of the ‘Coessential?’

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p88"></span>54. This is why the Nicene Council was
correct in writing, what it was becoming to say, that the Son, begotten
from the Father’s essence, is coessential with Him. And if we too have
been taught the same thing, let us not fight with shadows, especially as
knowing, that they who have so defined, have made this confession of
faith, not to misrepresent the truth, but as vindicating the truth and
religiousness towards Christ, and also as destroying the blasphemies
against Him of the Ario-maniacs. For this must be considered and noted
carefully, that, in using unlike-in-essence, and other-in-essence, we
signify not the true Son, but some one of the creatures, and an
introduced and adopted Son, which pleases the heretics; but when we
speak uncontroversially of the Coessential, we signify a genuine Son
born of the Father; though at this Christ’s enemies often burst with
rage <span id="fr_3666"></span>[3667](#fn_3666) . What then I have
learned myself, and have heard men of judgment say, I have written in
few words; but do you, remaining on the foundation of the Apostles, and
holding fast the traditions of the Fathers, pray that now at length all
strife and rivalry may cease, and the futile questions of the heretics
may be condemned, and all logomachy <span
id="fr_3667"></span>[3668](#fn_3667) ; and the guilty and murderous
heresy of the Arians may disappear, and the truth may shine again in the
hearts of all, so that all every where may ‘say the same thing’ ([1 Cor.
i. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p90.9"></span>), and think the same thing <span
id="fr_3668"></span>[3669](#fn_3668) , and that, no Arian contumelies
remaining, it may be said and confessed in every Church, ‘One Lord, one
faith, one baptism’ ([Eph. iv. 5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005)<span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p91.6"></span>), in Christ Jesus our Lord, through whom
to the Father be the glory and the strength, unto ages of ages. Amen.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p92"></span>Postscript.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p93"></span>55. After I had written my account of
the Councils <span id="fr_3669"></span>[3670](#fn_3669) , I had
information that the most irreligious <span
id="fr_3670"></span>[3671](#fn_3670) Constantius had sent Letters to the
Bishops remaining in Ariminum; and I have taken pains to get copies of
them from true brethren and to send them to you, and also what the
Bishops answered; that you may know the irreligious craft of the
Emperor, and the firm and unswerving purpose of the Bishops towards the
truth.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p96"></span>*Interpretation of the Letter* <span
id="fr_3671"></span>[3672](#fn_3671) .

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p98"></span>Constantius, Victorious and
Triumphant, Augustus, to all Bishops who are assembled at Ariminum.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p99"></span>That the divine and adorable Law is
our chief care, your excellencies are not ignorant; but as yet we have
been unable to receive the twenty Bishops sent by your wisdom, and
charged with the legation from you, for we are pressed by a necessary
expedition against the Barbarians; and as ye know, it beseems to have
the soul clear from every care, when one handles the matters of the
Divine Law. Therefore we have ordered the Bishops to await our return at
Adrianople; that, when all public affairs are well arranged, then at
length we may hear and weigh their suggestions. Let it not then be
grievous to your constancy to await their return, that, when they come
back with our answer to you, ye may be able to bring matters to a close
which so deeply affect the well-being of the Catholic Church.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p100"></span>This was what the Bishops received at
the hands of three emissaries.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p101"></span>Reply of the Bishops.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p102"></span>The letter of your humanity we have
received, most God-beloved Lord Emperor, which reports that, on account
of stress of public affairs, as yet you have been unable to attend to
our deputies; and in which you com<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>
<span id="xxii.ii.iii-Page_480"></span>mand us to await their return,
until your godliness shall be advised by them of what we have defined
conformably to our ancestors. However, we now profess and aver at once
by these presents, that we shall not recede from our purpose, as we also
instructed our deputies. We ask then that you will with serene
countenance command these letters of our mediocrity to be read; but also
that you will graciously receive those, with which we charged our
deputies. This however your gentleness comprehends as well as we, that
great grief and sadness at present prevail, because that, in these your
most happy days, so many Churches are without Bishops. And on this
account we again request your humanity, most God-beloved Lord Emperor,
that, if it please your religiousness, you would command us, before the
severe winter weather sets in, to return to our Churches, that so we may
be able, unto God Almighty and our Lord and Saviour Christ, His
Only-begotten Son, to fulfil together with our flocks our wonted prayers
in behalf of your imperial sway, as indeed we have ever performed them,
and at this time make them.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p103"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p103.1"></span>Additional</span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p103.2"></span>Note</span>.

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p104"></span>The ‘list of Sirmian confessions’
published by Newman as an *Excursus* to the *de Synodis* is omitted
here. It will be found printed as ‘Appendix iii.’ to his *Arians of the
Fourth Century.*

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p105"></span>The *Excursus* on a Creed ascribed
(at the Council of Ephesus, see Hard. *Conc.* i. 1640, Hahn. §83; Routh
*Rell.* iii. 367) to the 70 bishops who condemned Paul of Samosata, at
Antioch <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p105.1"></span>a.d.</span> 269, and containing the
formula <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p105.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p105.3"></span>μοούσιον</span> (against this, *supr.*
§§43–47), is also omitted, as bearing only very indirectly on the *de
Synodis.* Caspari *Alte und Neue Quellen* (xi), p. 161, has thoroughly
investigated the Confession since Newman wrote, and has proved (what
Newman half suspected) that the document is of Apollinarian origin. As
Caspari was unaware of Newman’s discussion, this result comes as the
result of two independent investigations pursued on very different
lines.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3602"></span>[468:3603](2040395.htm#fr_3602) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p4"></span> The subject before us, naturally rises
out of what has gone before. The Anomœan creed was hopeless; but with
the Semi-Arians all that remained was the adjustment of phrases.
Accordingly, Athan. goes on to propose such *explanations* as might
clear the way for a re-union of Christendom. §47, note.

<span id="fn_3603"></span>[468:3604](2040395.htm#fr_3603) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p5"></span> Vid. *Orat.* i. 8; iv. 23.

<span id="fn_3604"></span>[468:3605](2040395.htm#fr_3604) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p7.2"></span>ρα</span>. vid. *Orat.* i. §15; iv. §10;
*Serap.* ii. 1. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p7.4"></span>καίρος</span> *de Decr*. §15. init.

<span id="fn_3605"></span>[468:3606](2040395.htm#fr_3605) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p8"></span> ‘The Apostle’ is a common title of S.
Paul in antiquity. Cf. August. *ad Bonifac.* iii. 3.

<span id="fn_3606"></span>[469:3607](2040395.htm#fr_3606) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p9"></span> Cf. *de Decr.* 22, note 1.

<span id="fn_3607"></span>[469:3608](2040395.htm#fr_3607) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p10"></span> *De Decr.* 24, note 9.

<span id="fn_3608"></span>[469:3609](2040395.htm#fr_3608) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p11"></span> Vid. *supr. Orat.* i. §15; *de Decr.*
§22, note 1.

<span id="fn_3609"></span>[469:3610](2040395.htm#fr_3609) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p13"></span> *De Decr.* 29, note 7.

<span id="fn_3610"></span>[469:3611](2040395.htm#fr_3610) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p13.6"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p14"></span> Democritus, or Epicurus.

<span id="fn_3611"></span>[469:3612](2040395.htm#fr_3611) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p15"></span> Anaxagoras.

<span id="fn_3612"></span>[469:3613](2040395.htm#fr_3612) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p17"></span> *De Decr.* §19.

<span id="fn_3613"></span>[470:3614](2040395.htm#fr_3613) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p18"></span> *De Decr.* 18, note 8.

<span id="fn_3614"></span>[470:3615](2040395.htm#fr_3614) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p20"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §8 (1).\]

<span id="fn_3615"></span>[470:3616](2040395.htm#fr_3615) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p21"></span> *Supr.* p. 73.

<span id="fn_3616"></span>[470:3617](2040395.htm#fr_3616) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p22"></span> *Supr.* §29.

<span id="fn_3617"></span>[470:3618](2040395.htm#fr_3617) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p23"></span> *Supr.* §8.

<span id="fn_3618"></span>[470:3619](2040395.htm#fr_3618) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p25"></span> It must not be supposed from this
that he approves \[as adequate\] the phrase <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.2"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.3"></span>μοιος κατ᾽ οὐσίαν</span> or <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.4"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.5"></span>μοιούσιος</span>, in
this Treatise, for *infr.* §53. he rejects it on the ground that when we
speak of ‘like,’ we imply qualities, not essence. Yet he himself
frequently uses it, as other Fathers, and *Orat.* i. §26. uses <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.7"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.8"></span>μοιος τῆς
οὐσίας</span>.

<span id="fn_3619"></span>[471:3620](2040395.htm#fr_3619) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p25.10"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p26"></span> \[Prolegg. ch. ii. §8 (2) a.\]

<span id="fn_3620"></span>[471:3621](2040395.htm#fr_3620) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p28"></span> Vid. p. 162, note 8. Cf. Greg. Naz.
*Orat.* 31. 24. vid. also Hil. *contr. Constant.* 16. August. *Ep.* 238.
n. 4–6. Cyril. *Dial.* i. p. 391. Petavius refers to other passages. *de
Trin.* v. 5. §6.

<span id="fn_3621"></span>[471:3622](2040395.htm#fr_3621) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p30"></span> §8.

<span id="fn_3622"></span>[472:3623](2040395.htm#fr_3622) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p32"></span> \[See Prolegg. ch. ii. §8 (2) c.\]

<span id="fn_3623"></span>[472:3624](2040395.htm#fr_3623) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p33"></span> \[Ath. is referring to the Council of
Ancyra, 358.\]

<span id="fn_3624"></span>[472:3625](2040395.htm#fr_3624) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p34"></span> So also *de Decr.* §23. p. 40.
Pseudo-Ath. *Hyp. Mel. et Euseb.* Hil. *de Syn.* 89. The illustration
runs into this position, ‘Things that are like, \[need\] not be the
same.’ vid. §39. note 5. On the other hand, Athan. himself contends for
the <span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p34.2"></span>ταὐτὸν τῇ
ὁμοιώσει</span>, ‘the *same* in likeness.’ *de Decr.* §20.

<span id="fn_3625"></span>[472:3626](2040395.htm#fr_3625) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p34.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p35"></span> Vid. Socr. iii. 25. p. 204. a.b. *Una
substantia* religiose prædicabitur quæ ex *nativitatis* proprietate et
ex naturæ *similitudine* ita indifferens sit, ut una dicatur. Hil. *de
Syn.* 67.

<span id="fn_3626"></span>[472:3627](2040395.htm#fr_3626) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p36"></span> Here at last Athan. alludes to the
Ancyrene Synodal Letter, vid. Epiph. *Hær.* 73, 5 and 7. about which he
has kept a pointed silence above, when tracing the course of the Arian
confessions. That is, he treats the Semi-Arians as tenderly as S.
Hilary, *as soon as* they break company with the Arians. The Ancyrene
Council of 358 was a protest against the ‘blasphemia’ or second Sirmian
Confession

<span id="fn_3627"></span>[472:3628](2040395.htm#fr_3627) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p37"></span> It is usual with the Fathers to use
the two terms ‘Son’ and ‘Word,’ to guard and complete the ordinary sense
of each other, vid. p. 157, note 6; and p. 167, note 4. The term Son,
used by itself, was abused into Arianism; and the term Word into
Sabellianism; again the term Son might be accused of introducing
material notions, and the term Word of imperfection and transitoriness.
Each of them corrected the other. *Orat.* i. §28. iv. §8. Euseb. *contr.
Marc.* ii. 4. p. 54. Isid. Pel. *Ep.* iv. 141. So S. Cyril says that we
learn ‘from His being called Son that He is from Him, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p37.2"></span>τὸ ἐξ αὐτοῦ</span>;
from His being called Wisdom and Word, that He is in Him,’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p37.4"></span>τὸ ἐν αὐτῷ</span>.
*Thesaur.* iv. p. 31. However, S. Athanasius observes, that properly
speaking the one term implies the other, i.e. in its fulness. *Orat.*
iii. §3. iv. §24 fin. On the other hand the heretics accused Catholics
of inconsistency, or of a union of opposite errors, because they
accepted all the Scripture images together. Vigilius of Thapsus, *contr.
Eutych*. ii. init. vid. also i. init. and Eulogius, *ap. Phot*. 225, p.
759.

<span id="fn_3628"></span>[472:3629](2040395.htm#fr_3628) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p37.6"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p38"></span> *De Decr.* §10.

<span id="fn_3629"></span>[472:3630](2040395.htm#fr_3629) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p40"></span> Vid. Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 3, &c.

<span id="fn_3630"></span>[473:3631](2040395.htm#fr_3630) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p42"></span> §54, note 2.

<span id="fn_3631"></span>[473:3632](2040395.htm#fr_3631) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p43"></span> Vid. Hilar. *de Syn.* 81 init.;
Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 12.

<span id="fn_3632"></span>[473:3633](2040395.htm#fr_3632) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p44"></span> There were three Councils held
against Paul of Samosata, of the dates of 264, 269, and an intermediate
year. The third is spoken of in the text, which contrary to the opinion
of Pagi, S. Basnage, and Tillemont, Pearson fixes at 265 or 266.

<span id="fn_3633"></span>[473:3634](2040395.htm#fr_3633) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p46"></span> Vid. p. 167, and a different
translation, p. 183.

<span id="fn_3634"></span>[474:3635](2040395.htm#fr_3634) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p47.6"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p48"></span> This is in fact the objection which
Arius urges against the Coessential, *supr.* §16, when he calls it the
doctrine of Manichæus and Hieracas, vid. §16, note 11. The same
objection is protested against by S. Basil, *contr. Eunom.* i. 19.
Hilar. *de Trin.* iv. 4. Yet, while S. Basil agrees with Athan. in his
account of the reason of the Council’s rejection of the word, S. Hilary
on the contrary reports that Paul himself accepted it, i.e. in a
Sabellian sense, and therefore the Council rejected it. ‘Male homoüsion
Samosatenus confessus est, sed numquid melius Arii negaverunt.’ *de
Syn.* 86.

<span id="fn_3635"></span>[474:3636](2040395.htm#fr_3635) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p49"></span> Cf. Soz. iii. 18. The heretical
party, starting with the notion in which their heresy in all its shades
consisted, that the Son was a distinct being from the Father, concluded
that ‘*like* in essence’ was the only term which would express the
relation of the Son to the Father. Here then the word ‘coessential’ did
just enable the Catholics to join issue with them, as exactly expressing
what the Catholics wished to express, viz. that there was no such
distinction between Them as made the term ‘like’ necessary, but that as
material parent and offspring are individuals under one common
*species,* so the Eternal Father and Son are Persons under one common
*individual essence.*

<span id="fn_3636"></span>[474:3637](2040395.htm#fr_3636) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p50"></span> §49.

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[474:3638](2040395.htm#fr_3637) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p50.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p51.1"></span>τὴν τῆς ὁμοιώσεως ἑνότητα</span>: and so
pp. 163, note 9, 165, 166. And Basil. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p51.3"></span>ταὐτότητα τῆς φύσεως</span>, *Ep.* 8. 3:
\[but\] <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p51.5"></span>ταὐτότητα τῆς οὐσιάς</span>, Cyril *in
Joan.* lib. iii. c. v. p. 302. \[cf. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p51.7"></span>ταὐτοούσιον</span>, p. 315, note 6.\] It
is uniformly asserted by the Catholics that the Father’s godhead, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p51.9"></span>θεότης</span>, is the
Son’s; e.g. *infr.* §52; *supr.* p. 329 b, line 8; p. 333, note 5;
*Orat.* i. 49 fin. ii. §18. §73. fin. iii. §26; iii. §5 fin. iii. §53;
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p51.11"></span>μίαν τὴν
θεότητα καὶ τὸ ἴδιον τῆς οὐσίας τοῦ πατρός</span>. §56 *supr.* p. 84
fin. vid. §52. note. This is an approach to the doctrine of the Una Res,
defined in the fourth Lateran Council \[in 1215, see Harnack *Dogmg.*
iii. 447, note, and on the doctrine of the Greek Fathers, *Prolegg.* ch.
ii. §3 (2) b.\]

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[474:3639](2040395.htm#fr_3638) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p51.13"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p52"></span> Vid. Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 9 fin.

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[474:3640](2040395.htm#fr_3639) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p53"></span> §23, note 3.

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[474:3641](2040395.htm#fr_3640) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p54.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p54.2"></span>πιτείχισμα</span>; in like manner <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p54.4"></span>σύνδεσμον
πίστεως</span>. Epiph. *Ancor.* 6; cf. *Hær.* 69. 70; Ambros. *de Fid.*
iii. 15.

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[475:3642](2040395.htm#fr_3641) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56"></span> \[In this passage the difficulties
and confusion which surround the terms <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.3"></span>γένητος</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.5"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.6"></span>γέννητος</span>
(*supr.* p. 149, &c.) come to a head. The question is (assuming, as
proved by Lightfoot, the validity of the distinction of the two in
Athan.) which word is to be read here. The <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.8"></span>mss.</span> are divided throughout between
the two readings, but it is clear (so Lightf. and Zahn on Ign. *Eph.* 7)
that one word alone is in view throughout the present passage. That
word, then, is pronounced by Lightf., partly on the strength of the
quotation from the unnamed teachers (*infr.* note 7), partly on the
ground of a reference to §26 (see note 10 there), to be <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.9"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.10"></span>γέννητος</span>. With
all deference to so great an authority, I cannot hesitate to pronounce
for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.12"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.13"></span>γένητος</span>. (1.) The parallelism of
the two senses with the third and fourth senses of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.15"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.16"></span>γέν</span>. *Orat.*
i. 30. is almost decisive by itself. (2.) Ath.’s explanation of
Ignatius. viz. that Christ is <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.18"></span>γένητος</span> *on account of the flesh*
(he would have referred <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.21"></span>γέννητος</span> to His Essence, *Orat*.
i. 56, certainly not to the flesh), while as Son and Word He is distinct
from <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.23"></span>γένητα</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.25"></span>ποιήματα</span>, is
even more decisive. (3.) His explanation §46, *sub fin.* that the Son is
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.27"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.28"></span>γένητος</span>
because He is <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.29"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.30"></span>ΐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.31"></span>διον γέννημα</span> would lose all sense
if <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.32"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.33"></span>γέννητος</span> were read. As a matter of
fact, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.35"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.36"></span>γέννητος</span> is the specific, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.38"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.39"></span>γένητος</span> the
generic term: the former was not applicable to the Eternal Son; the
latter was, except in the first of the two senses distinguished in the
text; a sense, however, more properly coming under the specific idea of
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.41"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.42"></span>γέννητος</span>. This
was the ambiguity which made the similarity of the two words so
dangerous a weapon in Arian hands. The above note does not of course
affect the true reading of Ign. *Eph.* 7, as to which Lightfoot and Zahn
speak with authority: but it seems clear that Athan., however
mistakenly, *quotes* Ign. with the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.44"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p56.45"></span>γένητος</span>.\]

<span id="fn_3642"></span>[475:3643](2040395.htm#fr_3642) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p58"></span> Ign. *ad Eph.* \[Lightf. *Ign.* p.
90, Zahn *Patr. Apost.* ii. p. 338.\]

<span id="fn_3643"></span>[475:3644](2040395.htm#fr_3643) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p59"></span> Not known, but cf. Clement. *Strom.*
vi. 7. p. 769. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p59.2"></span>ἓ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p59.3"></span>ν μὲν τὸ ἀγέννητον, ὁ παντοκράτωρ θεὸς, ἓν
δὲ καὶ τὸ προγεννηθὲν δι᾽ οὖ τὰ πάντα ἐγένετο, καὶ χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ἐγένετο
οὐδὲ ἕν</span>.

<span id="fn_3644"></span>[475:3645](2040395.htm#fr_3644) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p59.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p60"></span> \[On the subject of the rejection of
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p60.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p60.3"></span>μοούσιον</span> at this Council of
Antioch, see *Prolegg.* ch. ii. §3 (2) b.\]

<span id="fn_3645"></span>[475:3646](2040395.htm#fr_3645) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p62"></span> *De Decr.* §1.

<span id="fn_3646"></span>[476:3647](2040395.htm#fr_3646) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p63"></span> §51, note.

<span id="fn_3647"></span>[476:3648](2040395.htm#fr_3647) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p64"></span> §23, note 3, yet vid. Hipp. *contr.
Noet.* 7.

<span id="fn_3648"></span>[476:3649](2040395.htm#fr_3648) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p65.1"></span>κινήσει</span> vid. Cyril. *contr. Jul.*
viii. p. 274. Greg. Nyss. *de Hom. Op.* p. 87.

<span id="fn_3649"></span>[476:3650](2040395.htm#fr_3649) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p67"></span> §45.

<span id="fn_3650"></span>[476:3651](2040395.htm#fr_3650) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p68"></span> By ‘the Son being *equal* to the
Father,’ is but meant that He is His ‘exact image;’ it does not imply
any distinction of essence. Cf. Hil. *de Syn.* 73. But this implies some
exception, for else He would not be like or equal, but the same. *ibid.*
72. Hence He is the Father’s image in all things except in being the
Father, <span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p68.2"></span>πλὴν τῆς
ἀγεννησίας καὶ τῆς πατρότητος</span>. Damasc. *de Imag.* iii. 18. p.
354. vid. also Basil. *contr. Eun.* ii. 28; Theod. *Inconfus.* p. 91;
Basil. *Ep.* 38. 7 fin. \[Through missing this point the\] Arians asked
why the Son was not the beginning of a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p68.4"></span>θεογονία</span>. *Supr.* p. 319 a, note 1.
vid. *infr.* note 8.

<span id="fn_3651"></span>[476:3652](2040395.htm#fr_3651) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p68.8"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p69"></span> Vid. *Orat.* iii. §4.

<span id="fn_3652"></span>[477:3653](2040395.htm#fr_3652) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p71"></span> Arianism was in the dilemma of
denying Christ’s divinity, or introducing a second God. The Arians
proper went off on the former side of the alternative, the Semi-Arians
on the latter; and Athan., as here addressing the Semi Arians, insists
on the greatness of the latter error. This of course was *the* objection
which attached to the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p71.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p71.3"></span>μοιούσιον, ἀπαράλλακτος εἴκων</span>, &c.,
when disjoined from the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p71.5"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p71.6"></span>μοούσιον</span>; and Eusebius’s language,
*supr.* p. 75, note 7, shews us that it is not an imaginary one.

<span id="fn_3653"></span>[477:3654](2040395.htm#fr_3653) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p73"></span> *De Decr.* §10. p. 15, note 4.

<span id="fn_3654"></span>[477:3655](2040395.htm#fr_3654) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p74"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p74.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p74.2"></span>θεοποίησε</span> *Orat.*ii. §70. *de
Decr.* §14.

<span id="fn_3655"></span>[477:3656](2040395.htm#fr_3655) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p74.4"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p75"></span> Cf. *supr.* p. 314, note 1, Cyr.
*Thesaur.* pp. 22, 23.

<span id="fn_3656"></span>[477:3657](2040395.htm#fr_3656) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p76"></span> Cf. p. 169, note 4a \[and on <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p76.2"></span>οὐσία</span> as a
philosophical and theological term, *Prolegg.* ch. ii. §3 (2) b. On the
divergence of its theological use from its philosophical sense, see\]
Anastasius, *Hodeg.* 6. and Theorian, *Legat. ad Arm.* pp. 441, 2. Socr.
iii. 25. Damascene, speaking of the Jacobite use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p76.4"></span>φύσις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p76.5"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p76.6"></span>πόστασις</span> says,
‘Who of holy men ever thus spoke? unless ye introduce to us your S.
Aristotle, as a thirteenth Apostle, and prefer the idolater to the
divinely inspired.’ *cont.* *Jacob.* 10. p. 399. and so again Leontius,
speaking of Philoponus, who from the Monophysite confusion of nature and
hypostasis was led into Tritheism. ‘He thus argued, taking his start
from Aristotelic principles; for Aristotle says that there are of
individuals particular substances as well as one common.’ *De Sect.* v.
fin.

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[477:3658](2040395.htm#fr_3657) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p76.8"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p77"></span> The argument, when drawn out, is
virtually this: if, because two subjects are coessential, a third is
pre-supposed of which they partake, then, since either of these two is
coessential with that of which both partake, a new third must be
supposed in which it and the pre-existing substance partake and thus an
infinite series of things coessential must be supposed. Vid. Basil.
*Ep.* 52. n. 2. \[Cf. Aristot. *Frag.* 183, p. 1509 b 23.\]

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[478:3659](2040395.htm#fr_3658) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p77.3"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p78"></span> *Orat.* i. §28.

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[478:3660](2040395.htm#fr_3659) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p79"></span> Vid. *de Decr.* §11, note 6: also
Cyril, *Thesaur.* iv. p. 29: Basil. *contr.* *Eun.* ii. 23: Hil. *de
Syn.* 17.

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[478:3661](2040395.htm#fr_3660) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p79.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p80"></span> Naz. *Orat.* 28. 2.

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[478:3662](2040395.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p81"></span> S. Basil says in like manner that,
though God is Father <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p81.2"></span>κυρίως</span> properly, *supr.* p. 156,
note 1, 157, note 6, 171, note 5, 319, note 3), yet it comes to the same
thing if we were to say that He is <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p81.4"></span>τροπικῶς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p81.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p81.7"></span>κ μεταφορᾶς</span>,
figuratively, such, *contr.* *Eun.* ii. 24; <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p81.9"></span>γέννησις</span> implies two
things,—passion, and relationship, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p81.11"></span>οἰκείωσις φύσεως</span>; accordingly we
must take the latter as an indication of the divine sense of the term.
Cf. also *supr.* p. 158, note 7, p. 322, *Orat.* ii. 32, iii. 18, 67,
and Basil. *contr.* *Eunom.* ii. 17; Hil. *de Trin.* iv. 2. Vid. also
Athan. *ad* *Serap.* i. 20. and Basil. *Ep*. 38. n. 5. and what is said
of the office of faith in each of these.

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[478:3663](2040395.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p83"></span> *Supr.* p. 167, note 7, and p. 307.

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[478:3664](2040395.htm#fr_3663) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p83.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p84"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.1"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.2"></span>νος ὄντος εἴδους θεότητος</span>: for the
word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.3"></span>εἶδος</span>, cf. *Orat.* iii. 16 is
generally applied to the Son, as in what follows, and is synonymous
\[?\] with hypostasis; but it is remarkable that here it is almost
synonymous with <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.5"></span>οὐσία</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.6"></span>φύσις</span>. Indeed in one sense nature,
substance, and hypostasis, are all synonymous, i.e. as one and all
denoting the Una Res, which is Almighty God. The apparent confusion is
useful as reminding us of this great truth; vid. note 8, *infr.*

<span id="fn_3664"></span>[478:3665](2040395.htm#fr_3664) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p84.10"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p85"></span> *De Decr.* §31.

<span id="fn_3665"></span>[478:3666](2040395.htm#fr_3665) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p85.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p86"></span> \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p86.1"></span>φύσις</span> is here (as the apodosis of
the clause shows) as well as in the next section, used as a somewhat
more vague equivalent for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p86.3"></span>οὐσία</span>, not, as Newman contends in
an omitted note, for ‘person,’ a use which is scarcely borne out by the
(no doubt somewhat fluctuating) senses of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p86.5"></span>φύσις</span> in the passages quoted by him
from Alexander (in Theod. *H. E.* i. 4, cf. Origen’s use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p86.7"></span>οὐσία</span>,
*Prolegg.* ch. ii. §3 (2) a) and Cyril *c.* *Nest.* iii. p. 91. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p86.9"></span>φύσις</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p86.10"></span>οὐσία</span> are
nearly equivalent in the manifesto of Basil of Ancyra, whom Ath. has in
view here, see Epiph. *Hær.* 73. 12–22.\]

<span id="fn_3666"></span>[479:3667](2040395.htm#fr_3666) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p89"></span> p. 171, note 6.

<span id="fn_3667"></span>[479:3668](2040395.htm#fr_3667) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p90"></span> And so <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p90.2"></span>ταῖς λογομαχίαις</span>, Basil *de Sp. S.*
n. 16. It is used with an allusion to the fight against the Word, as
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p90.4"></span>χριστομαχεῖν</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p90.5"></span>θεομαχεῖν</span>. Thus
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxii.ii.iii-p90.7"></span>λογομαχεῖν
μελετήσαντες, καὶ λοιπὸν πνευματομαχοῦντες, ἔσονται μετ᾽ ὀλίγον νεκροὶ
τῇ ἀλογί& 139·</span>. *Serap.* iv. 1.

<span id="fn_3668"></span>[479:3669](2040395.htm#fr_3668) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p90.10"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p91"></span> Cf. Hil. *de Syn.* 77, and appendix,
note 3, also *supr.* p. 303, and note. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p91.2"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p91.3"></span>μοούσιον</span> was not imposed upon
Ursacius and Valens, <span class="c10"><span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p91.5"></span>a.d.</span> 347, by Pope Julius; nor in
the Council of Aquileia in 381, was it offered by S. Ambrose to
Palladius and Secundianus. S. Jerome’s account of the apology made by
the Fathers of Ariminum is of the same kind. ‘We thought,’ they said,
‘the sense corresponded to the words, nor in the Church of God, where
there is simplicity, and a pure confession, did we fear that one thing
would be concealed in the heart, another uttered by the lips. We were
deceived by our good opinion of the bad.’ *ad Lucif.* 19.

<span id="fn_3669"></span>[479:3670](2040395.htm#fr_3669) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p94"></span> §11, note 7.

<span id="fn_3670"></span>[479:3671](2040395.htm#fr_3670) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p95"></span> §12, note 2.

<span id="fn_3671"></span>[479:3672](2040395.htm#fr_3671) <span
id="xxii.ii.iii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xxii.ii.iii-p97"></span> These two Letters are both in Socr.
ii. 37. And the latter is in Theod. *H. E.* ii. 15. p. 878. in a
different version from the Latin original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodal Letter to the People of Antioch. (Tomus ad
Antiochenos.)](2040396)
