[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040109)  [Next](2040111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xiii-p1"></span> §*13. Here again, was God to keep
silence? to allow to false gods the worship He made us to render to
Himself? A king whose subjects had revolted would, after sending letters
and messages, go to them in person. How much more shall God restore in
us the grace of His image. This men, themselves but copies, could not
do. Hence the Word Himself must come (1) to recreate, (2) to destroy
death in the Body.*

<span id="vii.ii.xiii-p2"></span>So then, men having thus become
brutalized, and demoniacal deceit thus clouding every place, and hiding
the knowledge of the true God, what was God to do? To keep still silence
at so great a thing, and suffer men to be led astray by demons and not
to know God? 2. And what was the use of man having been originally made
in God’s image? For it had been better for him to have been made simply
like a brute animal, than, once made rational, for him to live <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) the life of the brutes. 3. Or where
was any necessity at all for his receiving the idea of God to begin
with? For if he be not fit to receive it even now, it were better it had
not been given him at first. 4. Or what profit to God Who has made them,
or what glory to Him could it be, if men, made by Him, do not worship
Him, but think that others are their makers? For God thus proves to have
made these for others instead of for Himself. 5. Once again, a merely
human king does not let the lands he has colonized pass to others to
serve them, nor go over to other men; but he warns them by letters, and
often sends to them by friends, or, if need be, he comes in person, to
put them to rebuke in the last resort by his presence, only that they
may not serve others and his own work be spent for naught. 6. Shall not
God much more spare His own creatures, that they be not led astray from
Him and serve things of nought? especially since such going astray
proves the cause of their ruin and undoing, and since it was unfitting
that they should perish which had once been partakers of God’s image. 7.
What then was God to do? or what was to be done save the renewing of
that which was in God’s image, so that by it men might once more be able
to know Him? But how could this have come to pass save by the presence
of the very Image of God, our Lord Jesus Christ? For by men’s means it
was impossible, since they are but made after an image; nor by angels
either, for not even they are (God’s) images. Whence the Word of God
came in His own person, that, as He was the Image of the Father, He
might be able to create afresh the man after the image. 8. But, again,
it could not else have taken place had not death and corruption been
done away. 9. Whence He took, in natural fitness, a mortal body, that
while death might in it be once for all done away, men made after His
Image might once more be renewed. None other then was sufficient for
this need, save the Image of the Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[43:237](2040110.htm#fr_236) <span
id="vii.ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xiii-p3"></span> The Bened. text is corrected here on
the ground (1) of <span class="c10"><span
id="vii.ii.xiii-p3.2"></span>ms.</span> evidence, (2) of construction
(for which see 6, 7, and *c. Gent.* 20. 3).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A portrait once effaced must be restored from the original. Thus
the Son of the Father came to seek, save, and regenerate. No other way
was possible. Blinded himself, man could not see to heal. The witness of
creation had failed to preserve him, and could not bring him back. The
Word alone could do so. But how? Only by revealing Himself as
Man.](2040111)
