[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040396)  [Next](2040398) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span
id="xxiii.i-Page_481"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction to Tomus Ad Antiochenos.</span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxiii.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> word ‘tome’ (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xxiii.i-p3.2"></span>τόμος</span>) means either
a section, or, in the case of such a document as that before us, a
concise statement. It is commonly applied to synodical letters (cf. the
‘Tome’ of Leo, <span class="c10"><span
id="xxiii.i-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 450, to Flavian).

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span>Upon the accession of Julian (November,
361) the Homœan ascendancy which had marked the last six years of
Constantius collapsed. A few weeks after his accession (Feb. 362) an
edict recalled all the exiled Bishops. On Feb. 21 Athanasius re-appeared
in Alexandria. He was joined there by Lucifer of Cagliari and Eusebius
of Vercellæ, who were in exile in Upper Egypt. Once more free, he took
up the work of peace which had busied him in the last years of his exile
(see Prolegg. ch. ii. §9). With a heathen once more on the throne of the
Cæsars, there was everything to sober Christian party spirit, and to
promise success to the council which met under Athanasius during the
ensuing summer. Among the twenty-one bishops who formed the assembly the
most notable are Eusebius of Vercellæ, Asterius of Petra, and Dracontius
of Lesser Hermopolis and Adelphius of Onuphis, the friends and
correspondents of Athanasius. The rest, with the exception of Anatolius
of Eubœa, were all from Egypt and Marmarica, and (probably three only)
from S.W. Asia. The council (Newman, *Arians,* v. i.; Gwatkin, *Stud.*
p. 205, Krüger, *Lucif.* 45–53, was occupied with four problems: (1) The
terms on which communion should be vouchsafed to those Arians who
desired to re-unite (§§3, 8). They were to be asked for nothing beyond
the Nicene test, and an express anathema against Arianism, including the
doctrine that the Holy Spirit is a Creature. The latter point had been
rising into prominence of late, and had called forth from Athanasius his
four Discourses to Serapion of Thmuis. The emphatic way in which the
point is pressed in §3, implies that an attempt was being made in some
quarter to subscribe the Nicene Creed, while maintaining the Arian
position with regard to the Holy Spirit. The language of §3 cannot be
reconciled with the hypothesis (Gwatkin, *Studies,* 233), that no formal
requirement was made by this council on the subject. The person aimed at
was possibly Acacius, who (*Serap.* iv. 7) had treated the subject with
levity, and yet was now disposed to come to terms (as he did a year
later, Socr. iii. 25). It is true that we find the names of Macedonius
and his followers (N.B. not Eleusius) in the number of the 59 who betook
themselves to Liberius (Socr. iv. 12), and neither in their letter nor
in his reply is there any allusion to the doctrine of the Holy Spirit;
and that Basil (*Ep.* 204), with the sanction of Athanasius (cf. below,
*Letters* 62, 63), did not press the test upon those who were otherwise
orthodox. But the council of 362 has Syrian circumstances specially in
view; and however we may explain it, its language is too clear to be
mistaken. (On the *general* subject, cf. *Letter* 55.) (2) The Arian
Christology also occupied the council (§7). The integrity of Christ’s
human nature on the one hand, its perfect Union with the Word on the
other, are clearly emphasised. This question had begun to come into
prominent discussion in several parts of the Christian world (e.g. at
Corinth, see *infr. Letter* 59), and was soon to give rise to the system
of Apollinarius, who, however, it is interesting to note, was a party,
by his legates, to the present decision. (3) The state of the Church at
Antioch was the most practical problem before the council. Meletius was
returning to the presidency of the main body of the Antiochene church,
whose chief place of worship was the ‘Palaea’ (§3). Since the deposition
of Eustathius (*c.* 330), the intransigent or ‘protestant’ body had been
without a bishop, and were headed by the respected presbyter Paulinus.
Small in numbers, and dependent for a church upon the good will of the
Arians, they were yet strong in the unsullied orthodoxy of their
antecedents, in the sympathy of the West and of Athanasius himself, who
had given offence at Antioch in 346 by worshipping with them alone.
Clearly the right course was that they should reunite with the main body
under Meletius, and this was what the council recommended (§3),
although, perhaps in deference to the more uncompromising spirits, the
union is treated (*ib.* and 4) as a return of the larger body to the
smaller, instead of *vice versa.* (For the sequel, see Prolegg. *ubi
supra.*) (4) With the rivalry of parties at Antioch, a weighty question
of theological terminology was indirectly involved. The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxiii.i-p4.1"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxiii.i-p4.2"></span>πόστασις</span> had been
used in the Nicene anathema as a synonym of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxiii.i-p4.3"></span>οὐσία</span> (see *Excursus A,* pp. 77 *sqq.*
above), and in this sense it was commonly used by Athanasius in
agreement with the New Testament use of the word <span id="page_482">p.
482</span> <span id="xxiii.i-Page_482"></span> (Westcott on [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="xxiii.i-p4.4"></span>),
with Dionysius of Rome, and with the West, to whom <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxiii.i-p4.5"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxiii.i-p4.6"></span>πόστασις</span> was
etymologically identified with ‘Substantia’ their (perhaps imperfect)
equivalent for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxiii.i-p4.7"></span>οὐσία</span>. On the other hand, the general
tendency of Eastern Theology had been to use <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxiii.i-p4.8"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxiii.i-p4.9"></span>πόστασις</span> in the sense of Subject or
Person, for which purpose it expressed the idea of individual essence
less ambiguously than <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxiii.i-p4.10"></span>πρόσωπον</span>. This was the use of the word
adopted by Origen, Dionysius Alex. (*supr. de Sent. Dionys.*), Alexander
of Alexandria (in his letter Thdt. *H. E*. i. 4. p. 16, l. 19), and by
Athanasius himself in an earlier work (p. 90, *supr.*) At Antioch the
Eustathians appear to have followed the Nicene and Western usage, using
the word to emphasise the Individual Unity of God as against Arian or
Subordinationist views, while the Meletians protested against the
Marcellian monarchianism by insisting on *three* Hypostases in the
Godhead. The contradiction was mainly verbal, the two parties being
substantially at one as to the doctrine, but varying in its expression.
Hence the wise and charitable decision of the council, which came
naturally from one who, like Athanasius, could use either expression,
though he had come to prefer the Western to the Eastern use <span
id="fr_3672"></span>[3673](#fn_3672) .

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span>The Tome was carried to Antioch by the five
bishops named at the beginning of §1, and there subscribed by Paulinus
and Karterius of Antaradus. As to its effect among the friends of
Meletius our information is only inferential (see Gwatkin, *Studies,* p.
208). On the supposed disciplinary legislation of this council in
relation to the *Syntagma Doctrinæ,* see Prolegg. ch. ii. §§9.

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span>N.B. The translation of the present tract
as well as that of the *ad Afros* and of *Letters* 56, 59, 60, 61, was
made independently of that by Dr. Bright in his *Later Treatises of S.
Athanasius* (see Prolegg. ch. i. §2), but has been carefully collated
with it, and in not a few cases improved by its aid. For a fuller
commentary on these pieces than has been possible in this volume, the
reader is referred to Dr. Bright’s work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3672"></span>[482:3673](2040397.htm#fr_3672) <span
id="xxiii.i-p4.11"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span> It may be well to trace briefly the sense
of these technical terms, the history and significance of which is a
forcible reminder of the inability of Theology to bring the Infinite
within the categories of the Finite, to do more than guard our Faith by
pointing out the paths which experience has shewn to lead to some false
limitation of the fulness of the Revelation of God in Christ.

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span>The distinction (drawn out Prolegg. ch. ii.
§3 (2) b) between the primary and secondary sense of οὐσία in Greek
metaphysics does not easily fit the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. The
οὐσία common to Father and Son is not the name of a *Species*, as ‘Man’
applies to Peter and Paul. But neither can the idea of πρώτη οὐσία be
reconciled with inherence in three distinct personal existences. (Cf.
supr. p. 409, note 7.)

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span>But here the word ὑπόστασις comes in to
help our imagination. The word (see Socr. *H. E.* iii. 7. Westcott, *ubi
supr*. and Newman, *Arians*, *App*. 4), from various literal senses came
to be transferred to the philosophical vocabulary, doing duty as verbal
substantive not only for ὑφεστάναι but for ὑποκεῖσθαι. Like the concrete
ὑποκείμενον it was applied (a) to matter as underlying form, (b) to
substance as underlying attributes. In this latter use it served to
distinguish πρώτη from δευτέρα οὐσία, expressing moreover a complete
self-contained existence in a way that οὐσία did not. When therefore the
idea of personal individuality has to be expressed, ὑπόστασις is more
suitable than οὐσία. But the ambiguity of the latter word remains. Those
who preferred to speak of μία ὑπόστασις thought of the Divine Essence
rather as πρώτη οὐσία, and of One Personal God, with whom Father, Son,
and Spirit were each absolutely and fully identified (περιχώρησις),
while with those who preferred πρεῖς ὑποστάσεις the idea of the Divine
οὐσία approximated to δευτέρα οὐσία, and guarded against Tritheism
solely by holding fast to the Monarchia of the Father. The corrective to
each position lay in the recognition of the other, i.e. of its own
incompleteness. (See further Prolegg. *ubi supr*. and Zahn, *Marcell*.
p. 87, *sq*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synodal Letter to the People of Antioch. (Tomus ad
Antiochenos.)](2040398)
