[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040090)  [Next](2040092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.iii.x"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.x-p1"></span> §44. *The similes applied to the whole
Universe, seen and unseen*.

<span id="vi.ii.iii.x-p2"></span>For by a nod and by the power of the
Divine Word of the Father that governs and presides over all, the heaven
revolves, the stars move, the sun shines, the moon goes her circuit, and
the air receives the sun’s light and the æther his heat, and the winds
blow: the mountains are reared on high, the sea is rough with waves, and
the living things in it grow, the earth abides fixed, and bears fruit,
and man is formed and lives and dies again, and all things whatever have
their life and movement; fire burns, water cools, fountains spring
forth, rivers flow, seasons and hours come round, rains descend, clouds
are filled, hail is formed, snow and ice congeal, birds fly, creeping
things go along, water-animals swim, the sea is navigated, the earth is
sown and grows crops in due season, plants grow, and some are young,
some ripening, others in their growth become old and decay, and while
some things are vanishing others are being engendered and are coming to
light. 2. But all these things, and more, which for their number we
cannot mention, the worker of wonders and marvels, the Word of God,
giving light and life, moves and orders by His own nod, making the
universe one. Nor does He leave out of Himself even the invisible
powers; for including these also in the universe inasmuch as he is their
maker also, He holds them together and quickens them by His nod and by
His providence. And there can be no excuse for disbelieving this. 3. For
as by His own providence bodies grow and the rational soul moves, and
possesses life and thought, and this requires little proof, for we see
what takes place,—so again the same Word of God with one simple nod by
His own power moves and holds together both the visible universe and the
invisible powers, allotting to each its proper function, so that the
divine powers move in a diviner way, while visible things move as they
are <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="vi.ii.iii.x-Page_28"></span>seen to do. But Himself being over all,
both Governor and King and organising power, He does all for the glory
and knowledge of His own Father, so that almost by the very works that
He brings to pass He teaches us and says, “By the greatness and beauty
of the creatures proportionably the maker of them is seen <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) .”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[28:172](2040091.htm#fr_171) <span
id="vi.ii.iii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii.x-p3"></span> [Wisd. xiii.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#005)<span id="vi.ii.iii.x-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion. Doctrine of Scripture on the subject of Part
I.](2040092)
