[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040378)  [Next](2040380) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.v"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c8"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p1.1"></span>Excursus C.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p2"></span><span class="c40"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p2.1"></span>Introductory <span
id="fr_3272"></span>[3273](#fn_3272) to the Fourth Discourse against the
Arians.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p5"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p5.1"></span>The</span> fourth Discourse, as has been
already observed (p. 304), stands on a footing of its own. To begin
with, it is not quoted in antiquity, as the first three are, as part of
the work of Ath. against the Arians (details in Newman, p. 499). Again,
the fact that not only the *Ep. Æg.,* but even the dubious *de Incar. c.
Arian.,* are in some <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p5.2"></span>mss.</span> included in the *Orationes,* while
our present oration appears sometimes as the ‘fifth’ sometimes as the
‘sixth,’ cast a shade of doubt upon its claim to be included in the
‘Pentabiblus against the Arians’ referred to by Photius. In addition to
these external considerations, Newman lays stress on the apparent want
of continuity in its argument; on its non-conformity to the structural
plan of *Orat.* i.–iii., on the use of the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.v-p5.3"></span>ὁμοούσιον</span> (§§10,
22, contrast *Orat.* i. §9, p. 311, note 12); on certain peculiarities
of style which seem characteristic of disjointed notes rather than of a
systematic treatise; on the reference to ‘Eusebius’ (of Cæsarea) as
apparently still living (§8); and on the general absence of personal
reference to opponents, while yet a definite and extant system seems to
be combated.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p6"></span>Now a comparison with the works of
Eusebius against Marcellus leaves little doubt that the system combated
by Athan. is that of the latter (described briefly *Prolegg.* ch. ii. §3
(2) c).

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p7"></span>After laying down as a thesis (§1) the
substantive existence of the divine Word or Wisdom, Athan. proceeds to
combat the idea that the Word has no personality distinct from that of
the Father. Setting aside the alternative errors of Sabellius (§2) and
Arius (§3), he taxes with the consequence of involving two <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.v-p7.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.v-p7.2"></span>Αρχαί</span> a view that
the Word had a substantive existence and was then united to the Father
(cf. Euseb. *c. Marcell.* 32 A, 108 A, 106 C, D). This consequence can
only be avoided by falling into the Sabellian alternative of a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.v-p7.3"></span>θεὸς διφυής</span> (cf.
<span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.v-Page_432"></span>Tertullian’s ‘Deum versipellem’), unless
the true solution, that of the eternal divine <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p7.4"></span>γέννησις</span>, be accepted (§3 worked out in
4, 5). The argument, apparently interrupted by an anti-Arian digression
§§6, 7, is resumed §8, whence it proceeds without break to §24.
Eusebius, insisting against Marcellus on the eternity of Christ’s
Kingdom, inconsistently defends those who deny the eternity of His
Person. But if so, how inconsistent are those who deny the Son any
pre-existence, while yet repelling the Arian formulæ with indignation!
In §§9–12, taking [Joh. x. 30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.v-p7.5"></span> as his text, Athan. asks his opponents *in
what sense* Christ and the Father ‘are one,’ distinguishing from his own
answer that of Sabellius (9, 10), and that of Marcellus (11, 12), whom
he presses with the paradoxical character of his explanation of the
divine <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p7.6"></span>γέννησις</span>. In §§13, 14, he examines the
(Marcellian, *not Sabellian*) doctrine of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p7.7"></span>πλατυσμὸς</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p7.8"></span>συστολή</span>, charging it with Sabellianism
*as its consequence*. Next (§§15–24) Ath. turns upon the radically weak
point of the system of Marcellus *(Prolegg. ubi supra),* and asks What
do his followers mean by ‘the Son?’ Do they mean merely *(a)* the man,
Christ (§20, Photinus), or *(b)* the union of Word and Man, or *(c)* the
Word regarded as Incarnate? The latter was the answer (§22) of Marcellus
himself. This last point leads to a discussion (§24) of those O.T.
passages on which Marcellus notoriously relied. §25, which Zahn
understands as a direct polemic against Sabellius, is far more probably,
as Newman maintains in his note, a supplemental argument against
Marcellianism, for the view combated is said to *lead* inevitably to
Sabellianism. The concluding portion, §§26–36, turns the argument of
§24, that Scripture declares the identity of Son and Word, against those
who (adopting alternative *(a) supra*) drift from Marcellianism toward
the Samosatene rather than toward the Sabellian position (on the
connection of the two see *Prolegg.* ch. ii. §3 (2) a and c). Even here,
the name of Photinus, to whose position the section specially applies,
is significantly withheld.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p8"></span>Such is the course of the argument in the
Fourth Oration; and with the exception of §§6, 7, and again possibly
§25, it forms a homogeneous, if not a finished and elaborated piece of
argument. Its date and composition may be left an open question; but its
purpose as an appendix to *Orat.* i.–iii., is we think open to little
doubt (*supr.* p. 304). Of Sabellius, who left no writings <span
id="fr_3273"></span>[3274](#fn_3273) , the age of Athanasius knew
little, except that he identified Father and Son (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.v-p9.4"></span>υἱοπατώρ</span>), and
denied the Trinity of Persons. Most that is told us of Sabellius from
the fourth century onwards requires careful sifting, in order to
eliminate what really belongs to Marcellus, Photinus, or others who were
taxed with Sabellianism, and combated as ‘Sabellians.’ But with the
simple patri-passianism which is the one undoubted element in the
teaching of Sabellius, Marcellus had little or nothing in common. The
criticism of Marcellus that Sabellius ‘knew not the Word’ reveals the
true difference between them. To Sabellius, creation and redemption were
the work of the one God under successive changes of manifestation; to
Marcellus, they were the realisation of a process eternally latent in
God; but both Marcellus and apparently Sabellius referred to the divine
Nature what the theology of the Church has consistently referred to the
divine Will.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p10"></span>The following table will make the
foregoing scheme clear.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p11"></span>§1. Introductory. Thesis: the co-eternal
personality of the Son or Word.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p12"></span>§§2–5. Those who, while rejecting
Arianism, would avoid Sabellianism, must accept the eternal divine
Generation of the Son.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p13"></span>§§6, 7. \[Digression: the humiliation of
the Word explained against the Arians.\]

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p14"></span>§8. The eternity of Christ’s Kingdom and
of His Person implied each in the other.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p15"></span>§§9–12. In what sense Christ and the
Father are, and are not, one. The divine <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p15.1"></span>γέννησις</span>.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p16"></span>§§13, 14. The doctrine of divine
dilatation and contraction denies true personal distinctions in the
Godhead.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p17"></span>§§15–24. The Son and the Word identical.
Refutation of the three alternative suppositions, and of the argument
alleged from the O.T. in support of them.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p18"></span>§25. Final refutation of the doctrine of
dilatation.

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p19"></span>§§26–36. The Scriptural identification of
Son and Word refutes the restriction of the former title to the man
Jesus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3272"></span>[431:3273](2040379.htm#fr_3272) <span
id="xxi.ii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p3"></span> The above *Excursus* is substituted for
the longer introduction of Newman (republished in Latin in his *Tracts,
Theological and Ecclesiastical,* 1872), and is in the main a
condensation of the more recent and final discussion of Zahn
(*Marcellus,* 1867, pp. 198 *seqq.*). The result of the latter is to
confirm the main contention of Newman, viz. that the system, rather than
the person, of Marcellus is throughout in view. Earlier discussions
pointing the same way are cited: ‘In Eusebii contra Marcellum libros
Observationes, auctore K.S.C.,’ Lips. 1787 (cited by Newman); Rettberg,
*Marcelliana,* Præf. p. 7; Kuhn, *Kathol. Dogm.* ii. p. 344, note 1 (by
Zahn).

<span id="fn_3273"></span>[432:3274](2040379.htm#fr_3273) <span
id="xxi.ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.v-p9"></span> The Articles <span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.v-p9.2"></span>Sabellianism</span> and <span
class="c10"><span id="xxi.ii.v-p9.3"></span>Sabellius</span> (both *sub.
fin.*) in D.C.B. vol. iv., state the contrary, but the present writer
follows the standard discussion of Zahn, of which the learned articles
in question do not seem to take account.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discourse IV](2040380)
