[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040358)  [Next](2040360) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c8"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Excursus B. On §22 (Note 3).</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>On the Meaning of the Formula</span> <span
class="c1"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>πρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ
ἦν</span><span class="c1"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p2.3"></span>, in the
Nicene Anathema.</span>

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>It</span> was observed on p. 75, note 4(b),
that there were two clauses in the Nicene Anathema which required
explanation. One of them, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p3.3"></span>ξ ἑτέρας ὑποστάσεως ἢ οὐσίας</span>, has been
discussed in the Excursus, pp. 77–82; the other, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p3.4"></span>πρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ
ἦν</span>, shall be considered now.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p4"></span>Bishop Bull has suggested a very
ingenious interpretation of it, which is not obvious, but which, when
stated, has much plausibility, as going to explain, or rather to
sanction, certain modes of speech in some early Fathers of venerable
authority, which have been urged by heterodox writers, and given up by
Catholics of the Roman School, as savouring of Arianism. The foregoing
pages have made it abundantly evident that the point of controversy
between Catholics and Arians was, not whether our Lord was God, but
whether He was Son of God; the solution of the former question being
involved in that of the latter. The Arians maintained that the very word
‘Son’ implied a ‘beginning,’ or that our Lord was not Very God; the
Catholics said that it implied ‘connaturality,’ or that He was Very God
as one with God. Now five early writers, Athenagoras, Tatian,
Theophilus, Hippolytus, and Novatian, of whom the authority of
Hippolytus is very great, not to speak of Theophilus and Athenagoras,
whatever be thought of Tatian and of Novatian, seem to speak of the
divine generation as taking place immediately before the creation of the
world, that is, as if not eternal, though <span id="page_344">p.
344</span> <span id="xxi.ii.ii-Page_344"></span>at the same time they
teach that our Lord existed before that generation. In other words they
seem to teach that He was the Word from eternity, and became the Son at
the beginning of all things; some of them expressly considering Him,
first as the <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>λόγος
ἐνδιάθετος</span>, or Reason, in the Father, or (as may be speciously
represented) a mere attribute; next, as the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>λόγος προφορικὸς</span>, or Word, terms which
are explained, note on *de Syn.* 26 (5). This doctrine, when divested of
figure and put into literal statement, might appear nothing more or less
than this,—that at the beginning of the world the Son was created after
the likeness of the Divine attribute of Reason, as its image or
expression, and thereby became the Divine Word, was made the instrument
of creation, called the Son from that ineffable favour and adoption
which God had bestowed on Him, and in due time sent into the world to
manifest God’s perfections to mankind;—which, it is scarcely necessary
to say, is the doctrine of Arianism.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p5"></span>Thus S. Hippolytus says,—

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>Τῶν δὲ γινομένων ἀρχηγὸν καὶ σύμβουλον καὶ
ἐργατὴν ἐγέννα λόγον, ὃν λόγον ἔχων ἐν ἑαυτῶ ἀ& 231·ρατόν τε ὄντα τῷ
κτιζομένῳ, κόσμῳ, ὁρατὸν ποιεῖ· προτέραν φωνὴν φθεγγόμενος, καὶ φῶς ἐκ
φωτὸς γεννῶν, προῆκεν τῇ κτίσει κύριον</span>. *contr. Noet.* 10.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p7"></span>And S. Theophilus:—

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p8"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>Εχων οὖν ὁ θεὸς τὸν ἑαυτοῦ λόγον ἐνδιάθετον
ἐν τοῖς ἰδίοις σπλάγχνοις, ἐγέννησεν αὐτὸν μετὰ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ σοφίας
ἐξερευξάμενος πρὸ τῶν ὅλων</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p8.3"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p8.4"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p8.5"></span>πότε δὲ ἠθέλησεν ὁ θεὸς ποιῆσαι ὅσα
ἐβουλεύσατο, τοῦτον τὸν λόγον ἐγέννησε προφορικὸν, πρωτότοκον πάσης
κτίσεως</span>. *ad Autol*. ii. 10–22.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p9"></span>Bishop Bull, *Defens. F. N.* iii. 5–8,
meets this representation by maintaining that the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>γέννησις</span> which S.
Hippolytus and other writers spoke of, was but a metaphorical
generation, the real and eternal truth being shadowed out by a
succession of events in the economy of time, such as is the Resurrection
([Acts xiii. 33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033)<span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>), nay, the Nativity; and that of these His
going forth to create the worlds was one. And he maintains (ibid. [Acts
3.9](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#009)<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p9.3"></span>)
that such is the mode of speaking adopted by the Fathers after the
Nicene Council as well as before. And then he adds (which is our present
point), that it is even alluded to and recognised in the Creed of the
Council, which anathematizes those who say that ‘the Son was not before
His generation,’ i.e. who deny that ‘the Son *was* before His
*generation*,’ which statement accordingly becomes indirectly a Catholic
truth.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p10"></span>I am not aware whether any writer has
preceded or followed this great authority in this view <span
id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208) . The more obvious mode of
understanding the Arian formula is this, that it is an argument *ex
absurdo*, drawn from the force of the word Son, in behalf of the Arian
doctrine; it being, as they would say, a truism, that, ‘whereas He was
begotten, He was not *before* He was begotten,’ and the denial of it a
contradiction in terms. This certainly does seem to myself the true
force of the formula; so much so, that if Bishop Bull’s explanation be
admissible, it must, in order to its being so, first be shewn to be
reducible to this sense, and to be included under it.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p12"></span>The point at issue between the two
interpretations is this; whether the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>πρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ ἦν</span> is intended
for a *denial* of the *contrary* proposition, ‘He was before His
generation,’ as Bishop Bull says; or whether it is what Aristotle calls
an enthymematic sentence, *assuming* the falsity, as confessed on all
hands, of that contrary proposition, as self-contradictory, and directly
denying, not it, but ‘He was from everlasting.’ Or, in other words,
whether it opposes the position of the five writers, or the great
Catholic doctrine itself; and whether in consequence the Nicene Fathers
are in their anathema indirectly sanctioning that position, or stating
that doctrine. Bull considers that both sides *contemplated* the
proposition, ‘He was before His generation,’—and that the Catholics
asserted or defended it; some reasons shall here be given for the
contrary view.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p13"></span>1. Now first, let me repeat, what was
just now observed by the way, that the formula in question, when taken
as an enthymematic sentence, or *reductio ad absurdum*, exactly
expresses the main argument of the Arians, which they brought forward in
so many shapes, as feeling that their cause turned upon it, ‘He is a
son, *therefore* He had a beginning.’ Thus Socrates records Arius’s
words in the beginning of the controversy, (1) ‘If the Father begat the
Son, He who is begotten has a beginning of existence; (2) therefore once
the Son was not, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>ἦ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.2"></span>ν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν</span>; (3) therefore He has
His subsistence from nothing, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.4"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων ἔχει τὴν ὑπόστασιν</span>.’ *H.
E.* i. 5. The first of these propositions exactly answers to the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.5"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν
γεννηθῆναι</span> taken enthymematically; and it may be added that when
so taken, the three propositions will just answer to the three first
formulæ anathematized at Nicæa, two of which are indisputably the same
as two of them; viz. <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.6"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.7"></span>τι ἦν ποτὲ</span> <span id="page_345">p.
345</span> <span id="xxi.ii.ii-Page_345"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.8"></span>δτε οὐκ ἦν· & 234·τι
πρὶν γεννηθῆναι οὐκ ἦν· & 234·τι ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων ἐγένετο</span>. On the
other hand, we hear nothing in the controversy of the position which
Bull conceives to be opposed by Arius (‘He was before His generation’),
that is, supposing the formula in question does not allude to it; unless
indeed it is worth while to except the statement reprobated in the
Letter of the Arians to Alexander, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.9"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p13.10"></span>ντα πρότερον, γεννηθέντα εἰς υἱ&
231·ν</span>, which is explained, *de Syn.* 16. note 12.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p14"></span>2. Next, it should be observed that the
other formulæ here, as elsewhere, mentioned, are enthymematic also, or
carry their argument with them, and that, an argument resolvable often
into the original argument derived from the word ‘Son.’ Such are <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>ὢν τὸν μὴ ὄντα ἐκ τοῦ
ὄντος ἢ τὸν ὄντα</span>; and <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p14.3"></span>ἓ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p14.4"></span>ν τὸ ἀγένητον ἢ δύο</span>; and in like
manner as regards the question of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p14.5"></span>τρεπτόν</span>; ‘Has He free will’ (thus
Athanasius states the Arian objection) ‘or has He not? is He good from
choice according to free will, and can He, if He will, alter, being of
an alterable nature? as wood or stone, has He not His choice free to be
moved, and incline hither and thither?’ supr. §35. That is, they wished
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p14.6"></span>τρεπτὸς</span> to carry with it its own
self-evident application to our Lord, with the alternative of an
absurdity; and so to prove His created nature.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p15"></span>3. In §32, S. Athanasius observes that
the formula of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>γένητον</span> was the later substitute for
the original formulæ of Arius; ‘when they were no longer allowed to say,
“out of nothing,” and “He was not before His generation,”’ they hit upon
this word Unoriginate, that, by saying among the simple that the Son was
originate, *they might imply the very same phrases* “out of nothing” and
“He once was not.” Here he does not in so many words say that the
argument from the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.4"></span>γένητον</span> was a *substitute* for the
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.5"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν
γεννηθῆναι</span>, yet surely it is not unfair so to understand him. But
it is plain that the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.7"></span>γένητον</span> was brought forward merely to
express by an appeal to philosophy and earlier Fathers, that to be a Son
was to have a beginning and a creation, and not to be God. This
therefore will be the sense of the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.8"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν γεννηθῆναι</span>. Nay, when the
Arians asked, ‘Is the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.9"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.10"></span>γένητον</span> one or two,’ they actually
did assume that it was granted by their opponents that the Father only
was <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.11"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.12"></span>γένητος</span>; which
it was not, if the latter held, nay, if they had sanctioned at Nicæa, as
Bull says, that our Lord <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.13"></span>ἦ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.14"></span>ν πρὶν γεννηθῇ</span>; and moreover which
they knew and confessed was not granted, if their own formula <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p15.15"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν
γεννηθῆναι</span> was directed against this statement.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16"></span>4. Again, it is plain that the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρίν
γεννηθῆναι</span> is used by S. Athanasius as the *same* objection with
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.3"></span>ὢν τὸν μὴ ὄντα ἐκ τοῦ
ὄντος</span>, &c. E.g. he says, ‘We might ask them in turn, God who is,
has He so become, whereas He was not?’ *or* is He also before His
generation? whereas He is, did He make Himself, or is He of nothing.
&c., §25. Now the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.4"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.5"></span>ὢν τὸν μὴ ὄντα</span>, &c., is evidently an
*argument,* and that, grounded on the absurdity of saying <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.6"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.7"></span>ὢν τὸν ὄντα</span>. S.
Alexander’s Encyclical Letter (vid. Socr. i. 6), compared with Arius’s
original positions and the Nicene Anathemas as referred to above, is a
strong confirmation. In these three documents the formulæ agree
together, except one; and that one, which in Arius’s language is ‘he who
is begotten has a beginning of existence,’ is in the Nicene Anathema,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.8"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν
γεννηθῆναι</span>, but in S. Alexander’s circular, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.9"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.10"></span>ὢν θεὸς τὸν μὴ ὄντα ἐκ
τοῦ μὴ ὄντος πεποίηκεν</span>. The absence of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p16.11"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν</span>,
&c., in S. Alexander is certainly remarkable. Moreover the two formulæ
are treated as synonymous by Greg. Naz. *Orat.* 29. 9. Cyril, *Thesaur.*
4. p. 29 fin., and by Basil as quoted below. But indeed there is an
internal correspondence between them, shewing that they have but one
meaning. They are really but the same sentence in the active and in the
passive voice.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p17"></span>5. A number of scattered passages in
Athanasius lead us to the same conclusion. For instance, if the Arian
formula had the sense which is here maintained, of being an argument
against our Lord’s eternity, the Catholic answer would be, ‘He could not
be *before* His generation because His generation is *eternal,* as being
from the Father.’ Now this is precisely the language Athanasius uses,
when it occurs to him to introduce the words in question. Thus in
*Orat.* ii. §57 he says, ‘The creatures began to come to be (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>γίνεσθαι</span>); but
the Word of God, not having beginning (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.3"></span>ρχὴν</span>) of being, surely did not begin
to be, nor begin to come to be, but was always. And the works have a
beginning (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.5"></span>ρχὴν</span>) in the making, and the
beginning precedes things which come to be; but the Word not being of
such, rather Himself becomes the Framer of those things which have a
beginning. And the being of things originate is measured by their
becoming (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.6"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.7"></span>ν τῷ γίνεσθαι</span>), and at some beginning
(origin) doth God begin to make them through the Word, that it may be
known that they were not before their origination (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.8"></span>πρίν γενέσθαι</span>);
but the Word hath His being in no other origin than the Father (vid.
supr. §11, note 1), ‘whom they themselves allow to be unoriginate, so
that He too exists unoriginately in the Father, being His offspring not
His creature.’ We shall find that other Fathers say just the same.
Again, we have already come to a passage where for ‘His generation,’ he
substitutes ‘making,’ a word which Bull would not say that either the
Nicene Council or S. Hippolytus would use; clearly shewing that the
Arians were not quoting and denying a Catholic statement in the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.9"></span>οὐκ ἦν πρὶν</span>, &c.,
but laying down one of their own. ‘Who is there in all mankind, Greek or
Barbarian, who ventures to rank among creatures One whom he confesses
the while to be God, and says that “He was not ‘before He was made,’
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.10"></span>πρὶν
ποιηθῇ</span>.”’ *Orat*. i. §10. Arius, who is surely the best explainer
of his own words, says the same; that is, he interprets ‘generation’ by
‘making,’ or confesses that he is bringing forward an argument, not
opposing a dogma; ‘Before His generation,’ he says, ‘*or* creation, *or*
destination (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.11"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.12"></span>ρισθῇ</span>), [Rom. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.13"></span>),
*or* founding (vid. [Prov. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#023)<span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p17.14"></span>), He was not; for He was not ingenerate.’
Theod., *Hist*. i. 4. Eusebius of Nicomedia also, in a passage which has
already come before us, says distinctly, ‘“It is plain to any one,” that
what has been made was not before its *generation*; but what came to be
has an origin of being.’ *De Syn.* §17.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p18"></span>6. If there are passages in Athanasius
which seem to favour the opposite interpretation, that is, to imply that
the Catholics held or allowed, as Bp. Bull considers, that ‘before His
generation, He was,’ they admit of an explanation. E.g. “How is He not
in the number of the creatures, if, as they say, He was not before His
generation? for it is proper to the creatures and works, not to be
before their generation.’ *Orat.* ii. §22. This might be taken to imply
that the Arians said, ‘He was not,’ and Catholics ‘He was.’ But the real
meaning is this, ‘How is He not a creature, if the *formula be true,*
which they use, “He was not before His generation?” for it may indeed
properly be *said* of creatures that “they were not before their
generation.”’ And so again when he says, ‘if the Son was not before His
generation, Truth was not always in God,’ supr. §20, he does not thereby
imply that the Son *was* before His generation, but he means, ‘if it be
*true* that, &c.,’ ‘if the *formula holds,*’ ‘if it can be *said* of the
Son, “He was not, &c.”’ Accordingly, shortly afterwards, in a passage
already cited, he says the same of the Almighty Father in the way of
parallel; ‘God who is, hath He so become, whereas He was not, or “is He
too before His generation?”’ (§25), not implying here any generation at
all, but urging <span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.ii-Page_346"></span>that the question is *idle* and
*irrelevant*, that the formula is *unmeaning* and does not *apply to*,
cannot be *said* of, Father or Son.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p19"></span>7. Such an explanation of these
passages, as well as the view here taken of the formula itself, receive
abundant confirmation from S. Gregory Nazianzen and S. Hilary. What has
been maintained is, that when S. Athanasius says, ‘if the Son *is* not
before His generation, then, &c.,’ he does but mean, ‘if it can be
*said,*’ ‘if the words can be *used or applied* in this case.’ Now the
two Fathers just mentioned both decide that it is not true, *either*
that the Son *was* before His generation, *or* that He was not; in other
words, that the question is unmeaning and irrelevant, which is just the
interpretation which has been here given to Athanasius. But again, in
thus speaking, they thereby assert also that they did *not* hold, that
they do *not* allow, that formula which Bull considers the Nicene
Fathers defended and sanctioned, as being Catholic and in use both
before the Council and after, viz. ‘He *was* before His generation.’
Thus S. Gregory in the passage in which he speaks of ‘did He that is
make Him that is not, &c.,’ and ‘before His generation, &c.,’ as one and
the same, expressly says, ‘In His case, to be begotten *is concurrent*
with existence and is from the beginning,’ and that *in contrast* to the
instance of men; who he says, do fulfil in a manner ‘He who is, &c.’
(Levi being in the loins of Abraham), i.e. fulfil Bull’s proposition,
‘He was before generation.’ He proceeds, ‘I say that *the question is
irrelevant,* not the answer difficult.’ And presently after, mentioning
some idle inquiries by way of parallel, he adds, ‘more ill-instructed,
be sure, is it to decide whether what was generated *from the beginning*
was or was not *before* generation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>πρὸ τῆς γεννήσεως</span>.’ *Orat.* 29. 9.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p20"></span>8. S. Hilary, on the other hand, is so
full on the subject in his *de Trin.* xii., and so entirely to the point
for which I would adduce him, that but a few extracts of what might be
made are either necessary or practicable. He states and argues on the
formula expressly as an *objection*; Adjiciant hæc *arguta* satis atque
*auditu placentia;* Si, inquit, natus est, cœpit; et cum cœpit, non
fuit; et cum non fuit, non patitur ut fuerit. Atque *idcirco* piæ
intelligentiæ, sermonem esse contendant, Non fuit ante quam nasceretur,
*quia* ut esset, qui non erat, natus est.’ n. 18. He answers the
objection in the same way. ‘Unigenitus Deus neque non fuit aliquando non
filius, neque fuit aliquid ante quam filius, neque quidquam aliquid ipse
nisi filius,’ n. 15, which is in express words to *deny,* ‘He was before
His generation.’ Again, as Gregory, ‘Ubi pater auctor est, ibi et
nativitas est; et vero ubi auctor æternus est, ibi et nativitatis
æternitas est,’ n. 21. And he substitutes ‘being always born’ for ‘being
before birth;’ ‘Numquid ante tempora æterna esse, id ipsum sit quod est,
eum qui erat nasci? quia nasci quod erat, jam non nasci est, sed se
ipsum demutare nascendo.…Non est itaque id ipsum, natum ante tempora
æterna semper esse, et esse antequam nasci.’ n. 30. And he concludes, in
accordance with the above explanation of the passages of Athanasius
which I brought as if objections, thus: ‘Cum itaque natum semper esse,
nihil aliud sit confitendum esse, quam natum, id sensui, antequam
nascitur *vel fuisse, vel non fuisse* non subjacet. n. 31.’

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p21"></span>9. It may seem superfluous to proceed,
but as Bishop Bull is an authority not lightly to be set aside, a
passage from S. Basil shall be added. Eunomius objects, ‘God begat the
Son either being or not being, &c.…to him that is, there needs not
generation.’ He replies that Eunomius, ‘*because* animals first are not,
and then are generated, and he who is born to-day, yesterday did not
exist, *transfers* this conception to the subsistence of the
Only-begotten; and says, *since* He has been generated, He was not
before His generation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>πρὸ τῆς γεννήσεως</span>,’ *contr. Eunom.*
ii. 14. And he solves the objection as the other Fathers, by saying that
our Lord is from everlasting, speaking of S. John, in the first words of
his Gospel, as <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p21.2"></span>τῇ
ἀ& 187·διότητι τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ μονογενοῦς συνάπτων τὴν γέννησιν</span>.
§15.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p22"></span>These then being the explanations which
the contemporary and next following Fathers give of the Arian formula
which was anathematized at Nicæa, it must be observed that the line of
argument which Bishop Bull is pursuing, does not lead him to assign any
direct reasons for the substitution of a different interpretation in
their place. He is engaged, not in commenting on the Nicene Anathema,
but in proving that the Post-Nicene Fathers admitted that view or
statement of doctrine which he conceives *also* implied in that
anathema; and thus the sense of the anathema, instead of being the
subject of proof, is, as he believes, one of the proofs of the point
which he is establishing. However, since these other collateral
evidences which he adduces, may be taken to be some sort of indirect
comment upon the words of the Anathema, the principal of them in point
of authority, and that which most concerns us, shall here be noticed: it
is a passage from the second Oration of Athanasius.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p23"></span>While commenting on the words, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p23.2"></span>ρχὴ ὁδῶν εἰς τὰ
ἔργα</span> in the text, ‘The Lord has created me the beginning of His
ways unto the works,’ S. Athanasius is led to consider the text ‘first
born of every creature,’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p23.3"></span>πρωτότοκος πασῆς κτίσεως</span>: and he says
that He who was <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p23.4"></span>μονογενὴς</span> from eternity, became by a
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p23.5"></span>συγκατάβασις</span> at the creation of the
world <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p23.6"></span>πρωτότοκος</span>. This doctrine Bp. Bull
considers declaratory of a going forth, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p23.7"></span>προέλευσις</span>, or figurative *birth*
from the Father, at the beginning of all things.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p24"></span>It will be observed that the very point
to be proved is this, viz. not that there was a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>συγκατάβασις</span>
merely, but that according to Athanasius there was a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>γέννησις</span> or
proceeding from the Father, and that the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p24.3"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> marks it. Bull’s words
are, that ‘Catholici quidam Doctores, qui post exortam controversiam
Arianam vixerunt,…illam <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p24.4"></span>τοῦ λόγου</span>.…ex Patre *progressionem*
(quod et <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p24.5"></span>συγκατάβασιν</span>, hoc est,
condescensionem eorum nonnulli appellarunt), ad condendum hæc universa
agnovere; atque ejus etiam *progressionis respectu* ipsum <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p24.6"></span>τὸν λόγον</span> *a Deo
Patre* quasi *natum* fuisse et omnis creaturæ *primogenitum* in
Scripturis dici confessi sunt.’ *D. F. N.* iii. 9. §1. Now I consider
that S. Athanasius does not, as this sentence says, understand by
primogenitus that our Lord was ‘progressionis respectu a Deo Patre
*quasi natus*.’ He <span id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.ii-Page_347"></span>does not seem to me to speak of a
generation or birth of the Son at all, though figurative, but of the
birth of *all things*, and that *in* Him.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p25"></span>That Athanasius does not call the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>συγκατάβασις</span> of
the Word a birth, as denoted by the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p25.2"></span>πρωτότοκος</span>, is plain from his own
avowal in the passage to which Bull refers. ‘Nowhere in the Scriptures,’
he says, ‘is He called <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p25.3"></span>πρωτότοκος τοῦ Θεοῦ</span>, first-born *of
God*, nor creature of God, but Only-begotten, Word, Wisdom, have their
relation to the Father, and are proper to Him.’ ii. 62. Here surely he
expressly denies Bull’s statement that ‘first-born’ means ‘a Deo natus,’
‘born of God.’ Such additions as <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p25.4"></span>παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς</span>, he says, are
reserved for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p25.5"></span>μονογενὴς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p25.6"></span>λόγος</span>.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p26"></span>He goes on to say *what* the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> does
mean; viz. instead of having any reference to a <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.2"></span>προέλευσις</span> from
the Father, it refers solely to the creatures; our Lord is not called
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.3"></span>πρωτότοκος</span>,
because His <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.4"></span>προέλευσις</span> is a ‘type of His eternal
generation,’ but because by that <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.5"></span>προέλευσις</span> He became the ‘Prototype
of all creation.’ He, as it were, stamped His image, His Sonship, upon
creation, and became the first-born in the sense of being the Archetypal
Son. If this is borne out by the passage, Athanasius, it is plain, does
not speak of any <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.6"></span>γέννησις</span> whatever at the era of
creation, though figurative; <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.7"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> does but mean <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.8"></span>μονογενὴς πρωτεύων ἐν τῇ
κτίσει</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.9"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.10"></span>ρχὴ τῆς κτίσεως</span>, or πρωτότυπον
γέννημα, or <span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p26.11"></span>μόνος
γεννητὸς ἐν τοῖς γενητοῖς</span>; and no warrant is given, however
indirect, to the idea that in the Nicene Anathema, the Fathers implied
an allowance of the proposition, ‘He was before His generation.’

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p27"></span>As the whole passage occurs in the
Discourse which immediately follows, it is not necessary to enter
formally into the proof of this view of it, when the reader will soon be
able to judge of it for himself. But it may be well to add two passages,
one from Athenagoras, the other from S. Cyril, not in elucidation of the
words of Athanasius, but of the meaning which I would put upon them.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p28"></span>The passage from Athenagoras is quoted
by Bull himself, who of course is far from denying the doctrine of our
Lord’s Archetypal office; and does but wish in addition to find in
Athanasius the doctrine of a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>γέννησις</span>. Athenagoras says that the
Son is ‘the first offspring, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p28.2"></span>πρῶτον γέννημα</span>, of the Father, not as
come to be, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p28.3"></span>γενόμενον</span> (for God being Eternal Mind
had from the beginning in Himself the Word, as having Reason eternally,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p28.4"></span>λογικὸς
ὢν</span>), but that while as regards matter heavy and light were mixed
together’ (the passage is corrupt here), ‘He went forth, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p28.5"></span>προελθὼν</span>, as an
*idea* and *energy*’, i.e. as an Agent to create, and a Form and Rule to
create by. And then he goes on to quote the very text on which
Athanasius is employed when he explains <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p28.6"></span>πρωτότοκος</span>. ‘And the Prophetic Spirit
confirms this doctrine, saying, The Lord hath created me a beginning
(origin) of His ways, for His works.’ *Leg*. 10.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p29"></span>And so S. Cyril, ‘He is Only-begotten
according to nature, as being alone from the Father, God from God, Light
kindled from Light; and He is First-born for our sakes, that, *as if to
some immortal root* the whole creation might be ingrafted and might bud
forth from the Everlasting. For all things were made by Him, and
*consist* for ever and are *preserved in Him*.’ *Thesaur*. 25 p. 238.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p30"></span>In conclusion it may be suggested
whether the same explanation which has here been given of Athanasius’s
use of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p30.1"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> does not avail more
exactly to the defence of two of the five writers from the charge of
inaccurate doctrine, than that which Bull has preferred.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p31"></span>As to Athenagoras, we have already seen
that he does not speak of a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>γέννησις</span> at all in his account of
creation, but simply calls the Son <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p31.2"></span>πρῶτον γέννημα</span>, i.e. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p31.3"></span>πρωτότυπον
γέννημα</span>.

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p32"></span>Nor does Tatian approach nearer to the
doctrine of a <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>γέννησις</span>. He says that at the
creation the Word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.3"></span>ργον πρωτότοκον τοῦ πατρὸς γίνεται. τοῦτον
ἴσμεν τοῦ κόσμου τὴν ἀρχήν</span>. *ad Græc*. 5. Here the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.4"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.5"></span>ργον</span>, which at
first sight promises a difficulty, does in fact explain both himself and
Athenagoras. He says that at creation the Word became, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.6"></span>γίνεται</span>, not a
*Son* (figuratively), as Bull would grant to the parties whom he is
opposing, but a *work*. It was His great condescension, <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.7"></span>συγκατάβασις</span>, to
be accounted the first of the works, as being their *type*; that as they
were to be raised to an adoption and *called* sons, so He for that
purpose might stoop to creation, and be *called* a work. As Tatian uses
the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.8"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.9"></span>ρχὴ</span> in the concluding clause, there
is great reason to think that he is alluding to the very text which
Athanasius and Athenagoras expressly quote, in which Wisdom is said to
be ‘created a beginning, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.10"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.11"></span>ρχὴ</span>, of ways, unto the *works*,
<span class="Greek"><span id="xxi.ii.ii-p32.12"></span>εἰς τὰ
ἔργα</span>.’

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p33"></span>As to Novatian, Bishop Bull himself
observes that it is a question whether he need be understood to speak of
any generation but that which is eternal; nor does Pamelius otherwise
explain him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[344:2209](2040359.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="xxi.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.ii-p11"></span> Waterland expresses the view here
taken, and not Bishop Bull’s; vol. i. p. 114. Bull’s language, on the
other hand, is very strong: ‘Sæpe olim, ut verum ingenue fateai, animum
meum subiit *admiratio, quid* effato isto, ‘Filius priusquam nasceretur,
non erat,’ *sibi voluerint* Ariani. De nativitate Christi ex beatissima
Virgine dictum non esse exponendum constat.…Itaque de nativitate Filii
loquuntur, quæ hujus universi creationem antecessit. *Quis* vero,
inquam, *sensus* dicti hujus “Filius non erat, sive non existebat,
priusquam nasceretur ex Patre ante conditum mundum?” Ego sane nullus
dubito, quin hoc pronunciatum Arianorum oppositum fuerit Catholicorum
istorum sententiæ, qui docerent, Filium quidem paulo ante conditum
mundum inexplicabili quodam modo ex Patre progressum fuisse ad
constituendum universa, &c. *D. F. N.* iii. 9. §2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Discourse II](2040360)
