[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040386)  [Next](2040388) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p1"></span> *§§15–24. Since the Word is from
God, He must be Son. Since the Son is from everlasting, He must be the
Word; else either He is superior to the Word, or the Word is the Father.
Texts of the New Testament which state the unity of the Son with the
Father; therefore the Son is the Word. Three hypotheses refuted—1. That
the Man is the Son; 2. That the Word and Man together are the Son; 3.
That the Word became Son on His incarnation. Texts of the Old Testament
which speak of the Son. If they are merely prophetical, then those
concerning the Word may be such also.*

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p2"></span>15. Such absurdities will be the
consequence of saying that the Monad is dilated into a Triad. But since
those who say so venture to separate Word and Son, and to say that the
Word is one and the Son another, and that first was the Word and then
the Son, come let us consider this doctrine also. Now their presumption
takes various forms; for some say that the man whom the Saviour assumed
is the Son <span id="fr_3335"></span>[3336](#fn_3335) ; and others both
that the man and the Word then became Son, when they were united <span
id="fr_3336"></span>[3337](#fn_3336) . And others say that the Word
Himself then became Son when He became man <span
id="fr_3337"></span>[3338](#fn_3337) ; for from being Word, they say, He
has become Son, not being Son before, but only Word. Now both are
Stoic <span id="fr_3338"></span>[3339](#fn_3338) doctrines, whether to
say that God was dilated or to deny the Son, but especially is it absurd
to name the Word, yet deny Him to be Son. For if the Word be not from
God, reasonably might they deny Him to be Son; but if He is from God,
how see they not that what exists from anything is son of him from whom
it is? Next, if God is Father of the Word, why is not the Word Son of
His own Father? for one is and is called father, whose is the son; and
one is and is called son of another, whose is the father. If then God is
not Father of Christ, neither is the Word Son; but if God be Father,
then reasonably also the Word is Son. But if afterwards there is Father,
and first God, this is an Arian thought <span
id="fr_3339"></span>[3340](#fn_3339) . Next, it is absurd <span
id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-Page_439"></span>that God should change; for that
belongs to bodies; but if they argue that in the instance of creation He
became afterwards a Maker, let them know that the change is in the
things <span id="fr_3340"></span>[3341](#fn_3340) which afterwards came
to be, and not in God.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p9"></span>16. If then the Son too were a work,
well might God begin to be a Father towards Him as others; but if the
Son is not a work, then ever was the Father and ever the Son <span
id="fr_3341"></span>[3342](#fn_3341) . But if the Son was ever, He must
be the Word; for if the Word be not Son, and this is what a man waxes
bold to say, either he holds that Word to be Father or the Son superior
to the Word. For the Son being ‘in the bosom of the Father <span
id="fr_3342"></span>[3343](#fn_3342) ,’ of necessity either the Word is
not before the Son (for nothing is before Him who is in the Father), or
if the Word be other than the Son, the Word must be the Father in whom
is the Son. But if the Word is not Father but Word, the Word must be
external to the Father, since it is the Son who is ‘in the bosom of the
Father.’ For not both the Word and the Son are in the bosom, but one
must be, and He the Son, who is Only-begotten. And it follows for
another reason, if the Word is one, and the Son another, that the Son is
superior to the Word; for ‘no one knoweth the Father save the Son <span
id="fr_3343"></span>[3344](#fn_3343) ,’ not the Word. Either then the
Word does not know, or if He knows, it is not true that ‘no one knows.’
And the same of ‘He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father,’ and ‘I and
the Father are One,’ for this is uttered by the Son, not the Word, as
they would have it, as is plain from the Gospel; for according to John
when the Lord said, ‘I and the Father are One,’ the Jews took up stones
to stone Him. ‘Jesus <span id="fr_3344"></span>[3345](#fn_3344) answered
them, Many good works have I shewed you from My Father, for which of
those works do ye stone Me? The Jews answered Him, saying, For a good
work we stone Thee not, but for blasphemy, and because that Thou, being
a man, makest Thyself God. Jesus answered them, Is it not written in
your law, I said, Ye are gods? If he called them gods unto whom the Word
of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of Him, whom the
Father hath sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest,
because I said, I am the Son of God? If I do not the works of My Father,
believe Me not. But if I do, though ye believe not Me, believe the
works, that ye may know and believe that the Father is in Me, and I in
the Father.’ And yet, as far as the surface of the words intimated, He
said neither ‘I am God,’ nor ‘I am Son of God,’ but ‘I and the Father
are One.’

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p14"></span>17. The Jews then, when they heard
‘One,’ thought like Sabellius that He said that He was the Father, but
our Saviour shews their sin by this argument: ‘Though I had said “God,”
you should have remembered what is written, “I said, Ye are gods;”’ then
to clear up ‘I and the Father are One,’ He has explained the Son’s
oneness with the Father in the words, ‘Because I said, I am the Son of
God.’ For if He did not say it in words, still He has referred the sense
of ‘are One’ to the Son. For nothing is one with the Father, but what is
from Him. What is that which is from Him but the Son? And therefore He
adds, ‘that ye may know that I am in the Father, and the Father in Me.’
For, when expounding the ‘One,’ He said that the union and the
inseparability lay, not in This being That, with which It was One, but
in His being in the Father and the Father in the Son. For thus He
overthrows both Sabellius, in saying, ‘I am’ not, “the Father,” but,
‘the Son of God;’ and Arius, in saying, ‘are One.’ If then the Son and
the Word are not the same, it is not that the Word is one with the
Father, but the Son; nor he that hath seen the Word ‘hath seen the
Father,’ but ‘he that hath seen’ the Son. And from this it follows,
either that the Son is greater than the Word, or the Word has nothing
beyond the Son. For what can be greater or more perfect than ‘One,’ and
‘I in the Father and the Father in Me,’ and ‘He that hath seen Me, hath
seen the Father?’ for these utterances also belong to the Son. And hence
the same John says, ‘He that hath seen Me, hath seen Him that sent Me,’
and, ‘He that receiveth Me, receiveth Him that sent Me;’ and, ‘I am come
a light into the world, that whosoever believeth in Me, should not abide
in darkness. And, if any one hear My words and observe them not, I judge
him not; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. The
word which he shall hear, the same shall judge him in the last day,
because I go unto the Father <span id="fr_3345"></span>[3346](#fn_3345)
.’ The preaching, He says, judges him who has not observed the
commandment; ‘for if,’ He says, ‘I had not come and spoken unto them,
they had not had sin; but now they shall have no cloke <span
id="fr_3346"></span>[3347](#fn_3346) ,’ He says, having heard My words,
through which those who observe them shall reap salvation.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p17"></span>18. Perhaps they will have so little
shame as to say, that this utterance belongs not to the Son but to the
Word; but from what preceded it appeared plainly that the speaker was
the Son. <span id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-Page_440"></span>For He who here says, ‘I came not to
judge the world but to save <span id="fr_3347"></span>[3348](#fn_3347)
,’ is shewn to be no other than the Only-begotten Son of God, by the
same John’s saying before <span id="fr_3348"></span>[3349](#fn_3348) ,
‘For God so loved the world that He gave His Only-begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth on Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
For God sent not His Son into the world to condemn the world, but that
the world through Him might be saved. He that believeth on Him is not
condemned, but he that believeth not is condemned already, because he
hath not believed in the Name of the Only-begotten Son of God. And this
is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil <span
id="fr_3349"></span>[3350](#fn_3349) .’ If He who says, ‘For I came not
to judge the world, but that I might save it,’ is the Same as says, ‘He
that seeth Me, seeth Him that sent Me <span
id="fr_3350"></span>[3351](#fn_3350) ,’ and if He who came to save the
world and not judge it is the Only-begotten Son of God, it is plain that
it is the same Son who says, ‘He that seeth Me, seeth Him that sent Me.’
For He who said, ‘He that believeth on Me,’ and, ‘If any one hear My
words, I judge him not,’ is the Son Himself, of whom Scripture says, ‘He
that believeth on Him is not condemned, but He that believeth not is
condemned already, because He hath not believed in the Name of the
Only-begotten Son of God.’ And again: ‘And this is the condemnation’ of
him who believeth not on the Son, ‘that light hath come into the world,’
and they believed not in Him, that is, in the Son; for He must be ‘the
Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world <span
id="fr_3351"></span>[3352](#fn_3351) .’ And as long as He was upon earth
according to the Incarnation, He was Light in the world, as He said
Himself, ‘While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be the
children of light;’ for ‘I,’ says He, ‘am come a light into the
world <span id="fr_3352"></span>[3353](#fn_3352) .’

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p24"></span>19. This then being shewn, it
follows that the Word is the Son. But if the Son is the Light, which has
come into the world, beyond all dispute the world was made by the Son.
For in the beginning of the Gospel, the Evangelist, speaking of John the
Baptist, says, ‘He was not that Light, but that he might bear witness
concerning that Light <span id="fr_3353"></span>[3354](#fn_3353) .’ For
Christ Himself was, as we have said before, the True Light that lighteth
every man that cometh into the world. For if ‘He was in the world, and
the world was made by Him <span id="fr_3354"></span>[3355](#fn_3354) ,’
of necessity He is the Word of God, concerning whom also the Evangelist
witnesses that all things were made by Him. For either they will be
compelled to speak of two worlds, that the one may have come into being
by the Son and the other by the Word, or, if the world is one and the
creation one, it follows that Son and Word are one and the same before
all creation, for by Him it came into being. Therefore if as by the
Word, so by the Son also all things came to be, it will not be
contradictory, but even identical to say, for instance, ‘In the
beginning was the Word,’ or, ‘In the beginning was the Son.’ But if
because John did not say, ‘In the beginning was the Son,’ they shall
maintain that the attributes of the Word do not suit with the Son, it at
once follows that the attributes of the Son do not suit with the Word.
But it was shewn that to the Son belongs, ‘I and the Father are One,’
and that it is He ‘Who is in the bosom of the Father,’ and, ‘He that
seeth Me, seeth Him that sent Me <span
id="fr_3355"></span>[3356](#fn_3355) ;’ and that ‘the world was brought
into being by Him,’ is common to the Word and the Son; so that from this
the Son is shewn to be before the world; for of necessity the Framer is
before the things brought into being. And what is said to Philip must
belong, according to them, not to the Word, but to the Son. For, ‘Jesus
said,’ says Scripture, ‘Have I been so long time with you, and yet thou
hast not known Me, Philip? He that hath seen Me, hath seen the Father.
And how sayest thou then, Shew us the Father? Believest thou not, that I
am in the Father and the Father in Me? the words that I speak unto you,
I speak not of Myself, but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth the
works. Believe Me that I am in the Father and the Father in Me, or else,
believe Me for the very works’ sake. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he
that believeth on Me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater
works than these shall he do, because I go unto the Father. And
whatsoever ye shall ask in My Name, that will I do, that the Father may
be glorified in the Son <span id="fr_3356"></span>[3357](#fn_3356) .’
Therefore if the Father be glorified in the Son, the Son must be He who
said, ‘I in the Father and the Father in Me;’ and He who said, ‘He that
hath seen Me, hath seen the Father;’ for He, the same who thus spoke,
shews Himself to be the Son, by adding, ‘that the Father may be
glorified in the Son.’

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p29"></span>20. If then they say that the Man
whom the Word wore, and not the Word, is the Son of God the
Only-begotten, the Man must be by consequence He who is in the Father,
in whom also the Father is; and the Man must be He who is One with the
Father, and who is in the bosom of the Father, and the True Light. And
they will be compelled to say that through the Man Himself the world
came into being, and that the Man was He who came not to judge the <span
id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-Page_441"></span>world but to save it; and that He it
was who was in being before Abraham came to be. For, says Scripture,
Jesus said to them, ‘Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was,
I am <span id="fr_3357"></span>[3358](#fn_3357) .’ And is it not absurd
to say, as they do, that one who came of the seed of Abraham after two
and forty generations <span id="fr_3358"></span>[3359](#fn_3358) ,
should exist before Abraham came to be? is it not absurd, if the flesh,
which the Word bore, itself is the Son, to say that the flesh from Mary
is that by which the world was made? and how will they retain ‘He was in
the world?’ for the Evangelist, by way of signifying the Son’s
antecedence to the birth according to the flesh, goes on to say, ‘He was
in the world.’ And how, if not the Word but the Man is the Son, can He
save the world, being Himself one of the world? And if this does not
shame them, where shall be the Word, the Man being in the Father? And
where will the Word stand to the Father, the Man and the Father being
One? But if the Man be Only-begotten, what will be the place of the
Word? Either one must say that He comes second, or, if He be above the
Only-begotten, He must be the Father Himself. For as the Father is One,
so also the Only-begotten from Him is One; and what has the Word above
the Man, if the Word is not the Son? For, while Scripture says that
through the Son and the Word the world was brought to be, and it is
common to the Word and to the Son to frame the world, yet Scripture
proceeds to place the sight of the Father, not in the Word but in the
Son, and to attribute the saving of the world, not to the Word, but to
the Only-begotten Son. For, saith it, Jesus said, ‘Have I been so long
while with you, and yet hast thou not known Me, Philip? He that hath
seen Me, hath seen the Father.’ Nor does Scripture say that the Word
knows the Father, but the Son; and that not the Word sees the Father,
but the Only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p32"></span>21. And what more does the Word
contribute to our salvation than the Son, if, as they hold, the Son is
one, and the Word another? for the command is that we should believe,
not in the Word, but in the Son. For John says, ‘He that believeth on
the Son, hath everlasting life; but he that believeth not the Son, shall
not see life <span id="fr_3359"></span>[3360](#fn_3359) .’ And Holy
Baptism, in which the substance of the whole faith is lodged, is
administered not in the Word, but in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. If
then, as they hold, the Word is one and the Son another, and the Word is
not the Son, Baptism has no connection with the Word. How then are they
able to hold that the Word is with the Father, when He is not with Him
in the giving of Baptism? But perhaps they will say, that in the
Father’s Name the Word is included? Wherefore then not the Spirit also?
or is the Spirit external to the Father? and the Man indeed (if the Word
is not Son) is named after the Father, but the Spirit after the Man? and
then the Monad, instead of dilating into a Triad, dilates according to
them into a Tetrad, Father, Word, Son, and Holy Ghost. Being brought to
shame on this ground, they have recourse to another, and say that not
the Man by Himself whom the Lord bore, but both together, the Word and
the Man, are the Son; for both joined together are named Son, as they
say. Which then is cause of which? and which has made which a Son? or,
to speak more clearly, is the Word a Son because of the flesh? or is the
flesh called Son because of the Word? or is neither the cause, but the
concurrence of the two? If then the Word be a Son because of the flesh,
of necessity the flesh is Son, and all those absurdities follow which
have been already drawn from saying that the Man is Son. But if the
flesh is called Son because of the Word, then even before the flesh the
Word certainly, being such, was Son. For how could a being make other
sons, not being himself a son, especially when there was a father <span
id="fr_3360"></span>[3361](#fn_3360) ? If then He makes sons for
Himself, then is He Himself Father; but if for the Father, then must He
be Son, or rather that Son, by reason of Whom the rest are made sons.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p35"></span>22. For if, while He is not Son, we
are sons, God is our Father and not His. How then does He appropriate
the name instead, saying, ‘My Father,’ and ‘I from the Father <span
id="fr_3361"></span>[3362](#fn_3361) ?’ for if He be common Father of
all, He is not His Father only, nor did He alone come out from the
Father. But he says, that He is sometimes called our Father also,
because He has Himself become partaker in our flesh. For on this account
the Word has become flesh, that, since the Word is Son, therefore,
because of the Son dwelling in us <span
id="fr_3362"></span>[3363](#fn_3362) , He may be called our Father also;
for ‘He sent forth,’ says Scripture, ‘the Spirit of His Son into our
hearts, crying, Abba, Father <span id="fr_3363"></span>[3364](#fn_3363)
.’ Therefore the Son in us, calling upon His own Father, causes Him to
be named our Father also. Surely in whose hearts the Son is not, of them
neither can God be called Father. But if because of the Word the Man is
called Son, it follows necessarily, since the ancients <span
id="fr_3364"></span>[3365](#fn_3364) are called sons even before the
Incarnation, that the Word is Son even before His sojourn among us; for
‘I begat sons,’ saith Scripture; and in <span id="page_442">p.
442</span> <span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-Page_442"></span>the time of Noah,
‘When the sons of God saw,’ and in the Song, ‘Is not He thy Father <span
id="fr_3365"></span>[3366](#fn_3365) ?’ Therefore there was also that
True Son, for whose sake they too were sons. But if, as they say again,
neither of the two is Son, but it depends on the concurrence of the two,
it follows that neither is Son; I say, neither the Word nor the Man, but
some cause, on account of which they were united; and accordingly that
cause which makes the Son will precede the uniting. Therefore in this
way also the Son was before the flesh. When this then is urged, they
will take refuge in another pretext, saying, neither that the Man is
Son, nor both together, but that the Word was Word indeed simply in the
beginning, but when He became Man, then He was named <span
id="fr_3366"></span>[3367](#fn_3366) Son; for before His appearing He
was not Son but Word only; and as the ‘Word became flesh,’ not being
flesh before, so the Word became Son, not being Son before. Such are
their idle words; but they admit of an obvious refutation.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p42"></span>23. For if simply, when made Man, He
has become Son, the becoming Man is the cause. And if the Man is cause
of His being Son, or both together, then the same absurdities result.
Next, if He is first Word and then Son, it will appear that He knew the
Father afterwards, not before; for not as being Word does He know Him,
but as Son. For ‘No one knoweth the Father but the Son.’ And this too
will result, that He has come afterwards to be ‘in the bosom of the
Father <span id="fr_3367"></span>[3368](#fn_3367) ,’ and afterwards He
and the Father have become One; and afterwards is, ‘He that hath seen
Me, hath seen the Father <span id="fr_3368"></span>[3369](#fn_3368) .’
For all these things are said of the Son. Hence they will be forced to
say, The Word was nothing but a name. For neither is it He who is in us
with the Father, nor whoso has seen the Word, hath seen the Father, nor
was the Father known to any one at all, for through the Son is the
Father known (for so it is written, ‘And he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal Him’), and, the Word not being yet Son, not yet did any know the
Father. How then was He seen by Moses, how by the fathers? for He says
Himself in the Kingdoms, ‘Was I not plainly revealed to the house of thy
father <span id="fr_3369"></span>[3370](#fn_3369) ?’ But if God was
revealed, there must have been a Son to reveal, as He says Himself, ‘And
he to whomsoever the Son will reveal Him.’ It is irreligious then and
foolish to say that the Word is one and the Son another, and whence they
gained such an idea it were well to ask them. They answer, Because no
mention is made in the Old Testament of the Son, but of the Word; and
for this reason they are positive in their opinion that the Son came
later than the Word, because not in the Old, but in the New only, is He
spoken of. This is what they irreligiously say; for first to separate
between the Testaments, so that the one does not hold with the other, is
the device of Manichees and Jews, the one of whom oppose the Old, and
the other the New <span id="fr_3370"></span>[3371](#fn_3370) . Next, on
their shewing, if what is contained in the Old is of older date, and
what in the New of later, and times depend upon the writing, it follows
that ‘I and the Father are One,’ and ‘Only-begotten,’ and ‘He that hath
seen Me hath seen the Father <span id="fr_3371"></span>[3372](#fn_3371)
,’ are later, for these testimonies are adduced not from the Old but
from the New.

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p48"></span>24. But it is not so; for in truth
much is said in the Old also about the Son, as in the second Psalm,
‘Thou art My Son, this day have I begotten Thee <span
id="fr_3372"></span>[3373](#fn_3372) ;’ and in the ninth the title <span
id="fr_3373"></span>[3374](#fn_3373) , Unto the ‘end concerning the
hidden things of the Son, a Psalm of David;’ and in the forty-fourth,
‘Unto the end, concerning the things that shall be changed to the Sons
of Korah for understanding, a song about the Well-beloved;’ and in
Isaiah, ‘I will sing to my Well-beloved a song of my Well-beloved
touching my vineyard. My Well-beloved hath a vineyard <span
id="fr_3374"></span>[3375](#fn_3374) ;’ Who is this ‘Well-beloved’ but
the Only-begotten Son? as also in the hundred and ninth, ‘From the womb
I begat Thee before the morning star <span
id="fr_3375"></span>[3376](#fn_3375) ,’ concerning which I shall speak
afterwards; and in the Proverbs, ‘Before the hills He begat me;’ and in
Daniel, ‘And the form of the Fourth is like the Son of God <span
id="fr_3376"></span>[3377](#fn_3376) ;’ and many others. If then from
the Old be ancientness, ancient must be the Son, who is clearly
described in the Old Testament in many places. ‘Yes,’ they say, ‘so it
is, but it must be taken prophetically.’ Therefore also the Word must be
said to be spoken of prophetically; for this is not to be taken one way,
that another. For if ‘Thou art My Son’ refer to the future, so does ‘By
the Word of the Lord were the heavens established;’ for it is not said
‘were brought to be,’ nor ‘He made.’ But that ‘established’ refers to
the future, it states elsewhere: ‘The Lord reigned <span
id="fr_3377"></span>[3378](#fn_3377) ,’ followed by ‘He so established
the earth that it can never be moved.’ And if the words in the
forty-fourth Psalm ‘for My Well-beloved’ refer to the future, so does
what follows upon them, ‘My heart uttered a good Word.’ And if ‘From the
womb’ relates to a man, therefore <span id="page_443">p. 443</span>
<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-Page_443"></span>also ‘From the heart.’ For if
the womb is human, so is the heart corporeal. But if what is from the
heart is eternal, then what is ‘From the womb’ is eternal. And if the
‘Only-begotten’ is ‘in the bosom,’ therefore the ‘Well-beloved’ is ‘in
the bosom.’ For ‘Only-begotten’ and ‘Well-beloved’ are the same, as in
the words ‘This is My Well-beloved Son <span
id="fr_3378"></span>[3379](#fn_3378) .’ For not as wishing to signify
His love towards Him did He say ‘Well-beloved,’ as if it might appear
that He hated others, but He made plain thereby His being Only-begotten,
that He might shew that He alone was from Him. And hence the Word, with
a view of conveying to Abraham the idea of ‘Only-begotten,’ says, ‘Offer
thy son thy well-beloved <span id="fr_3379"></span>[3380](#fn_3379) ;’
but it is plain to any one that Isaac was the only son from Sara. The
Word then is Son, not lately come to be, or named Son, but always Son.
For if not Son, neither is He Word; and if not Word, neither is He Son.
For that which is from the father is a son; and what is from the Father,
but that Word that went forth from the heart, and was born from the
womb? for the Father is not Word, nor the Word Father, but the one is
Father, and the other Son; and one begets, and the other is begotten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3335"></span>[438:3336](2040387.htm#fr_3335) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p3"></span> Vid. §20.

<span id="fn_3336"></span>[438:3337](2040387.htm#fr_3336) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p4"></span> Vid. §21.

<span id="fn_3337"></span>[438:3338](2040387.htm#fr_3337) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p5"></span> Vid. §22 fin.

<span id="fn_3338"></span>[438:3339](2040387.htm#fr_3338) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p6"></span> Cf. Ritt. and Prell. (Ed. 5) §398
(?).

<span id="fn_3339"></span>[438:3340](2040387.htm#fr_3339) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p7"></span> §§8, 13.

<span id="fn_3340"></span>[439:3341](2040387.htm#fr_3340) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p8"></span> Cf. i. 29.

<span id="fn_3341"></span>[439:3342](2040387.htm#fr_3341) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p10"></span> *Or.* i. 14, n. 4.

<span id="fn_3342"></span>[439:3343](2040387.htm#fr_3342) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p11"></span> [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3343"></span>[439:3344](2040387.htm#fr_3343) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p12"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3344"></span>[439:3345](2040387.htm#fr_3344) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p13"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p13.1"></span>[John x.
32-38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#032)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="fn_3345"></span>[439:3346](2040387.htm#fr_3345) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p15"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p15.1"></span>[John xii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#045)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p15.3"></span>; [Matt. x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p15.4"></span>; [John xii.
46-48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p15.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_3346"></span>[439:3347](2040387.htm#fr_3346) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p15.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p16"></span> [John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3347"></span>[440:3348](2040387.htm#fr_3347) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p18"></span> [John xii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3348"></span>[440:3349](2040387.htm#fr_3348) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p19"></span> [John
3.16-19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3349"></span>[440:3350](2040387.htm#fr_3349) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p20"></span> [John
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#019)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3350"></span>[440:3351](2040387.htm#fr_3350) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p21"></span> John 22.45<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3351"></span>[440:3352](2040387.htm#fr_3351) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p22"></span> [John
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3352"></span>[440:3353](2040387.htm#fr_3352) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p23"></span> John 22:36, 46<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3353"></span>[440:3354](2040387.htm#fr_3353) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p25"></span> [John
1.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#008)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3354"></span>[440:3355](2040387.htm#fr_3354) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p26"></span> [John
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3355"></span>[440:3356](2040387.htm#fr_3355) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p27"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p27.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p27.3"></span>; i. 18; xii. 45.

<span id="fn_3356"></span>[440:3357](2040387.htm#fr_3356) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p28"></span> [John
14.9-13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3357"></span>[441:3358](2040387.htm#fr_3357) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p30"></span> [John viii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3358"></span>[441:3359](2040387.htm#fr_3358) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p31"></span> Vid. [Matt. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="fn_3359"></span>[441:3360](2040387.htm#fr_3359) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p33"></span> [John iii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3360"></span>[441:3361](2040387.htm#fr_3360) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p34"></span> Cf. iii. 11, n. 1.

<span id="fn_3361"></span>[441:3362](2040387.htm#fr_3361) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p36"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p36.1"></span>[John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p36.3"></span>; xvi. 28.

<span id="fn_3362"></span>[441:3363](2040387.htm#fr_3362) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p36.4"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p37"></span> *Or.* ii. 60. n. 5.

<span id="fn_3363"></span>[441:3364](2040387.htm#fr_3363) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p38"></span> [Gal. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3364"></span>[441:3365](2040387.htm#fr_3364) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p39"></span> Below, §29.

<span id="fn_3365"></span>[442:3366](2040387.htm#fr_3365) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p40"></span> [Isa.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002), [Gen.
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002), [Deut.
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p40.1"></span>[Is. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p40.3"></span>, LXX.; [Gen. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p40.4"></span>; [Deut. xxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p40.5"></span>

<span id="fn_3366"></span>[442:3367](2040387.htm#fr_3366) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p40.6"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p41"></span> *Or.* ii. 19, n. 3.

<span id="fn_3367"></span>[442:3368](2040387.htm#fr_3367) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p43"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p43.1"></span>[Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p43.3"></span>; [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p43.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3368"></span>[442:3369](2040387.htm#fr_3368) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p43.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p44"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3369"></span>[442:3370](2040387.htm#fr_3369) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p45"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p45.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3370"></span>[442:3371](2040387.htm#fr_3370) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p46"></span> Cf. i. 53, n. 7; iii. 35, n. 5.

<span id="fn_3371"></span>[442:3372](2040387.htm#fr_3371) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p47"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p47.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p47.3"></span>; i. 18; xiv. 9.

<span id="fn_3372"></span>[442:3373](2040387.htm#fr_3372) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p49"></span> [Ps. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3373"></span>[442:3374](2040387.htm#fr_3373) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p50"></span> Ib. ix. title xlv. title.

<span id="fn_3374"></span>[442:3375](2040387.htm#fr_3374) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p51"></span> [Is. v.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3375"></span>[442:3376](2040387.htm#fr_3375) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p52"></span> [Ps. cx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p52.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_3376"></span>[442:3377](2040387.htm#fr_3376) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p53"></span> [Prov.
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025), [Dan.
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p53.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p53.3"></span>, LXX.; [Dan. iii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p53.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3377"></span>[442:3378](2040387.htm#fr_3377) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p53.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p54"></span> Cf. *Exp. in Ps.* xcii.

<span id="fn_3378"></span>[443:3379](2040387.htm#fr_3378) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p55"></span> <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p55.1"></span>[Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p55.3"></span>; xciii. 1; xlv. 1; [Matt. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p55.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_3379"></span>[443:3380](2040387.htm#fr_3379) <span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p55.5"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p56"></span> [Gen. xxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002)<span
id="xxi.ii.vi.vii-p56.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section 25](2040388)
