[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040028)  [Next](2040030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p1"></span> <span class="c4"><span
id="v.iv.i-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV.</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p2"></span><span class="c55"><span
id="v.iv.i-p2.1"></span>The Theology of S. Athanasius</span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p3"></span>§1. *General Considerations.*

<span id="v.iv.i-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.iv.i-p4.1"></span>The</span> theological training of Athanasius
was in the school of Alexandria, and under the still predominant
although modified influence of Origen (see above, pp. xiv., xxvii.). The
resistance which the theology of that famous man had everywhere
encountered had not availed, in the Greek-speaking churches of the East,
to stem its influence; at the same time it had made its way at the cost
of much of its distinctive character. Its principal opponent, Methodius,
who represented the ancient Asiatic tradition, was himself not
uninfluenced by the theology he opposed. The legacy of his generation to
the Nicene age was an Origenism tempered in various degrees by the
Asiatic theology and by accommodations to the traditional canon of
ecclesiastical teaching. The degrees of this modification were various,
and the variety was reflected in the indeterminate body of theological
conviction which we find at the time of the outbreak of Arianism, and
which, as already explained, lies at the basis of the reaction against
the definition of Nicæa. The theology of Alexandria remained Origenist,
and the Origenist character is purest and most marked in Pierius,
Theognostus, and in the non-episcopal heads of the Alexandrian School.
The bishops of Alexandria after Dionysius represent a more tempered
Origenism. Especially this holds good of the martyred Peter, whom we
find expressly correcting distinctive parts of the system of his
spiritual ancestor. In Alexander of Alexandria, the theological sponsor
of the young Athanasius, the combination of a fundamentally Origenist
theology with ideas traceable to the Asiatic tradition is
conspicuous <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) .

<span id="v.iv.i-p6"></span>Athanasius, then, received his first
theological ideas from Origenist sources, and in so far as he eventually
diverged from Origen we must seek the explanation partly in his own
theological or religious idiosyncrasy and in the influences which he
encountered as time went on, partly in the extent to which the Origenism
of his masters was already modified by different currents of theological
influence.

<span id="v.iv.i-p7"></span>To work out this problem satisfactorily
would involve a separate treatise and a searching study, not only of
Athanasius <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) but on the one hand of
Origen and his school, on the other of Methodius and the earlier
pre-Nicene theologians. What is here attempted is the more modest task
of briefly drawing attention to some of the more conspicuous evidences
of the process and to some of its results in the developed theology of
the saintly bishop.

<span id="v.iv.i-p9"></span>It has been said by Harnack that the
theology of Athanasius underwent no development, but was the same from
first to last. The truth of this verdict is I think limited by the fact
that the Origenism of Athanasius distinctly undergoes a change, or
rather fades away, in his later works. A non-Origenist element is
present from the first, and after the contest with Arianism begins,
Origen’s ideas recede more and more from view. Athanasius was influenced
*negatively* by the stress of the Arian controversy: while the vague and
loose Origenism of the current Greek theology inclined the majority of
bishops to dread Sabellianism rather than Arianism, and to underrate the
danger of the latter (pp. xviii., xxxv.), Athanasius, deeply <span
id="page_lxix">p. lxix</span> <span
id="v.iv.i-Page_lxix"></span>impressed, from personal experience, with
the negation of the first principles of redemption which Arianism
involved, stood apart from the first from the theology of his Asiatic
contemporaries and went back to the authority of Scripture and the Rule
of Faith. He was influenced *positively* by the Nicene formula, which
represents the combination of Western with anti-Origenist Eastern
traditions in opposition to the dominant Eastern theology. The Nicene
formula found in Athanasius a mind predisposed to enter into its spirit,
to employ in its defence the richest resources of theological and
biblical training, of spiritual depth and vigour, of self-sacrificing
but sober and tactful enthusiasm; its victory in the East is due under
God to him alone.

<span id="v.iv.i-p10"></span>Athanasius was not a systematic theologian:
that is he produced no many-sided theology like that of Origen or
Augustine. He had no interest in theological speculation, none of the
instincts of a schoolman or philosopher. His theological greatness lies
in his firm grasp of *soteriological* principles, in his resolute
subordination of everything else, even the formula <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.i-p10.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.i-p10.2"></span>μοούσιος</span>, to the
central fact of Redemption, and to what that fact implied as to the
Person of the Redeemer. He goes back from the Logos of the philosophers
to the Logos of S. John, from the God of the philosophers to God in
Christ reconciling the world to Himself. His legacy to later ages has
been felicitously compared (Harnack, *Dg*. ii. 26, note) to that of the
Christian spirit of his age in the realm of architecture. ‘To the many
forms of architectural conception which lived in Rome and Alexandria in
the fourth century, the Christian spirit added nothing fresh. Its
achievement was of a different kind. Out of the many it selected and
consecrated one; the multiplicity of forms it carried back to a single
dominant idea, not so much by a change in the spirit of the art as by
the restoration of Religion to its place as the central motive. It
bequeathed to the art of the middle ages the Basilica, and rendered
possible the birth of Gothic, a style, like that of the old Greek
Temple, truly organic. What the Basilica was in the history of the
material, the central idea of Athanasius has been in that of the
spiritual fabric; an auspicious reduction, full of promise for the
future, of the exuberant speculation of Greek theology to the one idea
in which the power of religion then resided’ (*ib*. and pp. 22 *sqq*.,
freely reproduced).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[lxviii:89](2040029.htm#fr_88) <span
id="v.iv.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p5"></span> To begin with, we have the interesting fact
that Alexander studied the writings of Melito of Sardis, and even worked
up his tract <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.i-p5.2"></span>περὶ
ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος εἰς τὸ πάθος</span> into a homiletical discourse of
his own, omitting such passages as seemed to savour of ‘modalism,’ (see
Krüger in *Zeitschr. f. wiss. Theol.* 1888, p. 434, *sqq.:* his grounds
are convincing). Secondly, the expressions attributed to him by Arius
(in his letter to Euseb. Nic.), and his letter to his namesake of
Byzantium, bear out the above statement.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[lxviii:90](2040029.htm#fr_89) <span
id="v.iv.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.i-p8"></span> The reader is requested to supplement the
necessarily very slender treatment of the Athanasian theology in this
chapter by referring to the General Index to this volume, as well as to
the Index of Texts, for guidance to the passages of Athanasius which are
needed to check, fill out, and qualify what is here presented only in
broad outline.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fundamental ideas of man and his redemption.](2040030)
