[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040067)  [Next](2040069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiii-p1"></span> §23. *The variety of idolatrous
cults proves that they are false.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiii-p2"></span>But not only from these
considerations may one appreciate their godlessness, but also from their
discordant opinions about the idols themselves. For if they be gods
according to their assertion and their speculations, to which of them is
one to give allegiance, and which of them is one to judge to be the
higher, so as either to worship God with confidence, or as they say to
recognise the Deity by them without ambiguity? For not the same beings
are called gods among all; on the contrary, for every nation almost
there is a separate god imagined. And there are cases of a single
district and a single town being at internal discord about the
superstition of their idols. 2. The Phœnicians, for example, do not know
those who are called gods among the Egyptians, nor do the Egyptians
worship the same idols as the Phœnicians have. And while the Scythians
reject the gods of the Persians, the Persians reject those of the
Syrians. But the Pelasgians also repudiate the gods in Thrace, while the
Thracians know not those of Thebes. The Indians moreover differ from the
Arabs, the Arabs from the Ethiopians, and the Ethiopians from the Arabs
in their idols. And the Syrians worship not the idols of the Cilicians,
while the Cappadocian nation call gods beings different from these. And
while the Bithynians have adopted others, the Armenians have imagined
others again. And what need is there for me to multiply examples? The
men on the continent worship other gods than the islanders, while these
latter serve other gods than those of the main lands. 3. And, in
general, every city and village, not knowing the gods of its neighbours,
prefers its own, and deems that these alone are gods. For concerning the
abominations in Egypt there is no need even to speak, as they are before
the eyes of all: how the cities have religions which are opposite and
incompatible, and neighbours always make a point of worshipping the
opposite of those next to them <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) :
so much so that the crocodile, prayed to by some, is held in abomination
by their neighbours, while the lion, worshipped as a god by others,
their neighbours, so far from worshipping, slay, if they find it, as a
wild beast; and the fish, consecrated by some people, is used as food in
another place. And thus arise fights and riots and frequent occasions of
bloodshed, and every indulgence of the passions among them. 4. And
strange to say, according to the statement of historians, the very
Pelasgians, who learned from the Egyptians the names of the gods, do not
know the gods of Egypt, but worship others instead. And, speaking
generally, all the nations that are infatuated with idols have different
opinions and religions, and consistency is not to be met with in any one
case. Nor is this surprising. 5. For having fallen from the
contemplation of the one God, they have come down to many and diverse
objects; and having turned from the Word of the Father, Christ the
Saviour of all, they naturally have their understanding wandering in
many directions. And just as men who have turned from the sun and are
come into dark places go round by many pathless ways, and see not those
who are present, while they imagine those to be there who are not, and
seeing see not; so they that have turned from God and whose soul is
darkened, have their mind in a roving state, and like men who are drunk
and cannot see, imagine what is not true.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[16:138](2040068.htm#fr_137) <span
id="vi.ii.i.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiii-p3"></span> Hdt. ii. 69; cf. Juv. Sat. xv. 36,

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiii-p4"></span>‘numina vicinorum

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiii-p5"></span>Odit uterque locus.’

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiii-p6"></span>This is one of the few places where
Athanasius has any Egyptian ‘local colour’ (cf. supra 9 and 10). M.
Fialon is certainly too imaginative (p. 86 contradicted p. 283), when he
sees in the *contra Gentes* an appreciation of the higher religious
principles which the modern science (‘toute Francaise’) of Egyptology
has enabled us to read behind the grotesque features of popular Egyptian
polytheism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The so-called gods of one place are used as victims in
another.](2040069)
