[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040060)  [Next](2040062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xvi"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xvi-p1"></span> §16. *Heathen arguments in palliation
of the above: and (1) ‘the poets are responsible for these unedifying
tales.’ But are the names and existence of the gods any better
authenticated? Both stand or fall together. Either the actions must be
defended or the deity of the gods given up. And the heroes are not
credited with acts inconsistent with their nature, as, on this plea, the
gods are.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.xvi-p2"></span>But perhaps, as to all this, the
impious will appeal to the peculiar style of poets, saying that it is
the peculiarity of poets to feign what is not, and, for the pleasure of
their hearers, to tell fictitious tales; and that for this reason they
have composed the stories about gods. But this pretext of theirs, even
more than any other, will appear to be superficial from what they
themselves think and profess about these matters. 2. For if what is said
in the poets is fictitious and false, even the nomenclature of Zeus,
Cronos, Hera, Ares and the rest must be false. For perhaps, as they say,
even the names are fictitious, and, while no such being exists as Zeus,
Cronos, or Ares, the poets feign their existence to deceive their
hearers. But if the poets feign the existence of unreal beings, how is
it that they worship them as though they existed? 3. Or perhaps, once
again, they will say that while the names are not fictitious, they
ascribe to them fictitious actions. But even this is equally precarious
as a defence. For if they made up the actions, doubtless also they made
up the names, to which they attributed the actions. Or if they tell the
truth about the names, it follows that they tell the truth about the
actions too. In particular, they who have said in their tales that these
are gods certainly know how gods ought to act, and would never ascribe
to gods the ideas of men, any more than one would ascribe to water the
properties of fire; for fire burns, whereas the nature of water on the
contrary is cold. 4. If then the actions are worthy of gods, they that
do them must be gods; but if they are actions of men, and of
disreputable men, such as adultery and the acts mentioned above, they
that act in such ways must be men and not gods. For their deeds must
correspond to their natures, so that at once the actor may be made known
by his act, and the action may be ascertainable from his nature. So that
just as a man discussing about water and fire, and declaring their
action, would not say that water burned and fire cooled, nor, if a man
were discoursing about the sun and the earth, would he say the earth
gave light, while the sun was sown with herbs and fruits, but if he were
to say so would exceed the utmost height of madness, so neither would
their writers, and especially the most eminent <span id="page_13">p.
13</span> <span id="vi.ii.i.xvi-Page_13"></span>poet of all, if they
really knew that Zeus and the others were gods, invest them with such
actions as shew them to be not gods, but rather men, and not sober men.
5. Or if, as poets, they told falsehoods, and you are maligning them,
why did they not also tell falsehoods about the courage of the heroes,
and feign feebleness in the place of courage, and courage in that of
feebleness? For they ought in that case, as with Zeus and Hera, so also
to slanderously accuse Achilles of want of courage, and to celebrate the
might of Thersites, and, while charging Odysseus with dulness, to make
out Nestor a reckless person, and to narrate effeminate actions of
Diomed and Hector, and manly deeds of Hecuba. For the fiction and
falsehood they ascribe to the poets ought to extend to all cases. But in
fact, they kept the truth for their men, while not ashamed to tell
falsehoods about their so-called gods. 6. And as some of them might
argue, that they are telling falsehoods about their licentious actions,
but that in their praises, when they speak of Zeus as father of gods,
and as the highest, and the Olympian, and as reigning in heaven, they
are not inventing but speaking truthfully; this is a plea which not only
myself, but anybody can refute. For the truth will be clear, in
opposition to them, if we recall our previous proofs. For while their
actions prove them to be men, the panegyrics upon them go beyond the
nature of men. The two things then are mutually inconsistent; for
neither is it the nature of heavenly beings to act in such ways, nor can
any one suppose that persons so acting are gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The truth probably is, that the scandalous tales are true, while
the divine attributes ascribed to them are due to the flattery of the
poets.](2040062)
