[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040124)  [Next](2040126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxviii-p1"></span> §28. *This exceptional fact must be
tested by experience. Let those who doubt it become Christians.*

<span id="vii.ii.xxviii-p2"></span>Is this, then, a slight proof of the
weakness of death? or is it a slight demonstration of the victory won
over him by the Saviour, when the youths and young maidens that are in
Christ despise this life and practise to die? 2. For man is by nature
afraid of death and of the dissolution of the body; but there is this
most startling fact, that he who has put on the faith of the Cross
despises even what is naturally fearful, and for Christ’s sake is not
afraid of death. 3. And just as, whereas fire has the natural property
of burning, if some one said there was a substance which did not fear
its burning, but on the contrary proved it weak—as the asbestos among
the Indians is said to do—then one who did not believe the story, if he
wished to put it to the test, is at any rate, after putting on the
fireproof material and touching the fire, thereupon assured of the
weakness attributed <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) to the fire:
4. or if any one wished to see the tyrant bound, at any rate by going
into the country and domain of his conqueror he may see the man, a
terror to others, reduced to weakness; so if a man is incredulous even
still after so many proofs and after so many who have become martyrs in
Christ, and after the scorn shewn for death every day by those who are
illustrious in Christ, still, if his mind be even yet doubtful as to
whether death has been brought to nought and had an end, he does well to
wonder at so great a thing, only let him not prove obstinate in
incredulity, nor case-hardened in the face of what is so plain. 5. But
just as he who has got the asbestos knows that fire has no burning power
over it, and as he who would see the tyrant bound goes over to the
empire of his conqueror, so too let him who is incredulous about the
victory over death receive the faith of Christ, and pass over to His
teaching, and he shall see the weakness of death, and the triumph over
it. For many who were formerly incredulous and scoffers have afterwards
believed and so despised death as even to become martyrs for Christ
Himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[51:279](2040125.htm#fr_278) <span
id="vii.ii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xxviii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.ii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>κατὰ τοῦ πυρός</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.ii.xxviii-p3.2"></span>κατὰ</span> appears
to have the predicative force so common in Aristotle. The Bened.
translation ‘the weakness of fire against the asbestos’ is based on a
needless conjecture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Here then are wonderful effects, and a sufficient cause, the
Cross, to account for them, as sunrise accounts for daylight.](2040126)
