[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040040)  [Next](2040042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vi"></span>

<span id="v.vi-p1"></span> <span id="page_xc">p. xc</span> <span
id="v.vi-Page_xc"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="v.vi-p1.1"></span>Appendix.</span>

<span id="v.vi-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.vi-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.vi-p3.1"></span>The Civil and Military Government of Egypt in the
Lifetime of Athanasius</span>.

<span id="v.vi-p4"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="v.vi-p4.1"></span>The</span> name Egypt in the fourth century was
applied firstly to the ‘diocese’ or group of provinces governed by the
Præfectus Ægypti or ‘Præfectus Augustalis,’ secondly to the Delta or
Ægyptus Propria, one of the provinces of which the diocese was made up.
These provinces (Ammian. Marc. XXII. xvi.) were originally three in
number: Egypt proper, Libya, and the Thebais. During our period they
became five, firstly by the separation of the Eastern Delta from Egypt
proper under the name of Augustamnica in 341 (*infr*. pp. 130, 504, note
17a); secondly by the subdivision of Libya (at an uncertain date) into
Hither Libya (Libya ‘Inferior,’ or ‘Siccior’), and the Pentapolis or
Libya Superior of which Ptolemais was the capital. At a later date still
the Heptanomis was separated from ‘Ægyptus’ under the name of Arcadia,
given in honour of the Emperor Arcadius. These then are the six
provinces which make up ‘Egypt’ in the *Notilia* (shortly after <span
class="c10"><span id="v.vi-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 400). Each province,
with the exception of Augustamnica, whose governor enjoyed the title of
‘corrector,’ was under a præses (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p4.3"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vi-p4.4"></span>γούμενος</span>): not one of the six was of
consular rank. This regulation was due to the peculiar constitution of
the diocese or province of Egypt in the wider sense. At the head of this
latter, and subordinate in rank, though scarcely second in dignity, to
the Comes Orientis, was the Prefect of Egypt, who enjoyed an exceptional
position among the greater provincial officers. He appears to have been,
at least in practice, directly under the Præfectus Prætorio per
Orientem, the supreme civil representative of ‘Augustus’ throughout the
Eastern Empire. The title Præfectus had in fact a different history as
applied to the Prefect of the East and the Prefect of Egypt
respectively. As applied to the latter, it was as old as Augustus. The
importance of Egypt, mainly but not solely as a granary of Rome, had led
the politic heir of Julius Cæsar to ensure its complete and peculiar
dependence on the emperor. For this object, its government was committed
to a nominee of the emperor, who must be not a Senator but an Eques
only; i.e. he must never have held one of the great offices of state
from Consul to quæstor. No one of senatorial rank was to be permitted to
set foot in Egypt. (For the prerogatives of the præfectus Ægypti under
Augustus see Tacitus *Ann*. xii. 60. also Ulp. *Digest*. I. xvii.). This
arrangement survived the various vicissitudes of Egypt in the third
century, and even the reorganisation of the Empire by Diocletian. Egypt
was severed off between 365 and 386 from the Eastern ‘Diocese’ (Sievers,
p. 117, appealing to Mommsen in *Abhandl. der Berliner Akad*. 1862).
Upon the above facts was founded the (perhaps merely popular) title
‘Augustalis’ which we find already applied to the Prefect of Egypt about
<span class="c10"><span id="v.vi-p4.5"></span>a.d.</span> 350 (*infr*.
p. 143, cf. p. 93 note). But Sievers (*ubi supr*.), following Mommsen,
contends that there is reason to think that the dignity of ‘Augustal’
Prefect was officially created about <span class="c10"><span
id="v.vi-p4.6"></span>a.d.</span> 367. This view cannot be adequately
discussed here, but it rests only in part upon the series of governors
furnished by the *Festal Index*.

<span id="v.vi-p5"></span>From that document we learn that the prefect
of ‘Egypt’ in the wider sense in almost every case held also the office
of ‘governor’ of Egypt in the narrower sense. The exceptions noted by
Sievers (§14) are in most cases based on the errors of Larsow. But in
365 Flavianus is ‘governor’ only, next year ‘Prefect’ also: his
successors Proclianus and Tatianus are each ‘governor’ only (366–7), but
the latter is Prefect in 368, and ‘governor’ only in 369–70, as also is
Palladius, 370–371, who is yet succeeded by Olympius as ‘Prefect.’ These
variations may be due merely to careless use of language, or possibly to
some change about the time referred to.

<span id="v.vi-p6"></span>The list of prefects of Egypt is fuller than
any that exists for a Roman province over so long a period, and on the
whole it is in the highest degree trustworthy. But there are one or two
drawbacks to take account of. Firstly, there are the discrepancies
between the *Index* iii., vi., vii., and the headings to the
corresponding letters (see notes). Also, the heading to Letter x.
presupposes a change of governor in the previous year of which the Index
tells us nothing. Again, a letter of Julian’s (No. 23) is addressed to a
‘Hermogenes, governor of Egypt’ for <span id="page_xci">p. xci</span>
<span id="v.vi-Page_xci"></span>whom it is difficult to find room in the
following list at the date required (end of 361, when Gerontius was
prefect). Julianus, uncle of the Emperor, if not disguised under the
name Italicianus (see below), possibly ruled Egypt (Jul. *Ep*. 11), as
Comes Orientis, which office he held in 362. On the other hand the
Olympus of *Index* xxxiv., and the Ecdikius of Julian, *Epp*. 6, 50, and
*Cod. Theod*. xv. i. 8, are probably one and the same (Sievers, p. 124).

<span id="v.vi-p7"></span>The Military command of Egypt was now in the
hand of the ‘dux,’ who had the disposal of the troops in Egypt proper;
those of Libya and of the Thebais were, at any rate later on, entrusted
to separate ‘duces.’ In the *Notitia*, while the two latter ‘duces’
remain, the Dux Ægypti is replaced by a higher official, entitled the
‘Comes Rei Militaris per Ægyptum.’ But this belongs to a later date. In
the time of Athanasius ‘Counts’ appear in Egypt only as extraordinary or
special commissioners whose authority is exercised concurrently with
that of the Dux, as, e.g., Count Heraclianus or Heraclius (*infr*. pp.
290, 292), whose commission runs parallel with the command of the new
‘dux’ Sebastianus; and Count Asterius (p. 289), who was in Egypt when
Felicissimus was ‘Duke.’

<span id="v.vi-p8"></span>We now give a list of the governors and dukes
of Egypt, with references to the *Festal Index*: these must also be
supplemented by the general index to this volume:—

<span id="v.vi-p9"></span>(1) *Prefect and Governor.*

<span id="v.vi-p10"></span>328, 329. Septimius Zenius (*Index* i.,
Heading i.).

<span id="v.vi-p11"></span>330. Magninianus (*Index* ii., Heading ii.).

<span id="v.vi-p12"></span>331. Hyginus (or ‘Eugenius,’ *Index* iii.),
but Florentius (Heading iii.).

<span id="v.vi-p13"></span>332. Hyginus (Heading iv. and *Index* iv.).

<span id="v.vi-p14"></span>333. Paternus (Heading v. and *Index* v.).

<span id="v.vi-p15"></span>334, 335. Paternus (*Index*), but Philagrius
(Heading iv., v.).

<span id="v.vi-p16"></span>336–7. Philagrius (*Index* viii., ix.).

<span id="v.vi-p17"></span>338. Theodorus (*Index* x.), superseded by
Philagrius (Heading x.).

<span id="v.vi-p18"></span>339, 340. Philagrius (*Index* xi., xii.,
Heading xi.).

<span id="v.vi-p19"></span>341–343. Longinus (*Index* xiii.–xv.,
Headings xiii., xiv., and cf. *Cod. Th*. XVI. ii. 10, 11, correcting
date by Sievers, p. 114).

<span id="v.vi-p20"></span>344. Palladius of Italy (*Index* xvi.).

<span id="v.vi-p21"></span>345–352. Nestorius of Gaza (*Index*
xvii.–xxiv., Headings xvii.–xx., also *infr*. pp. 218, 219, notes, &c.).

<span id="v.vi-p22"></span>353, 354. Sebastianus of Thrace (*Index*
xxv., xxvi.).

<span id="v.vi-p23"></span>355, 356. Maximus ‘the elder’ of Nicæa
(*Index* xxvii., xxviii., and see pp. 246, 301).

<span id="v.vi-p24"></span>356, 7. Cataphronius (*Index* xxviii., xxix.;
he arrived on June 10, 356, see p. 290, note 9; also cf. Liban. *Epp*.
434, 435).

<span id="v.vi-p25"></span>357–359. Parnassius (*Index* xxix., xxxi.,
cf. for the latter year Amm. Marc. XIX., xii.).

<span id="v.vi-p26"></span>359. (For 3 months only) ‘Italicianus of
Italy,’ perhaps for Julianus (so Siev., p. 121, cf. *Index* xxxi.).

<span id="v.vi-p27"></span>359–361. Faustinus (*Index* xxxi.–xxxiii.,
cf. p. 291?).

<span id="v.vi-p28"></span>361, 362. Gerontius (*Index* xxxiii., xxxiv.,
Liban. *Epp*. 294, 295, 547, 548).

<span id="v.vi-p29"></span>362, 363. Ecdikius Olympus (*Index* xxxiv.,
xxxv., cf. remarks above).

<span id="v.vi-p30"></span>364. Hierius or Aerius (*Index* xxxvi.,
Sievers, *Leben des Libanius*, Appendix A).

<span id="v.vi-p31"></span>364. Maximus (*Index ib*., Liban. *Ep*. 1050,
written in July or Aug.), for a short time only.

<span id="v.vi-p32"></span>364–366. Flavianus (*Index* xxxvi., xxxviii.,
Liban. *Ep*. 569, *supr*. ch. v. §3, k).

<span id="v.vi-p33"></span>366, 367. Proclianus (*Index* xxxviii.,
xxxix.).

<span id="v.vi-p34"></span>367–370. Tatianus (*Index* xxxix., xlii., see
Gibbon ch. xxix. and notes 6–8, for references).

<span id="v.vi-p35"></span>370, 371. Olympius Palladius (*Index* xlii.,
xliii.).

<span id="v.vi-p36"></span>371–373. Aelius Palladius (*Index*
xliii.–xlv., Socr. iv. 21, &c.).

<span id="v.vi-p37"></span>(2) *Dux Ægypti.*

<span id="v.vi-p38"></span>Our materials for this list are very scanty,
but we can verify the following:—

<span id="v.vi-p39"></span>340 and 345. Balacius or Valacius (pp. 219,
273, &c.).

<span id="v.vi-p40"></span>350. Felicissimus (p. 289).

<span id="v.vi-p41"></span>356. (Jan. and Feb.) Syrianus (*Index*
xxviii., &c.).

<span id="v.vi-p42"></span>356. (Apparently after Midsummer, cf. p. 292
with 290.) Sebastianus (‘successor of Syrianus,’ *Ep*. *Ammon*. 21); he
remains till after 358 (cf. Siev. p. 125 for references to letters of
Libanius).

<span id="v.vi-p43"></span>360. Artemius (‘succ. of Sebastianus,’ *ib.,
Index* xxxii., Letter 53. note 1).

<span id="v.vi-p44"></span>365, 366. Victorinus (ch. v. §3, k).

<span id="v.vi-p45"></span>367, 368. Traianus (*Index* xxxix., Sievers,
pp. 146, *sq.*).

<span id="v.vi-p46"></span>On the matters dealt with in this appendix,
consult Mommsen, *Provinces* (Eng. Tra.), ii., pp. 233, 246; the
*Notitia* (ed. Panciroli, Genev., 1623, Böcking, Bonn, 1839–1853, Seeck,
Berlin, 1876); Gibbon, ch. xvii.; Marquardt, *Röm. Staats-verwaltung*,
vol. i.; and Kuhn, *Die städtische, &c., Verfassung des R. Reiches*,
vol. ii.; also Sievers on the *Hist. Aceph*. (*supr*. ch. i., §3).

<span id="v.vi-p47"></span>On the Egyptian bishoprics, see, in addition
to Le Quien, a Coptic list of sees in De Rougé, *Géographie de la
Basse-Egypte*, Paris, 1891, which came out too late to be used for this
volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against the Heathen. (Contra Gentes.)](2040042)
