[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040294)  [Next](2040296) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii.ii.xxx"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxx-p1"></span> 30. *A copy of the letter of
Constantius against Athanasius.*

<span id="xviii.ii.xxx-p2"></span>Victor Constantius Maximus Augustus to
the Alexandrians.

<span id="xviii.ii.xxx-p3"></span>Your city, preserving its national
character, and remembering the virtue of its founders, has habitually
shewn itself obedient unto us, as it does at this day; and we on our
part should consider ourselves greatly wanting in our duty, did not our
good will eclipse even that of Alexander himself. For as it belongs to a
temperate mind, to behave itself orderly in all respects, so it is the
part of royalty, on account of virtue, permit me to say, such as yours,
to embrace you above all others; you, <span id="page_250">p. 250</span>
<span id="xviii.ii.xxx-Page_250"></span>who rose up as the first
teachers of wisdom who were the first to acknowledge <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) God; who moreover have chosen for
yourselves the most consummate masters; and have cordially acquiesced in
our opinion, justly abominating that impostor and cheat, and dutifully
uniting yourselves to those venerable men who are beyond all admiration.
And yet, who is ignorant, even among those who live in the ends of the
earth, what violent party spirit was displayed in the late proceedings?
with which we know not anything that has ever happened, worthy to be
compared. The majority of the citizens had their eyes blinded, and a man
who had come forth from the lowest dens of infamy obtained authority
among them, entrapping into falsehood, as under cover of darkness, those
who were desirous to know the truth;—one who never provided for them any
fruitful and edifying discourse, but corrupted their minds with
unprofitable subtleties. His flatterers shouted and applauded him; they
were astonished at his powers, and they still probably murmur secretly;
while the majority of the more simple sort took their cue from them. And
thus all went with the stream, as if a flood had broken in, while
everything was entirely neglected. One of the multitude was in
power;—how can I describe him more truly than by saying, that he was
superior in nothing to the meanest of the people, and that the only
kindness which he shewed to the city was, that he did not thrust her
citizens down into the pit. This noble-minded and illustrious person did
not wait for judgment to proceed against him, but sentenced himself to
banishment, as he deserved. So that now it is for the interest of the
Barbarians to remove him out of the way, lest he lead some of them into
impiety, for he will make his complaint, like distressed characters in a
play, to those who first fall in with him. To him however we will now
bid a long farewell. For yourselves there are few with whom I can
compare you: I am bound rather to honour you separately above all
others, for the great virtue and wisdom which your actions, that are
celebrated almost through the whole world, proclaim you to possess. Go
on in this sober course. I would gladly have repeated to me a
description of your conduct in such terms of praise as it deserves; O
you who have eclipsed your predecessors in the race of glory, and will
be a noble example both to those who are now alive, and to all who shall
come after, and alone have chosen for yourselves the most perfect of
beings as guide for your conduct, both in word and deed, and hesitated
not a moment, but manfully transferred your affections, and gave
yourselves up to the other side, leaving those grovelling <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) and earthly teachers, and
stretching forth towards heavenly things, under the guidance of the most
venerable George <span id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371) , than whom
no man is more perfectly instructed therein. Under him you will continue
to have a good hope respecting the future life, and will pass your time
in this present world, in rest and quietness. Would that all the
citizens together would lay hold on his words, as a sacred anchor, so
that we might need neither knife nor cautery for those whose souls are
diseased! Such persons we most earnestly advise to renounce their zeal
in favour of Athanasius, and not even to remember the foolish things
which he spoke so plentifully among them. Otherwise they will bring
themselves before they are aware into extreme peril, from which we know
not any one who will be skilful enough to deliver such factious persons.
For while that pestilent fellow Athanasius is driven from place to
place, being convicted of the basest crimes, for which he would only
suffer the punishment he deserves, if one were to kill him ten times
over, it would be inconsistent in us to suffer those flatterers and
juggling ministers of his to exult against us; men of such a character
as it is a shame even to speak of, respecting whom orders have long ago
been given to the magistrates, that they should be put to death. But
even now perhaps they shall not die, if they desist from their former
offences, and repent at last. For that most pestilent fellow Athanasius
led them on, and corrupted the whole state, and laid his impious and
polluted hands upon the most holy things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[250:1370](2040295.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxx-p4"></span> On the reading, cf. infr. note 6.

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[250:1371](2040295.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxx-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xviii.ii.xxx-p5.1"></span>τῶν χαμαί</span>, vid. *contr.* Euseb. *H.
E.* vii. 27.

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[250:1372](2040295.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="xviii.ii.xxx-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.ii.xxx-p6"></span> Of Cappadocia, *de Syn.* 37, note 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of Constantius to the Ethiopians against
Frumentius.](2040296)
