[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040169)  [Next](2040171) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p1"></span> §3. *By ‘all things’ is meant the
redemptive attributes and power of Christ.*

<span id="xi.ii.iii-p2"></span>Thus, then, we may understand all things
to have been delivered to the Saviour, and, if it be necessary to follow
up understanding by explanation, that hath been delivered unto Him which
He did not previously possess. For He was not man previously, but became
man for the sake of saving man. And the Word was not in the beginning
flesh, but has been made flesh subsequently (cf. [Joh. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="xi.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>
sqq.), in which Flesh, as the Apostle says, He reconciled the enmity
which was against us ([Col. 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020),
[Col. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014), [Eph.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016)<span id="xi.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>)
and destroyed the law of the commandments in ordinances, that He might
make the two into one new man, making peace, and reconcile both in one
body to the Father. That, however, which the Father has, belongs also to
the Son, as also He says in John, ‘All things whatsoever the Father hath
are Mine’ ([Joh. xvi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span
id="xi.ii.iii-p2.3"></span>), expressions which could not be improved.
For when He became that which He was not, ‘all things were delivered’ to
Him. But when He desires to declare His unity with the Father, He
teaches it without any reserve, saying: ‘All things whatsoever the
Father hath are Mine.’ And one cannot but admire the exactness of the
language. For He has not said ‘all things whatsoever the Father hath, He
hath given to Me,’ lest He should appear at one time not to have
possessed these things; but ‘are Mine.’ For these things, being in the
Father’s power, are equally in that of the Son. But we must in turn
examine what things ‘the Father hath.’ For if Creation is meant, the
Father had nothing before creation, and proves to have received
something additional from Creation; but far be it to think this. For
just as He exists before creation, so before creation also He has what
He has, which we also believe to belong to the Son ([Joh. xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="xi.ii.iii-p2.4"></span>).
For if the Son is in the Father, then all things that the Father has
belong to the Son. So this expression is subversive of the perversity of
the heterodox in saying that ‘if all things have been delivered to the
Son, then the Father has ceased to have power over what is delivered,
having appointed the Son in His place. For, in fact, the Father judgeth
none, but hath given all judgment to the Son’ ([Joh. v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="xi.ii.iii-p2.5"></span>).
But ‘let the mouth of them that speak wickedness be stopped’ ([Ps.
lxiii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011)<span
id="xi.ii.iii-p2.6"></span>), (for although He has given all judgment to
the Son, He is not, therefore, stripped of lordship: nor, because it is
said that all things are delivered by the Father to the Son, is He any
the less over all), separating as they clearly do the Only-begotten from
God, Who is by nature <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="xi.ii.iii-Page_89"></span>inseparable from Him, even though in their
madness they separate Him by their words, not perceiving, the impious
men, that the Light can never be separated from the sun, in which it
resides by nature. For one must use a poor simile drawn from tangible
and familiar objects to put our idea into words, since it is over bold
to intrude upon the incomprehensible nature \[of God\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The text John xvi. 15, shews clearly the essential relation of
the Son to the Father.](2040171)
