[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040261)  [Next](2040263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p2"></span>12. *Arian statements.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p3"></span>Now the Bishop Alexander of blessed
memory cast Arius out of the Church for holding and maintaining the
following opinions: ‘God was not always a Father: The Son was not
always: But whereas all things were made out of nothing, the Son of God
also was made out of nothing: And since all things are creatures, He
also is a creature and a thing made: And since all things once were not,
but were afterwards made, there was a time when the Word of God Himself
was not; and He was not before He was begotten, but He had a beginning
of existence: For He has then originated when God has chosen to produce
Him: For He also is one among the rest of His works. And since He is by
nature changeable, and only continues good because He chooses by His own
free will, He is capable of being changed, as are all other things,
whenever He wishes. And therefore God, as foreknowing that He would be
good, gave Him by anticipation that glory which He would have obtained
afterwards by His virtue; and He is now become good by His works which
God foreknew.’ Accordingly they say, that Christ is not truly God, but
that He is called God on account of His participation in God’s nature,
as are all other creatures. And they add, that He is not that Word which
is by nature in the Father, and is proper to His Essence, nor is He His
proper wisdom by which He made this world; but that there is another
Word <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) which is properly in the
Father, and another Wisdom which is properly in the Father, by which
Wisdom also He made this Word; and that the Lord Himself is called the
Word (Reason) conceptually in regard of things endued with reason, and
is called Wisdom conceptually in regard of things endued with wisdom.
Nay, they say that as all things are in essence separate and alien from
the Father, so He also is in all respects separate and alien from the
essence of the Father, and properly belongs to things made and created,
and is one of them; for He is a creature, and a thing made, and a work.
Again, they say <span id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212) that God did
not create us for His sake, but Him for our sakes. For they say, ‘God
was alone, and the Word was not with Him, but afterwards when He would
produce us, then He made Him; and from the time He was made, He called
Him the Word, and the Son, and the Wisdom, in order that He might create
us by Him. And as all things subsisted by the will of God, and did not
exist before; so He also was made by the will of God, and did not exist
before. For the Word is not the proper and natural Offspring of the
Father, but has Himself originated by grace: for God who existed made by
His will the Son who did not exist, by which will also He made all
things, and produced, and created, and willed them to come into being.’
Moreover they say also, that Christ is not the natural and true power of
God; but as the locust and the cankerworm are called a power <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213) , so also He is called the power of
the Father. Furthermore he said, that the Father is secret from the Son,
and that the Son can neither see nor know the Father perfectly and
exactly. For having a beginning of existence, He cannot know Him that is
without beginning; but what He knows and sees, He knows and sees in a
measure proportionate to His own measure, as we also know and see in
proportion to our powers. And he added also, that the Son not only does
not know His own Father exactly, but that He does not even know His own
essence.

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p7"></span>13. *Arguments from Scripture against
Arian statements.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p8"></span>For maintaining these and the like
opinions Arius was declared a heretic; for myself, while I have merely
been writing them down, I have been cleansing myself by thinking of the
contrary doctrines, and by holding fast the sense of the true faith. For
the Bishops who all assembled from all parts at the Council of Nicæa,
began to hold their ears at these statements, and all with one voice
condemned this heresy on account of them, and anathematized it,
declaring it to be alien and estranged from the faith of the Church. It
was no compulsion which led the judges to this decision, but they all
deliberately vindicated the truth <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214) : and they did so justly and <span
id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-Page_230"></span>rightly. For infidelity is coming in
through these men, or rather a Judaism counter to the Scriptures, which
has close upon it Gentile superstition, so that he who holds these
opinions can no longer be even called a Christian, for they are all
contrary to the Scriptures. John, for instance, saith, ‘In the beginning
was the Word <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215) ;’ but these men
say, ‘He was not, before He was begotten.’ And again he wrote, ‘And we
are in Him that is true, even in His Son Jesus Christ; this is the true
God, and eternal life <span id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216) ;’ but
these men, as if in contradiction to this, allege that Christ is not the
true God, but that He is only called God, as are other creatures, in
regard of His participation in the divine nature. And the Apostle blames
the Gentiles, because they worship the creatures, saying, ‘They served
the creature more than’ God ‘the Creator <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217) .’ But if these men say that the
Lord is a creature, and worship Him as a creature, how do they differ
from the Gentiles? If they hold this opinion, is not this passage also
against them; and does not the blessed Paul write as blaming them? The
Lord also says, ‘I and My Father are One:’ and ‘He that hath seen Me,
hath seen the Father <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218) ;’ and
the Apostle who was sent by Him to preach, writes, ‘Who being the
Brightness of His glory, and the express Image of His Person <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219) .’ But these men dare to separate
them, and to say that He is alien from the essence and eternity of the
Father; and impiously to represent Him as changeable, not perceiving,
that by speaking thus, they make Him to be, not one with the Father, but
one with created things. Who does not see, that the brightness cannot be
separated from the light, but that it is by nature proper to it, and
co-existent with it, and is not produced after it? Again, when the
Father says, ‘This is My beloved Son <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220) ,’ and when the Scriptures say that
‘He is the Word’ of the Father, by whom ‘the heavens were
established <span id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221) ,’ and in short,
‘All things were made by Him <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222)
;’ these inventors of new doctrines and fictions represent that there is
another Word, and another Wisdom of the Father, and that He is only
called the Word and the Wisdom conceptually on account of things endued
with reason, while they perceive not the absurdity of this.

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p18"></span>14. *Arguments from Scripture against
Arian statements.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p19"></span>But if He be styled the Word and the
Wisdom by a fiction on our account, what He really is they cannot
tell <span id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223) . For if the Scriptures
affirm that the Lord is both these, and yet these men will not allow Him
to be so, it is plain that in their godless opposition to the Scriptures
they would deny His existence altogether. The faithful are able to
conclude this truth both from the voice of the Father Himself, and from
the Angels that worshipped Him, and from the Saints that have written
concerning Him; but these men, as they have not a pure mind, and cannot
bear to hear the words of divine men who teach of God, may be able to
learn something even from the devils who resemble them, for they spoke
of Him, not as if there were many besides, but, as knowing Him alone,
they said, ‘Thou art the Holy One of God,’ and ‘the Son of God <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224) .’ He also who suggested to them
this heresy, while tempting Him, in the mount, said not, ‘If Thou also
be a Son of God,’ as though there were others besides Him, but, ‘If Thou
be the <span id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225) Son of God,’ as being
the only one. But as the Gentiles, having fallen from the notion of one
God, have sunk into polytheism, so these wonderful men, not believing
that the Word of the Father is one, have come to adopt the idea of many
words, and they deny Him that is really God and the true Word, and have
dared to conceive of Him as a creature, not perceiving how full of
impiety is the thought. For if He be a creature, how is He at the same
time the Creator of creatures? or how the Son and the Wisdom and the
Word? For the Word is not created, but begotten; and a creature is not a
Son, but a production. And if all creatures were made by Him, and He is
also a creature, then by whom was He made? Things made must of necessity
originate through some one; as in fact they have originated through the
Word; because He was not Himself a thing made, but the Word of the
Father. And again, if there be another wisdom in the Father beside the
Lord, then Wisdom has originated in wisdom: and if the Word of God be
the Wisdom of God, then the Word has originated in a word: and if the
Son be the Word of God, then the Son must have been made in the Son.

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p23"></span>15. *Arguments from Scripture against
Arian statements.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p24"></span>How is it that the Lord has said, ‘I am
in the Father, and the Father in Me <span
id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226) ,’ if there be another in the
Father, by whom the Lord Himself also was made? And how is it that John,
passing over that other, relates of this <span id="page_231">p.
231</span> <span id="xvii.ii.ii-Page_231"></span>One, saying, ‘All
things were made by Him; and without Him was not any thing made <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227) ?’ If all things that were made by
the will of God were made by Him, how can He be Himself one of the
things that were made? And when the Apostle says, ‘For whom are all
things, and by whom are all things <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228) ,’ how can these men say, that we
were not made for Him, but He for us? If it be so, He ought to have
said, ‘For whom the Word was made;’ but He saith not so, but, ‘For whom
are all things, and by whom are all things,’ thus proving these men to
be heretical and false. But further, as they have had the boldness to
say that there is another Word in God, and since they cannot bring any
clear proof of this from the Scriptures, let them but shew one work of
His, or one work of the Father that was done without this Word; so that
they may seem to have some ground at least for their own idea. The works
of the true Word are manifest to all, so as for Him to be contemplated
by analogy from them. For as, when we see the creation, we conceive of
God as the Creator of it; so when we see that nothing is without order
therein, but that all things move and continue with order and
providence, we infer a Word of God who is over all and governs all. This
too the holy Scriptures testify, declaring that He is the Word of God,
and that ‘all things were made by Him, and without Him was not any thing
made <span id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229) .’ But of that other
Word, of whom they speak, there is neither word nor work that they have
to shew. Nay, even the Father Himself, when He says, ‘This is My beloved
Son <span id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230) ,’ signifies that besides
Him there is none other

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p30"></span>16. *Arians parallel to the Manichees.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p31"></span>It appears then that so far as these
doctrines are concerned, these wonderful men have now joined themselves
to the Manichees. For these also confess the existence of a good God, so
far as the mere name goes, but they are unable to point out any of His
works either visible or invisible. But inasmuch as they deny Him who is
truly and indeed God, the Maker of heaven and earth, and of all things
invisible, they are mere inventors of fables. And this appears to me to
be the case with these evil-minded men. They see the works of the true
Word who alone is in the Father, and yet they deny Him, and make to
themselves another Word <span id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231) ,
whose existence they are unable to prove either by His Works or by the
testimony of others. Unless it be that they have adopted a fabulous
notion of God, that He is a composite being like man, speaking and then
changing His words, and as a man exercising understanding and wisdom;
not perceiving to what absurdities they are reduced by such an opinion.
For if God has a succession of words <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232) , they certainly must consider Him
as a man. And if those words proceed from Him and then vanish away, they
are guilty of a greater impiety, because they resolve into nothing what
proceeds from the self-existent God. If they conceive that God doth at
all beget, it were surely better and more religious to say that He is
the begetter of One Word, who is the fulness of His Godhead, in whom are
hidden the treasures of all knowledge <span
id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233) , and that He is co-existent with
His Father, and that all things were made by Him; rather than to suppose
God to be the Father of many words which are nowhere to be found, or to
represent Him who is simple in His nature as compounded of many <span
id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234) , and as being subject to human
passions and variable. Next whereas the Apostle says, ‘Christ the power
of God and the wisdom of God <span id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235)
,’ these men reckon Him but as one among many powers; nay, worse than
this, they compare Him, transgressors as they are, with the cankerworm
and other irrational creatures which are sent by Him for the punishment
of men. Next, whereas the Lord says, ‘No one knoweth the Father, save
the Son <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236) ;’ and again, ‘Not
that any man hath seen the Father save He which is of the Father <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237) ;’ are not these indeed enemies of
God which say that the Father is neither seen nor known of the Son
perfectly? If the Lord says, ‘As the Father knoweth Me, even so know I
the Father <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) ,’ and if the
Father knows not the Son partially, are they not mad to say idly that
the Son knows the Father only partially, and not fully? Next, if the Son
has a beginning of existence, and all things likewise have a beginning,
let them say, which is prior to the other. But indeed they have nothing
to say, neither can they with all their craft prove such a beginning of
the Word. For He is the true and proper Offspring of the Father, and ‘in
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God <span id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) .’ For with regard to
their assertion, that the Son knows not His own essence, it is
superfluous to reply to it, except only so far as to condemn their
madness; for how does not the Word know Himself, when He imparts to all
men the knowledge of His Father and of Himself, and blames those who
know not themselves?

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p41"></span><span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-Page_232"></span>17. *Arguments from Scripture against
Arian statements.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p42"></span>But it is written <span
id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240) , say they, ‘The Lord created me in
the beginning of His ways for His works.’ O untaught and insensate that
ye are! He is called also in the Scriptures, ‘servant <span
id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241) ,’ and ‘son of a handmaid,’ and
‘lamb,’ and ‘sheep,’ and it is said that He suffered toil, and thirst,
and was beaten, and has suffered pain. But there is plainly a reasonable
ground and cause <span id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242) , why such
representations as these are given of Him in the Scriptures; and it is
because He became man and the Son of man, and took upon Him the form of
a servant, which is the human flesh: for ‘the Word,’ says John, ‘was
made flesh <span id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243) .’ And since He
became man, no one ought to be offended at such expressions; for it is
proper to man to be created, and born, and formed, to suffer toil and
pain, to die and to rise again from the dead. And as, being Word and
Wisdom of the Father, He has all the attributes of the Father, His
eternity, and His unchangeableness, and the being like Him in all
respects and in all things <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244) ,
and is neither before nor after, but co-existent with the Father, and is
the very form <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) of the Godhead,
and is the Creator, and is not created: (for since He is in essence
like <span id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246) the Father, He cannot be
a creature, but must be the Creator, as Himself hath said, ‘My Father
worketh hitherto, and I work <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247)
:’) so being made man, and bearing our flesh, He is necessarily said to
be created and made, and that is proper to all flesh; however, these
men, like Jewish vintners, who mix their wine with water <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248) , debase the Word, and subject His
Godhead to their notions of created things. Wherefore the Fathers were
with reason and justice indignant, and anathematized this most impious
heresy; which these persons are now cautious of and keep back, as being
easy to be disproved and unsound in every part of it. These that I have
set down are but a few of the arguments which go to condemn their
doctrines; but if any one desires to enter more at large into the proof
against them, he will find that this heresy is not far removed from
heathenism, and that it is the lowest and the very dregs of all the
other heresies. These last are in error either concerning the body or
the incarnation of the Lord, falsifying the truth, some in one way and
some in another, or else they deny that the Lord has sojourned here at
all, as the Jews erroneously suppose. But this one alone more madly than
the rest has dared to assail the very Godhead, and to assert that the
Word is not at all, and that the Father was not always a father; so that
one might reasonably say that that Psalm was written against them; ‘The
fool hath said in his heart, there is no God <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) . Corrupt are they, and become
abominable in their doings.’

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p53"></span>18. *If the Arians felt they were
right, they would speak openly.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p54"></span>‘But,’ say they, ‘we are strong, and
are able to defend our heresy by our many devices.’ They would have a
better answer to give, if they were able to defend it, not by artifice
nor by Gentile sophisms, but by the simplicity of their faith. If
however they have confidence in it, and know it to be in accordance with
the doctrines of the Church, let them openly express their sentiments;
for no man when he hath lighted a candle putteth it under the
bushel <span id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) , but on the
candlestick, and so it gives light to all that come in. If therefore
they are able to defend it, let them record in writing the opinions
above imputed to them, and expose their heresy bare to the view of all
men, as they would a candle, and let them openly accuse the Bishop
Alexander, of blessed memory, as having unjustly ejected <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251) Arius for professing these
opinions; and let them blame the Council of Nicæa for putting forth a
written confession of the true faith in place of their impiety. But they
will not do this, I am sure, for they are not so ignorant of the evil
nature of those notions which they have invented and are ambitious of
sowing abroad; but they know well enough, that although they may at
first lead astray the simple by vain deceit, yet their imaginations will
soon be extinguished, ‘as the light of the ungodly <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) ,’ and themselves branded
everywhere as enemies of the Truth. Therefore although they do all
things foolishly, and speak as fools, yet in this at least they have
acted wisely, as ‘children of this world <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253) ,’ hiding their candle under the
bushel, that it may be supposed to give light, and lest, if it appear,
it be condemned and extinguished. Thus when Arius himself, the author of
the heresy, and the associate of Eusebius, was summoned through the
interest of Eusebius and his fellows to appear before Constantine
Augustus of blessed memory <span id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254) ,
and was required to present a written declaration of his faith, the wily
man wrote one, but kept out of sight the peculiar expressions of his
impiety, and pretended, as the Devil did, to quote the simple words of
Scripture, just as they are written. And when the blessed Constantine
said to him, ‘If thou <span id="page_233">p. 233</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-Page_233"></span>holdest no other opinions in thy mind
besides these, take the Truth to witness for thee; the Lord is thy
avenger if thou swear falsely:’ the unfortunate man swore that he held
no other, and that he had never either spoken or thought otherwise than
as he had now written. But as soon as he went out he dropped down, as if
paying the penalty of his crime, and ‘falling headlong burst asunder in
the midst <span id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) .’

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p61"></span>19. *Significance of the death of
Arius.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p62"></span>Death, it is true, is the common end of
all men, and we ought not to insult the dead, though he be an enemy, for
it is uncertain whether the same event may not happen to ourselves
before evening. But the end of Arius was not after an ordinary manner,
and therefore it deserves to be related. Eusebius and his fellows
threatening to bring him into the Church, Alexander, the Bishop of
Constantinople, resisted them; but Arius trusted to the violence and
menace of Eusebius. It was the Sabbath, and he expected to join
communion on the following day. There was therefore a great struggle
between them; the others threatening, Alexander praying. But the Lord
being judge of the case, decided against the unjust party: for the sun
had not set, when the necessities of nature compelled him to that place,
where he fell down, and was forthwith deprived of communion with the
Church and of his life together. The blessed Constantine hearing of this
at once, was struck with wonder to find him thus convicted of perjury.
And indeed it was then evident to all that the threats of Eusebius and
his fellows had proved of no avail and the hope of Arius had become
vain. It was shewn too that the Arian madness was rejected from
communion by our Saviour both here and in the Church of the first-born
in heaven. Now who will not wonder to see the unrighteous ambition of
these men, whom the Lord has condemned;—to see them vindicating the
heresy which the Lord has pronounced excommunicate (since He did not
suffer its author to enter into the Church), and not fearing that which
is written, but attempting impossible things? ‘For the Lord of hosts
hath purposed, and who shall disannul it <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) ?’ and whom God hath condemned, who
shall justify? Let them however in defence of their own imaginations
write what they please; but do you, brethren, as ‘bearing the vessels of
the Lord <span id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) ,’ and vindicating
the doctrines of the Church, examine this matter, I beseech you; and if
they write in other terms than those above recorded as the language of
Arius, then condemn them as hypocrites, who hide the poison of their
opinions, and like the serpent flatter with the words of their lips.
For, though they thus write, they have associated with them those who
were formerly rejected with Arius, such as Secundus of Pentapolis, and
the clergy who were convicted at Alexandria; and they write to them in
Alexandria. But what is most astonishing, they have caused us and our
friends to be persecuted, although the most religious Emperor
Constantine sent us back in peace to our country and Church, and shewed
his concern for the harmony of the people. But now they have caused the
Churches to be given up to these men, thus proving to all that for their
sake the whole conspiracy against us and the rest has been carried on
from the beginning.

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p65"></span>20. *While they are friends of Arius,
in vain their moderate words.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p66"></span>Now while such is their conduct, how
can they claim credit for what they write? Had the opinions they have
put in writing been orthodox, they would have expunged from their list
of books the Thalia of Arius, and have rejected the scions of the
heresy, viz. those disciples of Arius, and the partners of his impiety
and his punishment. But since they do not renounce these, it is manifest
to all that their sentiments are not orthodox, though they write them
over ten thousand times <span id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258) .
Wherefore it becomes us to watch, lest some deception be conveyed under
the clothing of their phrases, and they lead away certain from the true
faith. And if they venture to advance the opinions of Arius, when they
see themselves proceeding in a prosperous course, nothing remains for us
but to use great boldness of speech, remembering the predictions of the
Apostle, which he wrote to forewarn us of such like heresies, and which
it becomes us to repeat. For we know that, as it is written, ‘in the
latter times some shall depart from the sound faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils, that turn from the
truth <span id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) ;’ and, ‘as many as
will live godly in Christ shall suffer persecution. But evil men and
seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.’ But
none of these things shall prevail over us, nor ‘separate us from the
love of Christ <span id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) ,’ though the
heretics threaten us with death. For we are Christians, not Arians <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) ; would that they too, who have
written these things, had not embraced the doctrines of Arius! Yea,
brethren, there is need now of such boldness of speech; for we have not
received ‘the <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-Page_234"></span>spirit of bondage again to fear <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) ,’ but God hath called us ‘to
liberty <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) .’ And it were indeed
disgraceful to us, most disgraceful, were we, on account of Arius or of
those who embrace and advocate his sentiments, to destroy the faith
which we have received from our Saviour through His Apostles. Already
very many in these parts, perceiving the craftiness of these writers,
are ready even unto blood to oppose their wiles, especially since they
have heard of your firmness. And seeing that the refutation of the
heresy has gone forth from you <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) , and it has been drawn forth from
its concealment, like a serpent from his hole, the Child that Herod
sought to destroy is preserved among you, and the Truth lives in you,
and the Faith thrives among you.

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p74"></span>21. *To make a stand for the Faith
equivalent to martyrdom.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p75"></span>Wherefore I exhort you, keeping in your
hands the confession which was framed by the Fathers at Nicæa, and
defending it with great zeal and confidence in the Lord, be ensamples to
the brethren everywhere, and shew them that a struggle is now before us
in support of the Truth against heresy, and that the wiles of the enemy
are various. For the proof of a martyr lies <span
id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) not only in refusing to burn
incense to idols; but to refuse to deny the Faith is also an illustrious
testimony of a good conscience. And not only those who turned aside unto
idols were condemned as aliens, but those also who betrayed the Truth.
Thus Judas was degraded from the Apostolical office, not because he
sacrificed to idols, but because he proved a traitor; and Hymenæus and
Alexander fell away not by betaking themselves to the service of idols,
but because they ‘made shipwreck concerning the faith <span
id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) .’ On the other hand, the Patriarch
Abraham received the crown, not because he suffered death, but because
he was faithful unto God; and the other Saints, of whom Paul
speaks <span id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) , Gideon, Barak,
Samson, Jephtha, David and Samuel, and the rest, were not made perfect
by the shedding of their blood, but by faith they were justified; and to
this day they are the objects of our admiration, as being ready even to
suffer death for piety towards the Lord. And if one may add an instance
from our own country, ye know how the blessed Alexander contended even
unto death against this heresy, and what great afflictions and labours,
old man as He was, he sustained, until in extreme age he also was
gathered to his fathers. And how many beside have undergone great toil,
in their teachings against this impiety, and now enjoy in Christ the
glorious reward of their confession! Wherefore, let us also, considering
that this struggle is for our all, and that the choice is now before us,
either to deny or to preserve the faith, let us also make it our earnest
care and aim to guard what we have received, taking as our instruction
the Confession drawn up at Nicæa, and let us turn away from novelties,
and teach our people not to give heed to ‘seducing spirits <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268) ,’ but altogether to withdraw from
the impiety of the Arian madmen, and from the coalition which the
Meletians have made with them.

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p80"></span>22. *Coalition of sordid Meletians with
insane Arians.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p81"></span>For you perceive how, though they were
formerly at variance with one another, they have now, like Herod and
Pontius, agreed together in order to blaspheme our Lord Jesus Christ.
And for this they truly deserve the hatred of every man, because they
were at enmity with one another on private grounds, but have now become
friends and join hands, in their hostility to the Truth and their
impiety towards God. Nay, they are content to do or suffer anything,
however contrary to their principles, for the satisfaction of securing
their several aims; the Meletians for the sake of pre-eminence and the
mad love of money, and the Arian madmen for their own impiety. And thus
by this coalition they are able to assist one another in their malicious
designs, while the Meletians put on the impiety of the Arians, and the
Arians from their own wickedness concur in their baseness, so that by
thus mingling together their respective crimes, like the cup of
Babylon <span id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269) , they may carry on
their plots against the orthodox worshippers of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The wickedness and falsehood of the Meletians were indeed even before
this evident unto all men; so too the impiety and godless heresy of the
Arians have long been known everywhere and to all; for the period of
their existence has not been a short one. The former became schismatics
five and fifty years ago, and it is thirty-six years since the latter
were pronounced heretics <span id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270) ,
and they were rejected from the Church by the judgment of the whole
Ecumenic Council. But by their present proceedings they have proved at
length, even to those who seem openly to favour them, that they have
carried on their <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-Page_235"></span>designs against me and the rest of the
orthodox Bishops from the very first solely for the sake of advancing
their own impious heresy. For observe, that which was long ago the great
object of Eusebius and his fellows is now brought about. They have
caused the Churches to be snatched out of our hands, they have banished
as they pleased, the Bishops and Presbyters who refused to communicate
with them; and the people who withdrew from them they have excluded from
the Churches, which they have given up into the hands of the Arians who
were condemned so long ago, so that with the assistance of the hypocrisy
of the Meletians they can without fear pour forth in them their impious
language, and make ready, as they think, the way of deceit for
Antichrist <span id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271) , who sowed among
them the seeds of this heresy.

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p85"></span>23. *Conclusion.*

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p86"></span>Let them however thus dream and imagine
vain things. We know that when our gracious Emperor shall hear of it, he
will put a stop to their wickedness, and they will not continue long,
but according to the words of Scripture, ‘the hearts of the impious
shall quickly fail them <span id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) .’
But let us, as it is written, ‘put on the words of holy Scripture <span
id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273) ,’ and resist them as apostates who
would set up fanaticism in the house of the Lord. And let us not fear
the death of the body, nor let us emulate their ways; but let the word
of Truth be preferred before all things. We also, as you all know, were
formerly required <span id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274) by Eusebius
and his fellows either to put on their impiety, or to expect their
hostility; but we would not engage ourselves with them, but chose rather
to be persecuted by them, than to imitate the conduct of Judas. And
assuredly they have done what they threatened; for after the manner of
Jezebel, they engaged the treacherous Meletians to assist them, knowing
how the latter resisted the blessed martyr Peter, and after him the
great Achillas, and then Alexander, of blessed memory, in order that, as
being practised in such matters, the Meletians might pretend against us
also whatever might be suggested to them, while Eusebius and his fellows
gave them an opening for persecuting and for seeking to kill me. For
this is what they thirst after; and they continue to this day to desire
to shed my blood. But of these things I have no care; for I know and am
persuaded that they who endure shall receive a reward from our Saviour;
and that ye also, if ye endure as the Fathers did, and shew yourselves
examples to the people, and overthrow these strange and alien devices of
impious men, shall be able to glory, and say, We have ‘kept the
Faith <span id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) ;’ and ye shall receive
the ‘crown of life,’ which God ‘hath promised to them that love
Him <span id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) .’ And God grant that I
also together with you may inherit the promises, which, were given, not
to Paul only, but also to all them that ‘have loved the appearing <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277) ’ of our Lord, and Saviour, and
God, and universal King, Jesus Christ; through whom to the Father be
glory and dominion in the Holy Spirit, both now and for ever, world
without end <span id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) . Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[229:1212](2040262.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p4"></span> Cf. *De Syn.* §§15, 18.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[229:1213](2040262.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p5"></span> *De Syn.* 15–19.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[229:1214](2040262.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p6"></span> [Joel ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>.
\[With this entire section, compare *Socr.* i. 5, *de Decr.* 6, *de
Syn.* 15, *Orat.* i. 5. 6, *ad Afros* 5, *Vit. Ant.* 69, and the
*Depositio Arii.*’\]

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[229:1215](2040262.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p9"></span> Cf. *Ep. ad Jov.* (Letter 56, below),
§2. Theod. *H. E.* v. 9. p. 205, l. 17. vid. Keble on Primitive Trad. p.
122. 10. ‘Let each boldly set down his faith in writing, having the fear
of God before his eyes.’ Conc. Chalced. Sess. 1. *Hard.* t. 2. 273.
‘Give diligence without fear, favour, or dislike, to set out the faith
in its purity.’ ibid. p. 285.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[230:1216](2040262.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p10"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[230:1217](2040262.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p11"></span> [1 John v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[230:1218](2040262.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p12"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>.
supr. §4, and note on *Or*. i. 8, also *Vit. Ant.* 69.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[230:1219](2040262.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p13"></span> <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p13.1"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p13.3"></span>;
xiv. 9, and *Or.* i. 34, note.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[230:1220](2040262.htm#fr_1219) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p14"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[230:1221](2040262.htm#fr_1220) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p15"></span> [Matt. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[230:1222](2040262.htm#fr_1221) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p16"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[230:1223](2040262.htm#fr_1222) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p17"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[230:1224](2040262.htm#fr_1223) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p20"></span> Cf. *de. Decr.* 6, note 5.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[230:1225](2040262.htm#fr_1224) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p21"></span> <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Mark i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p21.3"></span>;
[Matt. viii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p21.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[230:1226](2040262.htm#fr_1225) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p21.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p22"></span> \[[Matt.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003), [Luke
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#003)<span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>. No existing text appears to bear out
Athanasius in his insertion of the definite article.\]

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[230:1227](2040262.htm#fr_1226) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p25"></span> [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[231:1228](2040262.htm#fr_1227) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p26"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[231:1229](2040262.htm#fr_1228) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p27"></span> [Heb. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[231:1230](2040262.htm#fr_1229) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p28"></span> [Joh. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[231:1231](2040262.htm#fr_1230) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p29"></span> [Matt. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[231:1232](2040262.htm#fr_1231) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p32"></span> Vid. passage in *Orat.* ii. 39 fin.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[231:1233](2040262.htm#fr_1232) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p33"></span> *de Decr.* 16, note 4.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[231:1234](2040262.htm#fr_1233) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p34"></span> Cf. [Col.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[231:1235](2040262.htm#fr_1234) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p35"></span> *de Decr.* 22 note 9.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[231:1236](2040262.htm#fr_1235) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p36"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[231:1237](2040262.htm#fr_1236) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p37"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[231:1238](2040262.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p38"></span> [John vi.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[231:1239](2040262.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p39"></span> [John x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[231:1240](2040262.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p40"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[232:1241](2040262.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p43"></span> *Orat.* ii. 18–72; <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p43.2"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p43.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[232:1242](2040262.htm#fr_1241) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p43.5"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p44"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#016)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p44.1"></span>,
&c.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[232:1243](2040262.htm#fr_1242) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p44.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p45"></span> *de Decr.* 14.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[232:1244](2040262.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p46"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[232:1245](2040262.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p47"></span> *De Syn.* 26, and note.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[232:1246](2040262.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p48.1"></span>εἶδος</span>, ibid. §52, note.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[232:1247](2040262.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p49"></span> *Orat.* i. 20, note.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[232:1248](2040262.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p50"></span> [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[232:1249](2040262.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p51"></span> [Isa. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p51.1"></span>,
cf. *Orat.* iii. §35, also *de Decr.* 10 end.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[232:1250](2040262.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p51.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p52"></span> [Ps. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[232:1251](2040262.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p55"></span> [Matt. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[232:1252](2040262.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p56"></span> Infr. §21, note.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[232:1253](2040262.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p57"></span> [Job xviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[232:1254](2040262.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p58"></span> [Luke xvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[232:1255](2040262.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p59"></span> Vid. *Letter* 54.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[233:1256](2040262.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p60"></span> [Acts i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[233:1257](2040262.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p63"></span> [Is. xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#027)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[233:1258](2040262.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p64"></span> [Is. lii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[233:1259](2040262.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p67"></span> Cf. *De Syn.* 6, 9.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[233:1260](2040262.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p68"></span> <span id="xvii.ii.ii-p68.1"></span>[1
Tim. iv. 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001)<span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p68.3"></span>; [Tit. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p68.4"></span>;
[2 Tim. iii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p68.5"></span>

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[233:1261](2040262.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p68.6"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p69"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[233:1262](2040262.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p70"></span> *Orat.* i. 2, 10.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[234:1263](2040262.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p71"></span> [Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[234:1264](2040262.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p72"></span> [Gal. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[234:1265](2040262.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p72.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p73"></span> i.e. from Egypt.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[234:1266](2040262.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p76"></span> Vid. Suicer *Thes. in voc.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xvii.ii.ii-p76.2"></span>μαρτ</span>. iii.
\[D.C.A. 1118 sqq.\]

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[234:1267](2040262.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p76.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p77"></span> [1 Tim. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[234:1268](2040262.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p78"></span> [Heb. xi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p78.1"></span>,
&c.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[234:1269](2040262.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p78.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p79"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[234:1270](2040262.htm#fr_1269) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p82"></span> [Rev. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[234:1271](2040262.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p82.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p83"></span> This <span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p83.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p83.2"></span>ποδείξις</span> or declaration is ascribed
to S. Alexander (as Montfaucon would explain it, supr. introd. p. 222).
Cf. *Ap. Ar.* 23, above, §§18, 19. It should be observed that an
additional reason for assigning this Letter to the year 356, is its
resemblance in parts to the Orations which were written not long after.
\[This is not a strong reason, there being no proof that the Orations
were written early in the exile.\]

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[235:1272](2040262.htm#fr_1271) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p83.4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p84"></span> *De Syn.* 5, note 10.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[235:1273](2040262.htm#fr_1272) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p87"></span> [Prov. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#020)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p87.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[235:1274](2040262.htm#fr_1273) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p87.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p88"></span> [2 Kings xvii.
9](../../../bib/sep/kg2017.htm#009)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p88.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[235:1275](2040262.htm#fr_1274) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p89"></span> *Apol. Ar.* §59.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[235:1276](2040262.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p89.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p90"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[235:1277](2040262.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p90.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p91"></span> [James i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[235:1278](2040262.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p92"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[235:1279](2040262.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="xvii.ii.ii-p92.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii.ii-p93"></span> \[Cf. the doxology at the end of
*Apol. pro Fuga,* and (with a difference) that of *Hist. Ar.* 80,
contrasting that in *de Decr.* 32. Dr. Bright observes that Athan. ‘felt
himself free to use both forms, although at Antioch they became symbols
respectively of the Arianisers and the Orthodox.’\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Apology to the Emperor. (Apologia Ad Constantium.)](2040263)
