[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040053)  [Next](2040055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.ix"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ix-p1"></span> §9. *The various developments of
idolatry: worship of the heavenly bodies, the elements, natural objects,
fabulous creatures, personified lusts, men living and dead. The case of
Antinous, and of the deified Emperors.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.ix-p2"></span>For now the understanding of mankind
leaped asunder from God; and going lower in their ideas and
imaginations, they gave the honour due to God first to the heaven and
the sun and moon and the stars, thinking them to be not only gods, but
also the causes of the other gods lower than themselves <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) . Then, going yet lower in their dark
imaginations, they gave the name of gods to the upper æther and the air
and the things in the air. Next, advancing further in evil, they came to
celebrate as gods the elements and the principles of which bodies are
composed, heat and cold and dryness and wetness. 2. But just as they who
have fallen flat creep in the slime like land-snails, so the most
impious of mankind, having fallen lower and lower from the idea of God,
then set up as gods men, and the forms of men, some still living, others
even after their death. Moreover, counselling and imagining worse things
still, they transferred the divine and supernatural name of God at last
even to stones and stocks, and creeping things both of land and water,
and irrational wild beasts, awarding to them every divine honour, and
turning from the true and only real God, the Father of Christ. 3. But
would that even there the audacity of these foolish men had stopped
short, and that they had not gone further yet in impious self-confusion.
For to such a depth have some fallen in their understanding, to such
darkness of mind, that they have even devised for themselves, and made
gods of things that have no existence at all, nor any place among things
created. For mixing up the rational with the irrational, and combining
things unlike in nature, they worship the result as gods, such as the
dog-headed and snake-headed and ass-headed gods among the Egyptians, and
the ram-headed Ammon among the Libyans. While others, dividing apart the
portions of men’s bodies, head, shoulder, hand, and foot, have set up
each as gods and deified them, as though their religion were not
satisfied with the whole body in its integrity. 4. But others, straining
impiety to the utmost, have deified the motive of the invention of these
things and of their own wickedness, namely, pleasure and lust, and
worship them, such as their Eros, and the Aphrodite at Paphos. While
some of them, as if vying with them in depravation, have ventured to
erect into gods their rulers or even their sons, either out of honour
for their princes, or from fear of their tyranny, such as the Cretan
Zeus, of such renown among them, and the Arcadian Hermes; and among the
Indians Dionysus, among the Egyptians Isis and Osiris and Horus, and in
our own <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="vi.ii.i.ix-Page_9"></span>time Antinous, favourite of Hadrian,
Emperor of the Romans, whom, although men know he was a mere man, and
not a respectable man, but on the contrary, full of licentiousness, yet
they worship for fear of him that enjoined it. For Hadrian having come
to sojourn in the land of Egypt, when Antinous the minister of his
pleasure died, ordered him to be worshipped; being indeed himself in
love with the youth even after his death, but for all that offering a
convincing exposure of himself, and a proof against all idolatry, that
it was discovered among men for no other reason than by reason of the
lust of them that imagined it. According as the wisdom of God testifies
beforehand when it says, “The devising of idols was the beginning of
fornication <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) .” 5. And do not
wonder, nor think what we are saying hard to believe, inasmuch as it is
not long since, even if it be not still the case that the Roman Senate
vote to those emperors who have ever ruled them from the beginning,
either all of them, or such as they wish and decide, a place among the
gods, and decree them to be worshipped <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) . For those to whom they are hostile,
they treat as enemies and call men, admitting their real nature, while
those who are popular with them they order to be worshipped on account
of their virtue, as though they had it in their own power to make gods,
though they are themselves men, and do not profess to be other than
mortal. 6. Whereas if they are to make gods, they ought to be themselves
gods; for that which makes must needs be better than that which it
makes, and he that judges is of necessity in authority over him that is
judged, while he that gives, at any rate that which he has, confers a
layout, just as, of course, every king, in giving as a favour what he
has to give, is greater and in a higher position than those who receive.
If then they decree whomsoever they please to be gods, they ought first
to be gods themselves. But the strange thing is this, that they
themselves by dying as men, expose the falsehood of their own vote
concerning those deified by them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[8:118](2040054.htm#fr_117) <span
id="vi.ii.i.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ix-p3"></span> For the following chapters Döllinger,
‘The Gentile and the Jew,’, is a rich mine of illustration. The recently
published ‘Manual of the History of Religions,’ by Prof. Chantepie de la
Saussaye (Eng. Tra. pub. by Longmans), summarises the best results of
recent research.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[9:119](2040054.htm#fr_118) <span
id="vi.ii.i.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ix-p4"></span> [Wisd. xiv.
12](../../../bib/apo/wis014.htm#012)<span id="vi.ii.i.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[9:120](2040054.htm#fr_119) <span
id="vi.ii.i.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.ix-p5"></span> Constantine was the last Emperor
officially deified (D.C.B., I. 649), but even Theodosius is raised to
heaven by the courtly Claudian *Carm. de* 111 *Cons. Honor.* 163 *sqq.;*
cf. Gwatkin, p. 54, note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Similar human origin of the Greek gods, by decree of Theseus. The
process by which mortals became deified.](2040055)
