[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040418)  [Next](2040420) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p1.1"></span>Letter X</span>.—*For 338. Coss. Ursus
and Polemius; Præf. the same Theodorus, of Heliopolis, and of the
Catholics* <span id="fr_4202"></span>[4203](#fn_4202) *. After him, for
the second year, Philagrius; Indict. xi; Easter-day, vii Kal. Ap. <span
id="fr_4203"></span>[4204](#fn_4203) xxx Phamenoth; Moon 18½; Æra
Dioclet. 54.*

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p4"></span> <span
id="fr_4204"></span>[4205](#fn_4204) <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p5.2"></span>Although</span> I have travelled all
this distance from you, my brethren, I have not forgotten the custom
which obtains among you, which has been delivered to us by the
fathers <span id="fr_4205"></span>[4206](#fn_4205) , so as to be silent
without notifying to you the time of the annual holy feast, and the day
for its celebration. For although I have been hindered by those
afflictions of which you have doubtless heard, and severe trials have
been laid upon me, and a great distance has separated us; while the
enemies of the truth have followed our tracks, laying snares to discover
a letter from us, so that by their accusations, they might add to the
pain of our wounds; yet the Lord, strengthening and comforting us in our
afflictions, we have not feared, even when held fast in the midst of
such machinations and conspiracies, to indicate and make known to you
our saving Easter-feast, even from the ends of the earth. Also when I
wrote to the presbyters of Alexandria, I urged that these letters might
be sent to you through their instrumentality, al<span id="page_528">p.
528</span> <span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-Page_528"></span>though I knew the
fear imposed on them by the adversaries. Still, I exhorted them to be
mindful of the apostolic boldness of speech, and to say, ‘Nothing
separates us from the love of Christ; neither affliction, nor distress,
nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword <span
id="fr_4206"></span>[4207](#fn_4206) .’ Thus, keeping the feast myself,
I was desirous that you also, my beloved, should keep it; and being
conscious that an announcement like this is due from me, I have not
delayed to discharge this duty, fearing to be condemned by the Apostolic
counsel; ‘Render to every man his due <span
id="fr_4207"></span>[4208](#fn_4207) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p9"></span>2. While I then committed all my
affairs to God, I was anxious to celebrate the feast with you, not
taking into account the distance between us. For although place separate
us, yet the Lord the Giver of the feast, and Who is Himself our
feast <span id="fr_4208"></span>[4209](#fn_4208) , Who is also the
Bestower of the Spirit <span id="fr_4209"></span>[4210](#fn_4209) ,
brings us together in mind, in harmony, and in the bond of peace <span
id="fr_4210"></span>[4211](#fn_4210) . For when we mind and think the
same things, and offer up the same prayers on behalf of each other, no
place can separate us, but the Lord gathers and unites us together. For
if He promises, that ‘when two or three are gathered together in His
name, He is in the midst of them <span
id="fr_4211"></span>[4212](#fn_4211) ,’ it is plain that being in the
midst of those who in every place are gathered together, He unites them,
and receives the prayers of all of them, as if they were near, and
listens to all of them, as they cry out the same Amen <span
id="fr_4212"></span>[4213](#fn_4212) . I have <span
id="fr_4213"></span>[4214](#fn_4213) borne affliction like this, and all
those trials which I mentioned, my brethren, when I wrote to you.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p16"></span>3. And that we may not distress
you at all, I would now (only) briefly remind you of these things,
because it is not becoming in a man to forget, when more at ease, the
pains he experienced in tribulation; lest, like an unthankful and
forgetful person, he should be excluded from the divine assembly. For at
no time should a man freely praise God, more than when he has passed
through afflictions; nor, again, should he at any time give thanks more
than when he finds rest from toil and temptations. As Hezekiah, when the
Assyrians perished, praised the Lord, and, gave thanks, saying, ‘The
Lord is my salvation <span id="fr_4214"></span>[4215](#fn_4214) ; and I
will not cease to bless Thee with harp all the days of my life, before
the house of the Lord <span id="fr_4215"></span>[4216](#fn_4215) .’ And
those valiant and blessed three who were tried in Babylon, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah, when they were in safety and the fire became to
them as dew, gave thanks, praising and ‘saying words of glory to
God <span id="fr_4216"></span>[4217](#fn_4216) .’ I too like them have
written, my brethren, having these things in mind; for even in our time,
God hath made possible those things which are impossible to men. And
those things which could not be accomplished by man, the Lord has shewn
to be easy of accomplishment, by bringing us to you. For He does not
give us as a prey to those who seek to swallow us up. For it is not so
much us, as the Church, and the faith and godliness which they planned
to overwhelm with wickedness.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p20"></span>4. But God, who is good,
multiplied His loving-kindness towards us, not only when He granted the
common salvation of us all through His Word, but now also, when enemies
have persecuted us, and have sought to seize upon us. As the blessed
Paul saith in a certain place, when describing the incomprehensible
riches of Christ: ‘But God, being rich in mercy, for the great love
wherewith He loved us, even when we were dead in follies and sins,
quickened us with Christ <span id="fr_4217"></span>[4218](#fn_4217) .’
For the might of man and of all creatures, is weak and poor; but the
Might which is above man, and uncreated, is rich and incomprehensible,
and has no beginning, but is eternal. He does not then possess one
method only of healing, but being rich, He works in divers manners for
our salvation by means of His Word, Who is not restricted or hindered in
His dealings towards us; but since He is rich and manifold, He varies
Himself according to the individual capacity of each soul. For He is the
Word and the Power and the Wisdom of God, as Solomon testifies
concerning Wisdom, that ‘being one, it can do all things, and remaining
in itself, it maketh all things new; and passing upon holy souls,
fashioneth the friends of God and the prophets <span
id="fr_4218"></span>[4219](#fn_4218) .’ To those then who have not yet
attained to the perfect way He becomes like a sheep giving milk, and
this was administered by Paul: ‘I have fed you with milk, not with
meat <span id="fr_4219"></span>[4220](#fn_4219) .’ To those who have
advanced beyond the full stature of childhood, but still are weak as
regards perfection, He is their food, according to their capacity, being
again administered by Paul <span id="fr_4220"></span>[4221](#fn_4220) ,
‘Let him that is weak <span id="page_529">p. 529</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-Page_529"></span>eat herbs.’ But as soon as ever a
man begins to walk in the perfect way, he is no longer fed with the
things before mentioned, but he has the Word for bread, and flesh for
food, for it is written, ‘Strong meat is for those who are of full age,
for those who, by reason of their capacity, have their senses
exercised <span id="fr_4221"></span>[4222](#fn_4221) .’ And further,
when the word is sown it does not yield a uniform produce of fruit in
this human life, but one various and rich; for it bringeth forth, some
an hundred, and some sixty, and some thirty <span
id="fr_4222"></span>[4223](#fn_4222) , as the Saviour teaches—that Sower
of grace, and Bestower of the Spirit <span
id="fr_4223"></span>[4224](#fn_4223) . And this is no doubtful matter,
nor one that admits no confirmation; but it is in our power to behold
the field which is sown by Him; for in the Church the word is manifold
and the produce <span id="fr_4224"></span>[4225](#fn_4224) rich. Not
with virgins alone is such a field adorned; nor with monks alone, but
also with honourable matrimony and the chastity of each one. For in
sowing, He did not compel the will beyond the power. Nor is mercy
confined to the perfect, but it is sent down also among those who occupy
the middle and the third ranks, so that He might rescue all men
generally to salvation. To this intent He hath prepared many
mansions <span id="fr_4225"></span>[4226](#fn_4225) with the Father, so
that although the dwelling-place is various in proportion to the advance
in moral attainment, yet all of us are within the wall, and all of us
enter within the same fence, the adversary being cast out, and all his
host expelled thence. For apart from light there is darkness, and apart
from blessing there is a curse, the devil also is apart from the saints,
and sin far from virtue. Therefore the Gospel rebukes Satan, saying,
‘Get thee behind Me, Satan <span id="fr_4226"></span>[4227](#fn_4226) .’
But us it calls to itself, saying, ‘Enter ye in at the strait gate.’ And
again, ‘Come, blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom which is
prepared for you <span id="fr_4227"></span>[4228](#fn_4227) .’ So also
the Spirit cried aforetime in the Psalms, saying, ‘Enter into His gates
with psalms <span id="fr_4228"></span>[4229](#fn_4228) .’ For through
virtue a man enters in unto God, as Moses did into the thick cloud where
God was. But through vice a man goes out from the presence of the Lord;
as Cain <span id="fr_4229"></span>[4230](#fn_4229) when he had slain his
brother, went out, as far as his will was concerned, from before the
face of God; and the Psalmist enters, saying, ‘And I will go in to the
altar of God, even to the God that delighteth my youth <span
id="fr_4230"></span>[4231](#fn_4230) .’ But of the devil the Scripture
beareth witness, that the devil went out from before God, and smote
Job <span id="fr_4231"></span>[4232](#fn_4231) with sore boils. For this
is the characteristic of those who go out from before God—to smite and
to injure the men of God. And this is the characteristic of those who
fall away from the faith—to injure and persecute the faithful. The
saints on the other hand, take such to themselves and look upon them as
friends; as also the blessed David, using openness of speech, says,
‘Mine eyes are on the faithful of the earth, that they may dwell with
me.’ But those that are weak in the faith <span
id="fr_4232"></span>[4233](#fn_4232) , Paul urges that we should
especially take to ourselves. For virtue is philanthropic <span
id="fr_4233"></span>[4234](#fn_4233) , just as in men of an opposite
character, sin is misanthropic. So Saul, being a sinner, persecuted
David, whereas David, though he had a good opportunity, did not kill
Saul. Esau too persecuted Jacob, while Jacob overcame his wickedness by
meekness. And those eleven sold Joseph, but Joseph, in his
loving-kindness, had pity on them.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p38"></span>5. But what need we many words?
Our Lord and Saviour, when He was persecuted by the Pharisees, wept for
their destruction. He was injured, but He threatened <span
id="fr_4234"></span>[4235](#fn_4234) not; not when He was afflicted, not
even when He was killed. But He grieved for those who dared to do such
things. He, the Saviour, suffered for man, but they despised and cast
from them life, and light, and grace. All these were theirs through that
Saviour Who suffered in our stead. And verily for their darkness and
blindness, He wept. For if they had understood the things which are
written in the Psalms, they would not have been so vainly daring against
the Saviour, the Spirit having said, ‘Why do the heathen rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing?’ And if they had considered the prophecy of
Moses, they would not have hanged Him Who was their Life <span
id="fr_4235"></span>[4236](#fn_4235) . And if they had examined with
their understanding the things which were written, they would not have
carefully fulfilled the prophecies which were against themselves, so as
for their city to be now desolate, grace taken from them, and they
themselves without the law, being no longer called children, but
strangers. For thus in the Psalms was it before declared, saying, ‘The
strange children have acted falsely by Me.’ And by Isaiah the prophet;
‘I have begotten and brought up children, and they have rejected
Me. <span id="fr_4236"></span>[4237](#fn_4236) ’ And they are no longer
named the people of God, and a holy nation, but <span id="page_530">p.
530</span> <span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-Page_530"></span>rulers of Sodom,
and people of Gomorrah; having exceeded in this even the iniquity of the
Sodomites, as the prophet also saith, ‘Sodom is justified before
thee <span id="fr_4237"></span>[4238](#fn_4237) .’ For the Sodomites
raved against angels, but these against the Lord and God and King of
all, and these dared to slay the Lord of angels, not knowing that
Christ, who was slain by them, liveth. But those Jews who had conspired
against the Lord died, having rejoiced a very little in these temporal
things, and having fallen away from those which are eternal. They were
ignorant of this—that the immortal promise has not respect to temporal
enjoyment, but to the hope of those things which are everlasting. For
through many tribulations, and labours, and sorrows, the saint enters
into the kingdom of heaven; but when he arrives where sorrow, and
distress, and sighing, shall flee away, he shall thenceforward enjoy
rest; as Job, who, when tried here, was afterwards the familiar friend
of the Lord. But the lover of pleasures, rejoicing for a little while,
afterwards passes a sorrowful life; like Esau, who had temporal food,
but afterwards was condemned thereby.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p43"></span>6. We may take as a type of this
distinction, the departure of the children of Israel and the Egyptians
from Egypt. For the Egyptians, rejoicing a little while in their
injustice against Israel, when they went forth, were all drowned in the
deep; but the people of God, being for a time smitten and injured, by
the conduct of the taskmasters, when they came out of Egypt, passed
through the sea unharmed, and walked in the wilderness as an inhabited
place. For although the place was unfrequented by man and desolate, yet,
through the gracious gift of the law, and through converse with angels,
it was no longer desert, but far more than an inhabited country. As also
Elisha <span id="fr_4238"></span>[4239](#fn_4238) , when he thought he
was alone in the wilderness, was with companies of angels; so in this
case, though the people were at first afflicted and in the wilderness,
yet those who remained faithful afterwards entered the land of promise.
In like manner those who suffer temporal afflictions here, finally
having endured, attain comfort, while those who here persecute are
trodden under foot, and have no good end. For even the rich man <span
id="fr_4239"></span>[4240](#fn_4239) , as the Gospel affirms, having
indulged in pleasure here for a little while, suffered hunger there, and
having drunk largely here, he there thirsted exceedingly. But Lazarus,
after being afflicted in worldly things, found rest in heaven, and
having hungered for bread ground from corn, he was there satisfied with
that which is better than manna, even the Lord who came down and said,
‘I am the bread which came down from heaven, and giveth life to
mankind <span id="fr_4240"></span>[4241](#fn_4240) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p47"></span>7. Oh! my dearly beloved, if we
shall gain comfort from afflictions, if rest from labours, if health
after sickness, if from death immortality, it is not right to be
distressed by the temporal ills that lay hold on mankind. It does not
become us to be agitated because of the trials which befall us. It is
not right to fear if the gang that contended with Christ, should
conspire against godliness; but we should the more please God through
these things, and should consider such matters as the probation and
exercise of a virtuous life. For how shall patience be looked for, if
there be not previously labours and sorrows? Or how can fortitude be
tested with no assault from enemies? Or how shall magnanimity be
exhibited, unless after contumely and injustice? Or how can
long-suffering be proved, unless there has first been the calumny of
Antichrist <span id="fr_4241"></span>[4242](#fn_4241) ? And, finally,
how can a man behold virtue with his eyes, unless the iniquity of the
very wicked has previously appeared? Thus even our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ comes before us, when He would shew men how to suffer, Who
when He was smitten bore it patiently, being reviled He reviled not
again, when He suffered He threatened not, but He gave His back to the
smiters, and His cheeks to buffetings, and turned not His face from
spitting <span id="fr_4242"></span>[4243](#fn_4242) ; and at last, was
willingly led to death, that we might behold in Him the image of all
that is virtuous and immortal, and that we, conducting ourselves after
these examples, might truly tread on serpents and scorpions, and on all
the power of the enemy <span id="fr_4243"></span>[4244](#fn_4243) .

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p51"></span>8. Thus too Paul, while he
conducted himself after the example of the Lord, exhorted us, saying,
‘Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ <span
id="fr_4244"></span>[4245](#fn_4244) .’ In this way he prevailed against
all the divisions of the devil, writing, ‘I am persuaded that neither
death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor powers, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Jesus Christ <span id="fr_4245"></span>[4246](#fn_4245) .’ For the enemy
draws near to us in afflictions, and trials, and labours, using every
endeavour to ruin us. But the man who is in Christ, combating those
things that are contrary, and opposing wrath by long-suffering,
contumely by meekness, and vice by virtue, obtains the victory, and
exclaims, ‘I can do all <span id="page_531">p. 531</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-Page_531"></span>things through Christ Who
strengtheneth me;’ and, ‘In all these things we are conquerors through
Christ Who loved us <span id="fr_4246"></span>[4247](#fn_4246) .’ This
is the grace of the Lord, and these are the Lord’s means of restoration
for the children of men. For He suffered to prepare freedom from
suffering for those who suffer in Him, He descended that He might raise
us up, He took on Him the trial of being born, that we might love Him
Who is unbegotten, He went down to corruption, that corruption might put
on immortality, He became weak for us, that we might rise with power, He
descended to death, that He might bestow on us immortality, and give
life to the dead. Finally, He became man, that we who die as men might
live again, and that death should no more reign over us; for the
Apostolic word proclaims, ‘Death shall not have the dominion over
us <span id="fr_4247"></span>[4248](#fn_4247) .’

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p56"></span>9. Now because they did not thus
consider these matters, the Ario-maniacs <span
id="fr_4248"></span>[4249](#fn_4248) , being opponents of Christ, and
heretics, smite Him who is their Helper with their tongue, and blaspheme
Him who set \[them\] free, and hold all manner of different opinions
against the Saviour. Because of His coming down, which was on behalf of
man, they have denied His essential Godhead; and seeing that He came
forth from the Virgin, they doubt His being truly the Son of God, and
considering Him as become incarnate in time, they deny His eternity;
and, looking upon Him as having suffered for us, they do not believe in
Him as the incorruptible Son from the incorruptible Father. And finally,
because He endured for our sakes, they deny the things which concern His
essential eternity; allowing the deed of the unthankful, these despise
the Saviour, and offer Him insult instead of acknowledging His grace. To
them may these words justly be addressed: Oh! unthankful opponent of
Christ, altogether wicked, and the slayer of his Lord, mentally blind,
and a Jew in his mind, hadst thou understood the Scriptures, and
listened to the saints, who said, ‘Cause Thy face to shine, and we shall
be saved;’ or again, ‘Send out Thy light and Thy truth <span
id="fr_4249"></span>[4250](#fn_4249) ;’—then wouldest thou have known
that the Lord did not descend for His own sake, but for ours; and for
this reason, thou wouldest the more have admired His loving kindness.
And hadst thou considered what the Father is, and what the Son, thou
wouldest not have blasphemed the Son, as of a mutable nature <span
id="fr_4250"></span>[4251](#fn_4250) . And hadst thou understood His
work of loving-kindness towards us, thou wouldest not have alienated the
Son from the Father, nor have looked upon Him as a stranger <span
id="fr_4251"></span>[4252](#fn_4251) , Who reconciled us to His Father.
I know these \[words\] are grievous, not only to those who dispute with
Christ <span id="fr_4252"></span>[4253](#fn_4252) , but also to the
schismatics; for they are united together, as men of kindred feelings.
For they have learned to rend the seamless coat <span
id="fr_4253"></span>[4254](#fn_4253) of God: they think it not strange
to divide the indivisible Son from the Father <span
id="fr_4254"></span>[4255](#fn_4254) .

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p64"></span>10. I know indeed, that when
these things are spoken, they will gnash their teeth upon us, with the
devil who stirs them up, since they are troubled by the declaration of
the true glory concerning the Redeemer. But the Lord, Who always has
scoffed at the devil, does the same even now, saying, ‘I am in the
Father, and the Father in Me <span id="fr_4255"></span>[4256](#fn_4255)
.’ This is the Lord, Who is manifested in the Father, and in Whom also
the Father is manifested; Who, being truly the Son of the Father, at
last became incarnate for our sakes, that He might offer Himself to the
Father in our stead, and redeem us through His oblation and sacrifice.
This is He Who once brought the people of old time out of Egypt; but Who
afterwards redeemed all of us, or rather the whole race of men, from
death, and brought them up from the grave. This is He Who in old time
was sacrificed as a lamb, He being signified in the lamb; but Who
afterwards was slain for us, for ‘Christ our Passover is
sacrificed <span id="fr_4256"></span>[4257](#fn_4256) .’ This is He Who
delivered us from the snare of the hunters, from the opponents of
Christ, I say, and from the schismatics, and again rescued us His
Church. And because we were then victims of deceit, He has now delivered
us by His own self.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p67"></span>11. What then is our duty, my
brethren, for the sake of these things, but to praise and give thanks to
God, the King of all? And let us first exclaim in the words of the
Psalms, ‘Blessed be the Lord, Who hath not given us over as a prey to
their teeth <span id="fr_4257"></span>[4258](#fn_4257) .’ Let us keep
the feast in that way which He hath dedicated for us unto salvation—the
holy day Easter—so that we may celebrate the feast which is in heaven
with the angels. Thus anciently, the people of the Jews, when they came
out of affliction into a state of ease, kept the feast, staging a song
of praise for their victory. So also the people in the time of Esther,
because they were delivered from the edict of death, kept a feast to the
Lord <span id="fr_4258"></span>[4259](#fn_4258) , reckoning it a feast,
returning thanks to the <span id="page_532">p. 532</span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-Page_532"></span>Lord, and praising Him for having
changed their condition. Therefore let us, performing our vows to the
Lord, and confessing our sins, keep the feast to the Lord, in
conversation, moral conduct, and manner of life; praising our Lord, Who
hath chastened us a little, but hath not utterly failed nor forsaken us,
nor altogether kept silence from us. For if, having brought us out of
the deceitful and famous Egypt of the opponents of Christ, He hath
caused us to pass through many trials and afflictions, as it were in the
wilderness, to His holy Church, so that from hence, according to custom,
we can send to you, as well as receive letters from you; on this account
especially I both give thanks to God myself, and exhort you to thank Him
with me and on my behalf, this being the Apostolic custom, which these
opponents of Christ, and the schismatics, wished to put an end to, and
to break off. The Lord did not permit it, but both renewed and preserved
that which was ordained by Him through the Apostle, so that we may keep
the feast together, and together keep holy-day, according to the
tradition and commandment of the fathers.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p70"></span>12. We begin the fast of forty
days on the nineteenth of the month Mechir (Feb. 13); and the holy
Easter-fast on the twenty-fourth of the month Phamenoth (Mar. 20<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p70.1"></span>). We cease from the fast on the
twenty-ninth of the month Phamenoth (Mar. 25<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p70.2"></span>), late in the evening of the seventh
day. And we thus keep the feast on the first day of the week which dawns
on the thirtieth of the month Phamenoth (Mar. 26<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p70.3"></span>); from which, to Pentecost, we keep
holy-day, through seven weeks, one after the other. For when we have
first meditated properly on these things, we shall attain to be counted
worthy of those which are eternal, through Christ Jesus our Lord,
through Whom to the Father be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
Amen. Greet one another with a holy kiss, remembering us in your holy
prayers. All the brethren who are with me salute you, at all times
remembering you. And I pray that ye may have health in the Lord, my
beloved brethren, whom we love above all.

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p71"></span>Here endeth the tenth Letter of
holy Athanasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4202"></span>[527:4203](2040419.htm#fr_4202) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p2"></span> The text is difficult; possibly
the Syriac translator is responsible for the difficulty. But we know
from Ath. (*supr.* p. 273) that the reappointment of Philagrius was in
the express interest of the Arians: it is, therefore, probable that
Theodorus was not unfavourable to Athanasius. See Prolegg. ch. ii. §6
(1), and Sievers, pp. 101, 102.

<span id="fn_4203"></span>[527:4204](2040419.htm#fr_4203) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p3"></span> In the *Chron. Pasch.* tom. ii.
p. 202, Easter-day is wrongly given as falling on viii. Kal. Ap.

<span id="fn_4204"></span>[527:4205](2040419.htm#fr_4204) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p5"></span> See Prolegg. ch. v. §3 b. The
letter may have been finished (see §§3, 11) after Ath. had returned
home, but the language of §1 seems to be applicable only to his
residence at Treveri, and §11 may be reconciled to this supposition. In
this case (§1 *sub. fin*.) it was probably begun as early as the Easter
of 337; cf. *Letters* 17 and 18.

<span id="fn_4205"></span>[527:4206](2040419.htm#fr_4205) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p6"></span> See above, p. 500.

<span id="fn_4206"></span>[528:4207](2040419.htm#fr_4206) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p7"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4207"></span>[528:4208](2040419.htm#fr_4207) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p8"></span> [Rom. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p8.1"></span>; cf. *Ep*. iii. init.

<span id="fn_4208"></span>[528:4209](2040419.htm#fr_4208) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p10"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4209"></span>[528:4210](2040419.htm#fr_4209) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p11"></span> Cf. *Orat.* i. 50; ii. 18; [Luke
xi. 13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p11.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4210"></span>[528:4211](2040419.htm#fr_4210) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p12"></span> Cf. [Eph. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4211"></span>[528:4212](2040419.htm#fr_4211) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p13"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p13.1"></span>[Matt. xviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p13.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4212"></span>[528:4213](2040419.htm#fr_4212) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p14"></span> Cf. *Apol. Const*. 16.

<span id="fn_4213"></span>[528:4214](2040419.htm#fr_4213) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p15"></span> Thus far Athan. has been
referring to the circumstances attending his exile for the last two
years. The principal subject of the remaining part consists of the duty
incumbent on us to praise and thank God for deliverance from affliction,
and to exercise forgiveness towards our enemies. He several times (e.g.
§§3, 10) speaks of his restoration to the Church of Alexandria.

<span id="fn_4214"></span>[528:4215](2040419.htm#fr_4214) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p17"></span> The Syriac translator must have
found in the Greek copy the reading of the Codex Alex. Κύριε—the
rendering of ‘Jehovah,’ not that of the Vatican text. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p17.3"></span>Θεέ</span>

<span id="fn_4215"></span>[528:4216](2040419.htm#fr_4215) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p18"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p18.1"></span>[Is. xxxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p18.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4216"></span>[528:4217](2040419.htm#fr_4216) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p19"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p19.1"></span> ‘Song of Three Children,’ 25–28.

<span id="fn_4217"></span>[528:4218](2040419.htm#fr_4217) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p21"></span> [Eph.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#005)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4218"></span>[528:4219](2040419.htm#fr_4218) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p22"></span> [Wisd. vii.
27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#027)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p22.1"></span>; cf. *Ep*. i.

<span id="fn_4219"></span>[528:4220](2040419.htm#fr_4219) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p23"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4220"></span>[528:4221](2040419.htm#fr_4220) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p24"></span> [Rom. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p24.1"></span>. The sense in the last few lines,
and in those that follow, is clear, though the construction appears
somewhat obscure. Milks, herbs, and meat are severally mentioned in
connection with the different advances made in the Christian course. The
translation of Larsow is less satisfactory.

<span id="fn_4221"></span>[529:4222](2040419.htm#fr_4221) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p25"></span> [Heb. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4222"></span>[529:4223](2040419.htm#fr_4222) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p26"></span> [Matt. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#008)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p26.1"></span>. In the Syriac text, as published by
Mr. Cureton, as well as in the German translation by Larsow, there is a
hiatus, here, the next two or three pages, as far as the words ‘He
wept,’ (§5 *init.*) being wanting. Two more leaves were afterwards
discovered among the fragments in the British Museum by the learned
Editor. One of them belongs to this part; the other to the eleventh
Letter.

<span id="fn_4223"></span>[529:4224](2040419.htm#fr_4223) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p27"></span> Vid. note 9, *supr*.

<span id="fn_4224"></span>[529:4225](2040419.htm#fr_4224) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p28"></span> Syr. ‘virtue,’ a letter (rish)
having been inserted by mistake.

<span id="fn_4225"></span>[529:4226](2040419.htm#fr_4225) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p29"></span> [John xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4226"></span>[529:4227](2040419.htm#fr_4226) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p30"></span> [Matt. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4227"></span>[529:4228](2040419.htm#fr_4227) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p31"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p31.1"></span>[Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p31.3"></span>; xxv. 34.

<span id="fn_4228"></span>[529:4229](2040419.htm#fr_4228) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p32"></span> [Ps. c.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#000)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4229"></span>[529:4230](2040419.htm#fr_4229) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p33"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p33.1"></span>[Gen. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#016)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p33.3"></span>; [Exod. xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p33.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4230"></span>[529:4231](2040419.htm#fr_4230) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p33.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p34"></span> [Ps. xliii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4231"></span>[529:4232](2040419.htm#fr_4231) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p35"></span> [Job ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p35.1"></span>. In the <span class="c10"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p35.3"></span>ms.</span> *Jesus* is written by
mistake for *Job*.

<span id="fn_4232"></span>[529:4233](2040419.htm#fr_4232) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p35.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p36"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p36.1"></span>[Ps. ci.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p36.3"></span>; [Rom. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p36.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4233"></span>[529:4234](2040419.htm#fr_4233) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p36.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p37"></span> Cf. *Letter* xi. sub. init.

<span id="fn_4234"></span>[529:4235](2040419.htm#fr_4234) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p39"></span> The Syriac is ‘was
persecuted’—which supplies no good sense.

<span id="fn_4235"></span>[529:4236](2040419.htm#fr_4235) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p40"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p40.1"></span>[Ps. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p40.3"></span>; [Deut. xxviii.
66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p40.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4236"></span>[529:4237](2040419.htm#fr_4236) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p40.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p41"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p41.1"></span>[Ps. xviii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#045)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p41.3"></span>; [Is. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p41.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4237"></span>[530:4238](2040419.htm#fr_4237) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p41.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p42"></span> [Ezek.
16:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048), [Lam.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p42.1"></span>[Ezek. xvi.
48](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#048)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p42.3"></span>, cf. [Lam. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p42.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4238"></span>[530:4239](2040419.htm#fr_4238) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p44"></span> The reference is to <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p44.2"></span>[2 Kings vi.
13-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p44.4"></span>, though ‘the wilderness’ agrees
better with the history of Elijah, <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p44.6"></span>[1 Kings xix.
4-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p44.8"></span>.

<span id="fn_4239"></span>[530:4240](2040419.htm#fr_4239) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p44.9"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p45"></span> [Luke xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4240"></span>[530:4241](2040419.htm#fr_4240) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p46"></span> [John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4241"></span>[530:4242](2040419.htm#fr_4241) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p48"></span> i.e. Arians. See *Index* to this
vol. *s.v.*

<span id="fn_4242"></span>[530:4243](2040419.htm#fr_4242) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p49"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p49.1"></span>[1 Pet. ii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p49.3"></span>; [Isa. l.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p49.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4243"></span>[530:4244](2040419.htm#fr_4243) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p49.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p50"></span> Cf. Pseudo-Ath. *de Pass. et
Cruc.* 19.

<span id="fn_4244"></span>[530:4245](2040419.htm#fr_4244) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p52"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4245"></span>[530:4246](2040419.htm#fr_4245) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p53"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p53.1"></span>[Rom.
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p53.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_4246"></span>[531:4247](2040419.htm#fr_4246) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p53.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p54"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p54.1"></span>[Phil. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#013)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p54.3"></span>; [Rom. viii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p54.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_4247"></span>[531:4248](2040419.htm#fr_4247) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p54.5"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p55"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p55.1"></span>[Rom.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p55.3"></span>, cf. *de Pass. et Cruc*. 11.

<span id="fn_4248"></span>[531:4249](2040419.htm#fr_4248) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p57"></span> The Syriac mistranslates *Arius
and Manetes.*

<span id="fn_4249"></span>[531:4250](2040419.htm#fr_4249) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p58"></span> <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p58.1"></span>[Ps. xliii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p58.3"></span>, lxxx. 7.

<span id="fn_4250"></span>[531:4251](2040419.htm#fr_4250) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p58.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p59"></span> Cf. *Orat*. i. 35; ii. 6, and
notes there.

<span id="fn_4251"></span>[531:4252](2040419.htm#fr_4251) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p60"></span> Cf. *supr.* p. 70.

<span id="fn_4252"></span>[531:4253](2040419.htm#fr_4252) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p61"></span> i.e. the Arians.

<span id="fn_4253"></span>[531:4254](2040419.htm#fr_4253) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p62"></span> Syr. χιτών. The words translated
‘rend’ and ‘seamless’ are cognate in the Syriac, and answer to <span
class="Greek"><span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p62.2"></span>σχίζειν</span>
and its derivatives.

<span id="fn_4254"></span>[531:4255](2040419.htm#fr_4254) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p62.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p63"></span> The Arians were thence called
<span class="Greek"><span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p63.2"></span>Διατομῖται</span>. Vid. Damascen. *de
hæresib*. apud Cotel. *eccles. Gr. monum.* p. 298.

<span id="fn_4255"></span>[531:4256](2040419.htm#fr_4255) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p65"></span> [John xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4256"></span>[531:4257](2040419.htm#fr_4256) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p66"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4257"></span>[531:4258](2040419.htm#fr_4257) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p68"></span> [Ps. cxxiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4258"></span>[531:4259](2040419.htm#fr_4258) <span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p68.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p69"></span> Cf. [Esth.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#009), [Esth.
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#021)<span
id="xxv.iii.iii.viii-p69.1"></span>; *Letter* iv. p. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: For 339. Coss. Constantius Augustus II, Constans I; Præfect,
Philagrius the Cappadocian, for the second time; Indict. xii; Easter-day
xvii Kal. Mai, xx Pharmuthi; Æra Dioclet. 55.](2040420)
