[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040068)  [Next](2040070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiv"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiv-p1"></span> §24. *The so-called gods of one place
are used as victims in another.*

<span id="vi.ii.i.xxiv-p2"></span>This, then, is no slight proof of
their real godlessness. For, the gods for every city and country being
many and various, and the one destroying the god of the other, the whole
of them are destroyed by all. For those who are considered gods by some
are offered as sacrifices and drink-offerings to the so-called gods of
others, and the victims of some are conversely the gods of others. So
the Egyptians serve the ox, and Apis, a calf, and others sacri<span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="vi.ii.i.xxiv-Page_17"></span>fice
these animals to Zeus. For even if they do not sacrifice the very
animals the others have consecrated, yet by sacrificing their fellows
they seem to offer the same. The Libyans have for god a sheep which they
call Ammon, and in other nations this animal is slain as a victim to
many gods. 2. The Indians worship Dionysus, using the name as a symbol
for wine, and others pour out wine as an offering to the other gods.
Others honour rivers and springs, and above all the Egyptians pay
especial honour to water, calling them gods. And yet others, and even
the Egyptians who worship the waters, use them to wash off the dirt from
others and from themselves, and ignominiously throw away what is used.
While nearly the whole of the Egyptian system of idols consists of what
are victims to the gods of other nations, so that they are scorned even
by those others for deifying what are not gods, but, both with others
and even among themselves, propitiatory offerings and victims.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Human sacrifice. Its absurdity. Its prevalence. Its calamitous
results.](2040070)
