[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040140)  [Next](2040142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.ii.xliv"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xliv-p1"></span> §44. *As God made man by a word, why
not restore him by a word? But (1) creation out of nothing is different
from reparation of what already exists. (2) Man was there with a
definite need, calling for a definite remedy. Death was ingrained in
man’s nature: He then must wind life closely to human nature. Therefore
the Word became Incarnate that He might meet and conquer death in His
usurped territory. (Simile of straw and asbestos.)*

<span id="vii.ii.xliv-p2"></span>But perhaps, shamed into agreeing with
this, they will choose to say that God, if He wished to reform and to
save mankind, ought to have done so by a mere fiat <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) , without His word taking a body, in
just the same way as He did formerly, when He produced them out of
nothing. 2. To this objection of theirs a reasonable answer would be:
that formerly, nothing being in existence at all, what was needed to
make everything was a fiat and the bare will to do so. But when man had
once been made, and necessity demanded a cure, not for things that were
not, but for things that had come to be, it was naturally consequent
that the Physician and Saviour should appear in what had come to be, in
order also to cure the things that were. For this cause, then, He has
become man, and used His body as a human instrument. 3. For if this were
not the right way, how was the Word, choosing to use an instrument, to
appear? or whence was He to take it, save from those already in being,
and in need of His Godhead by means of one like themselves? For it was
not things without being that needed salvation, so that a bare command
should suffice, but man, already in existence, was going to corruption
and ruin <span id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) . It was then natural
and right that the Word should use a human instrument and reveal Himself
everywhither. 4. Secondly, you must know this also, that the corruption
which had set in was not external to the body, but had become attached
to it; and it was required that, instead of corruption, life should
cleave to it; so that, just as death has been engendered in the body, so
life may be engendered in it also. 5. Now if death were external to the
body, it would be proper for life also to have been engendered
externally to it. But if death was wound closely to the body and was
ruling over it as though united to it, it was required that life also
should be wound closely to the body, that so the body, by putting on
life in its stead, should cast off corruption. Besides, even supposing
that the Word had come outside the body, and not in it, death would
indeed have been defeated by Him, in perfect accordance with nature,
inasmuch as death has no power against the Life; but the corruption
attached to the body would have remained in it none the less <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) . 6. For this cause the Saviour
reasonably put on Him a body, in order that the body, becoming wound
closely to the Life, should no longer, as mortal, abide in death, but,
as having put on immortality, should thenceforth rise again and remain
immortal. For, once it had put on corruption, it could not have risen
again unless it had put on life. And death likewise could not, from its
very nature, appear, save in the body. Therefore He put on a body, that
He might find death in the body, and blot it out. For how could the Lord
have been proved at all to be the Life, had He not quickened what <span
id="page_61">p. 61</span> <span id="vii.ii.xliv-Page_61"></span>was
mortal? 7. And just as, whereas stubble is naturally destructible by
fire, supposing (firstly) a man keeps fire away from the stubble, though
it is not burned, yet the stubble remains, for all that, merely stubble,
fearing the threat of the fire—for fire has the natural property of
consuming it; while if a man (secondly) encloses it with a quantity of
asbestos, the substance said <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) to
be an antidote to fire, the stubble no longer dreads the fire, being
secured by its enclosure in incombustible matter; 8. in this very way
one may say, with regard to the body and death, that if death had been
kept from the body by a mere command on His part, it would none the less
have been mortal and corruptible, according to the nature of bodies;
but, that this should not be, it put on the incorporeal Word of God, and
thus no longer fears either death or corruption, for it has life as a
garment, and corruption is done away in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_320"></span>[60:321](2040141.htm#fr_320) <span
id="vii.ii.xliv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xliv-p3"></span> With this discussion compare that upon
‘repentance’ above 7. (esp. 7. 4).

<span id="fn_321"></span>[60:322](2040141.htm#fr_321) <span
id="vii.ii.xliv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xliv-p4"></span> Restoration by a mere fiat would have
shewn God’s *power,* the Incarnation shews His *Love.* See *Orat*. i.
52, note 1, ii. 68, note 1.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[60:323](2040141.htm#fr_322) <span
id="vii.ii.xliv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xliv-p5"></span> Cf. *Orat.* i. 56, note 5, 65, note 3.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[61:324](2040141.htm#fr_323) <span
id="vii.ii.xliv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.ii.xliv-p6"></span> See above 28. 3. He appears not to
have seen the substance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thus once again every part of creation manifests the glory of
God. Nature, the witness to her Creator, yields (by miracles) a second
testimony to God Incarnate. The witness of Nature, perverted by man's
sin, was thus forced back to truth. If these reasons suffice not, let
the Greeks look at facts.](2040142)
