[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2040212)  [Next](2040214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.ii-Page_195"></span><span class="c8"><span
id="xvi.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Life of Antony.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xvi.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> life and conversation of our holy
Father, Antony: written and sent to the monks in foreign parts by our
Father among the Saints, Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria.

<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p4"></span>Athanasius <span
id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982) the bishop to the brethren in foreign
parts.

<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p6"></span>You have entered upon a noble rivalry
with the monks of Egypt by your determination either to equal or surpass
them in your training in the way of virtue. For by this time there are
monasteries among you, and the name of monk receives public recognition.
With reason, therefore, all men will approve this determination, and in
answer to your prayers God will give its fulfilment. Now since you asked
me to give you an account of the blessed Antony’s way of life, and are
wishful to learn how he began the discipline, who and what manner of man
he was previous to this, how he closed his life, and whether the things
told of him are true, that you also may bring yourselves to imitate him,
I very readily accepted your behest, for to me also the bare
recollection of Antony is a great accession of help. And I know that
you, when you have heard, apart from your admiration of the man, will be
wishful to emulate his determination; seeing that for monks the life of
Antony is a sufficient pattern of discipline. Wherefore do not refuse
credence to what you have heard from those who brought tidings of him;
but think rather that they have told you only a few things, for at all
events they scarcely can have given circumstances of so great import in
any detail. And because I at your request have called to mind a few
circumstances about him, and shall send as much as I can tell in a
letter, do not neglect to question those who sail from here: for
possibly when all have told their tale, the account will hardly be in
proportion to his merits. On account of this I was desirous, when I
received your letter, to send for certain of the monks, those especially
who were wont to be more frequently with him, that if I could learn any
fresh details I might send them to you. But since the season for sailing
was coming to an end and the letter-carrier urgent, I hastened to write
to your piety what I myself know, having seen him many times, and what I
was able to learn from him, for I was his attendant for a long time, and
poured water on his hands <span id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) ; in
all points being mindful of the truth, that no one should disbelieve
through hearing too much, nor on the other hand by hearing too little
should despise the man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_982"></span>[195:983](2040213.htm#fr_982) <span
id="xvi.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p5"></span> This heading, preserved in the Evagrian
version, is probably the original one. Compare the statement to the same
effect in *Vit. Pachom.* 63. The preface to the Evagrian version is
important as bearing on the question of interpolation. It runs as
follows: ‘Evagrius, presbyter, to his dearest son Innocent, greeting in
the Lord. A word-for-word translation from one language to another
obscures the sense and as it were chokes the corn with luxuriant grass.
For in slavishly following cases and constructions, the language
scarcely explains by lengthy periphrasis what it might state by concise
expression. To avoid this, I have at your request rendered the Life of
the blessed Antony in such a way as to give the full sense, but cut
short somewhat of the words. Let others try to catch syllables and
letters; do you seek the meaning.’

<span id="fn_983"></span>[195:984](2040213.htm#fr_983) <span
id="xvi.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p7"></span> Cf. [2 Kings iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011)<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>:
the expression merely refers to personal attendance (contrast §§47, 93).
The text is uncertain, as some <span class="c10"><span
id="xvi.ii.ii-p7.3"></span>mss.</span>, both Greek and Latin read, ‘was
able to learn *from him who* was his attendant,’ &c. The question of
textual evidence requires further sifting. In support of the statement
in the text we may cite *<span id="xvi.ii.ii-p7.4"></span>Ap. c. Ar.* 6,
where Ath. is called ‘one of the ascetics,’ which may, but need not,
refer to something of the kind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sections 1, 2](2040214)
