[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Homer](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoo01)  [Next](aoo03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

ONE day, as he sat sad and disconsolate in the house of his father, the
youth Telemachus saw a stranger come to the outer gate. There were many
in the court outside, but no one went to receive the newcomer. Then,
because he would never let a stranger stand at the gate without hurrying
out to welcome him, and because, too, he had hopes that some day such a
one would bring him tidings of his father, Telemachus rose up from where
he was sitting and went down the hall and through the court and to the
gate at which the stranger stood.

‘Welcome to the house of Odysseus,’ said Telemachus giving him his hand.
The stranger clasped it with a friendly clasp. ‘I thank you,
Telemachus,’ he said, ‘for your welcome, and glad I am to enter the
house of your father, the renowned Odysseus.’

The stranger looked like one who would be a captain amongst soldiers.
His eyes were grey and clear and shone wonderfully. In his hand he
carried a great bronze spear. He and Telemachus went together through
the court and into the hall. And when the stranger left his spear within
the spearstand Telemachus took him to a high chair and put a footstool
under his feet.

He had brought him to a place in the hall where the crowd would not
come. There were many in the court outside and Telemachus would not have
his guest disturbed by questions or clamours. A handmaid brought water
for the washing of his hands, and poured it over them from a golden ewer
into a silver basin. A polished table was left at his side. Then the
house-dame brought wheaten bread and many dainties. Other servants set
down dishes of meat with golden cups, and afterwards the maids came into
the hall and filled up the cups with wine.

But the servants who waited on Telemachus and his guest were disturbed
by the crowd of men who now came into the hall. They seated themselves
at tables and shouted out their orders. Great dishes of meat were
brought to them and bowls of wine, and the men ate and drank and talked
loudly to each other and did not refrain even from staring at the
stranger who sat with Telemachus.

‘Is there a wedding-feast in the house?’ the stranger asked, ‘or do the
men of your clan meet here to drink with each other?’

A flush of shame came to the face of Telemachus. ‘There is no
wedding-feast here,’ he said, ‘nor do the men of our clan meet here to
drink with each other. Listen to me, my guest. Because you look so wise
and because you seem so friendly to my father’s name I will tell you who
these men are and why they trouble this house.’

THEREUPON Telemachus told the stranger how his father had not returned
from the war of Troy although it was now ten years since the City was
taken by those with whom he went. ‘Alas,’ Telemachus said, ‘he must have
died on his way back to us, and I must think that his bones lie under
some nameless strait or channel of the ocean. Would he had died in the
fight at Troy! Then the Kings and Princes would have made him a
burial-mound worthy of his name and his deeds. His memory would have
been reverenced amongst men, and I, his son, would have a name, and
would not be imposed upon by such men as you see here--men who are
feasting and giving orders in my father’s house and wasting the
substance that he gathered.’

‘How come they to be here?’ asked the stranger.

Telemachus told him about this also. When seven years had gone by from
the fall of Troy and still Odysseus did not return there were those who
thought he was dead and would never be seen more in the land of Ithaka.
Then many of the young lords of the land wanted Penelope, Telemachus’
mother, to marry one of them. They came to the house to woo her for
marriage. But she, mourning for the absence of Odysseus and ever hoping
that he would return, would give no answer to them. For three years now
they were coming to the house of Odysseus to woo the wife whom he had
left behind him. ‘They want to put my lady-mother between two dread
difficulties,’ said Telemachus, ‘either to promise to wed one of them or
to see the substance of our house wasted by them. Here they come and eat
the bread of our fields, and slay the beasts of our flocks and herds,
and drink the wine that in the old days my father laid up, and weary our
servants with their orders.’

When he had told him all this Telemachus raised his head and looked at
the stranger: ‘O my guest,’ he said, ‘wisdom and power shine out of your
eyes. Speak now to me and tell me what I should do to save the house of
Odysseus from ruin. And tell me too if you think it possible that my
father should still be in life.’

The stranger looked at him with his grey, clear, wonderfully-shining
eyes. ‘Art thou verily the son of Odysseus?’ said he.

‘Verily, I am the son of Odysseus,’ said Telemachus.

‘As I look at you,’ said the stranger, ‘I mark your head and eyes, and I
know they are such a head and such eyes as Odysseus had. Well, being the
son of such a man, and of such a woman as the lady Penelope, your spirit
surely shall find a way of destroying those wooers who would destroy
your house.’

‘Already,’ said Telemachus, ‘your gaze and your speech make me feel
equal to the task of dealing with them.’

‘I think,’ said the stranger, ‘that Odysseus, your father, has not
perished from the earth. He may yet win home through labors and perils.
But you should seek for tidings of him. Harken to me now and I shall
tell you what to do.

‘To-morrow summon a council of all the chief men of the land of Ithaka,
and stand up in that council and declare that the time has come for the
wooers who waste your substance to scatter, each man to his own home.
And after the council has been held I would have you voyage to find out
tidings of your father, whether he still lives and where he might be. Go
to Pylos first, to the home of Nestor, that old King who was with your
father in the war of Troy. Beg Nestor to give you whatever tidings he
has of Odysseus. And from Pylos go to Sparta, to the home of Menelaus
and Helen, and beg tidings of your father from them too. And if you get
news of his being alive, return: It will be easy for you then to endure
for another year the wasting of your substance by those wooers. But if
you learn that your father, the renowned Odysseus, is indeed dead and
gone, then come back, and in your own country raise a great funeral
mound to his memory, and over it pay all funeral rites. Then let your
mother choose a good man to be her husband and let her marry him,
knowing for a certainty that Odysseus will never come back to his own
house. After that something will remain for you to do: You will have to
punish those wooers who destroy the goods your father gathered and who
insult his house by their presence. And when all these things have been
done, you, Telemachus, will be free to seek out your own fortune: you
will rise to fame, for I mark that you are handsome and strong and most
likely to be a wise and valiant man. But now I must fare on my journey.’

The stranger rose up from where he sat and went with Telemachus from the
hall and through the court and to the outer gate. Telemachus said: ‘What
you have told me I shall not forget. I know you have spoken out of a
wise and a friendly heart, and as a father to his son.’

The stranger clasped his hands and went through the gate. And then, as
he looked after him Telemachus saw the stranger change in his form. He
became first as a woman, tall, with fair hair and a spear of bronze in
her hand. And then the form of a woman changed too. It changed into a
great sea-eagle that on wide wings rose up and flew high through the
air. Telemachus knew then that his visitor was an immortal and no other
than the goddess Athene who had been his father’s friend.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](aoo03)
