[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Homer](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoo09)  [Next](aoo11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X

HIS ship and his fellow-voyagers waited at Pylos but for a while longer
Telemachus bided in Sparta, for he would fain hear from Menelaus and
from Helen the tale of Troy. Many days he stayed, and on the first day
Menelaus told him of Achilles, the greatest of the heroes who had fought
against Troy, and on another day the lady Helen told him of Hector, the
noblest of all the men who defended King Priam’s City.

<span id="img_011"></span>

|                  |
|------------------|
| ![](img/011.jpg) |

‘Achilles,’ said King Menelaus, ‘was sprung of a race that was favoured
by the immortals. Peleus, the father of Achilles, had for his friend,
Cheiron, the wisest of the Centaurs--of those immortals who are half men
and half horse. Cheiron it was who gave to Peleus his great spear. And
when Peleus desired to wed an immortal, Zeus, the greatest of the gods,
prevailed upon the nymph Thetis to marry him, although marriage with a
mortal was against her will. To the wedding of Thetis and Peleus all the
gods came. And for wedding gifts Zeus gave such armour as no mortal had
ever worn before--armour wonderfully bright and wonderfully strong, and
he gave also two immortal horses.

‘Achilles was the child of Thetis and Peleus--of an immortal woman
married to a mortal hero. He grew up most strong and fleet of foot. When
he was grown to be a youth he was sent to Cheiron, and his father’s
friend instructed him in all the ways of war. He became the greatest of
spearmen, and on the mountain with the Centaur he gained in strength and
in fleetness of foot.

‘Now after he returned to his father’s hall the war against Troy began
to be prepared for. Agamemnon, the king, wanted Achilles to join the
host. But Thetis, knowing that great disasters would befall those who
went to that war, feared for Achilles. She resolved to hide him so that
no word from King Agamemnon might reach him. And how did the nymph
Thetis hide her son? She sent him to King Lycomedes and prayed the King
to hide Achilles amongst his daughters.

‘So the youth Achilles was dressed as a maiden and stayed with the
daughters of the King. The messengers of Agamemnon searched everywhere
for him. Many of them came to the court of King Lycomedes, but not
finding one like Achilles amongst the King’s sons they went away.

‘Odysseus, by Agamemnon’s order, came to seek Achilles. He knew that the
youth was not amongst the King’s sons. He saw the King’s daughters in
their father’s orchard, but could not tell if Achilles was amongst them,
for all were veiled and dressed alike.

‘Then Odysseus went away and returned as a peddler carrying in his pack
such things as <span id="img_012"></span>

|                  |
|------------------|
| ![](img/012.jpg) |

maidens admire--veils and ornaments and brazen mirrors. But under the
veils and ornaments and mirrors the wise Odysseus left a gleaming sword.
When he came before the maidens in the King’s orchard he laid down his
peddler’s pack. The mirrors and veils and ornaments were taken up and
examined eagerly. But one of the company took up the gleaming sword and
looked at it with flashing eyes. Odysseus knew that this was Achilles,
King Peleus’ son.

‘He gave the youth the summons of King Agamemnon, bidding him join the
war that the Kings and princes of Greece were about to wage against
Troy. And Achilles was glad to get the summons and glad to go. He
returned to Phthia, to his father’s citadel. There did he make ready to
go to Aulis where the ships were being gathered. He took with him his
father’s famous warriors, the Myrmidons who were never beaten in battle.
And his father bestowed on him the armour and the horses that had been
the gift of Zeus--the two immortal Xanthos and Balios.

‘But what rejoiced Achilles more than the gift of marvellous armour and
immortal steeds was that his dear comrade, Patroklos, was to be with him
as his mate in war. Patroklos had come into Phthia and into the hall of
Peleus when he was a young boy. In his own country he had killed another
boy by mischance over a game of dice. His father, to save him from the
penalty, fled with him to King Peleus. And Achilles’ father gave them
refuge and took Patroklos into his house and reared him up with his own
son. Later he made him squire to Achilles. These two grew up together
and more than brothers they loved each other.

‘Achilles bade good-bye to Phthia, and to his hero-father and his
immortal mother, and he and Patroklos with the Myrmidons went over the
sea to Aulis and joined the host of the Kings and Princes who had made a
vow not to refrain from war until they had taken King Priam’s famous
city.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](aoo11)
