[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Homer](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](aoo35)  [Next](aoo37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIII

ALL night Odysseus lay awake, tossing this side and that, as he pondered
on how he might slay the wooers, and save his house from them. As soon
as the dawn came, he went into the open air and, lifting up his hands,
prayed to Zeus, the greatest of the gods, that he might be shown some
sign, as to whether he would win victory or meet with defeat.

And then, as he was going within the house, he heard the voice of a
woman who ground barley-meal between stones. She was one of twelve, but
the other women had fallen asleep by the quernstones. She was an
ancient, wretched woman, covered all over with the dust of the grain,
and, as Odysseus came near her, she lifted up her hands and prayed in a
weak voice

‘O Zeus, even for miserable me, fulfil a prayer! May this be the last
day that the wooers make their feast in the house of Odysseus! They have
loosened my knees with the cruel toil they have made me undergo,
grinding for them the barley for the bread they eat. O Zeus, may they
to-day sup their last!’

Thus the quern-woman spoke, as Odysseus crossed his thresh-old. He was
glad of her speech, for it seemed to him her words were an omen from
Zeus, and that vengeance would soon be wrought upon the proud and
hard-hearted men who wasted the goods of the house and oppressed the
servants.

And now the maids came into the hall from the women’s aPartment, and
some cleaned the tables and others took pitchers and went to the well
for water. Then men-servants came in and split the fagots for the fire.
Other servants came into the courtyard--Eumæus the swineherd, driving
fatted swine, the best of his drove, and Philœtius the cattle-herd
bringing a calf. The goatherd Melanthius, him whom Odysseus and Eumæus
had met on the road the day before, also came, bringing the best goats
of his flock to be killed for the wooers’ feast.

When the cattle-herd, Philœtius, saw a stranger in the guise of a
beggar, he called out as he tethered the calf in the yard, ‘Hail,
stranger friend! My eyes fill with tears as I look on thee. For even
now, clad as thou art in rags, thou dost make me think of my master
Odysseus, who may be a wanderer such as thou in friendless lands. Ah,
that he might return and make a scattering of the wooers in his hall.’
Eumæus the swineherd came up to Philœtius and made the same prayer.
These two, and the ancient woman at the quern, were the only ones of his
servants whom he heard pray for his return.

And now the wooers came into the hall. Philœtius the cattle-herd, and
Melanthius the evil goatherd, went amongst them, handing them bread and
meat and wine. Odysseus stood outside the hall until Telemachus went to
him and brought him within.

Now there was amongst the wooers a man named Ctesippus, and he was the
rudest and the roughest of them all. When he saw Telemachus bringing
Odysseus within he shouted out, ‘Here is a guest of Telemachus to whom
some gift is due from us. It will be unseemly if he should get nothing
to-day. Therefore I will bestow this upon him as a token.’

Saying this, Ctesippus took up the foot of a slaughtered ox and flung it
full at Odysseus. Odysseus drew back, and the ox’s foot struck the wall.
Then did Odysseus smile grimly upon the wooers.

Said Telemachus, ‘Verily, Ctesippus, the cast turned out happily for
thyself. For if thou shouldst have struck my guest, there would have
been a funeral feast instead of a wedding banquet in thy father’s house.
Assuredly I should have driven my spear through thee.’

All the wooers were silent when Telemachus spoke these bold words. But
soon they fell laughing at something one of their number said. The guest
from Telemachus’ ship, Theoclymenus, was there, and he started up and
went to leave the hall.

‘Why dost thou go, my guest?’ said Telemachus.

‘I see the walls and the beams of the <span id="img_045"></span>

|                  |
|------------------|
| ![](img/045.jpg) |

roof sprinkled with blood,’ said Theoclymenus, the second-sighted man.
‘I hear the voice of wailing. I see cheeks wet with tears. The men
before me have shrouds upon them. The courtyard is filled with ghosts.’

So Theoclymenus spoke, and all the wooers laughed at the second-sighted
man, for he stumbled about the hall as if it were in darkness. Then said
one of the wooers, ‘Lead that man out of the house, for surely he cannot
tell day from night.’

‘I will go from the place,’ said Theoclymenus. ‘I see death approaching.
Not one of all the company before me will be able to avoid it.’

So saying, the second-sighted man went out of the hall. The wooers
looking at each other laughed again, and one of them said:

‘Telemachus has no luck in his guests. One is a dirty beggar, who thinks
of nothing but what he can put from his hand into his mouth, and the
other wants to stand up here and play the seer.’ So the wooers spake in
mockery, but neither Telemachus nor Odysseus paid heed to their words,
for their minds were bent upon the time when they should take vengeance
upon them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](aoo37)
