[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4163) 
[Next](sbe4165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2">7:4:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:1">7:4:2:1</span></span>1. He
puts a Svayam-ât*rinn*â (naturally-perforated brick) on (the gold
man);--the (first) naturally-perforated one being this earth, he thus
puts this earth thereon. He puts it on so as not to be separate from the
man; for the naturally-perforated one means food, and the
naturally-perforated one means this earth, and this earth is food, since
it is on her that all food ripens: he thus places food close to him (the
man, Agni). Upon (the man he puts it): he thus places the food upon
him <span id="fr_697"></span>[1](#fn_695).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:2">7:4:2:2</span></span>2. And,
again, why he puts on a naturally-perforated one;--the
naturally-perforated (brick) is the breath (or vital air), for the
breath thus bores itself (svayam ât*ri*ntte) through the body: it is
breath he thus bestows on it. He puts it so as not to be separate from
the man; for the naturally-perforated one is the breath, and the
naturally-perforated one is this earth, and this earth is the breath,
since this earth bears everything that breathes: he thus puts the breath
so as not to be separate from him. Upon (the man he places the brick):
he thus puts the breath upon him <span id="fr_698"></span>[1](#fn_695).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:3">7:4:2:3</span></span>3. And,
again, why he puts thereon the naturally-perforated one. The deities,
taking up the disjointed Pra*g*âpati, separated; and, having obtained a
resting-place in them, thus separated, he settled down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:4">7:4:2:4</span></span>4. Now
that Pra*g*âpati who became disjointed is this very Agni (fire-altar)
that is now being built up; and that resting-place (or, foundation) is
this first

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

naturally-perforated (brick);--thus when he now puts it on, he thereby
puts upon this (altar-site) that (foundation <span
id="fr_699"></span>[1](#fn_696)) which there was for his body: that is
why he now puts it on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:5">7:4:2:5</span></span>5. He
puts it on by means of Pra*g*âpati, for Pra*g*âpati thereby took back to
himself (that foundation) of his body. \[Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 16\] 'Steady
thou art,' that is, 'Firm thou art, or established thou
art;'--'supporting,' for that which supports is a foundation;--'laid
down by Vi*s*vakarman;' Vi*s*vakarman is Pra*g*âpati, thus, 'laid down
by that one;'--'May the ocean, may the bird not injure thee!' the ocean
doubtless is the gold plate, and the bird is the man: thus, 'May those
two not injure thee!'--'Not shaking, steady thou the earth!' as the
text, so the meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:6">7:4:2:6</span></span>6.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 17\] 'May Pra*g*âpati settle thee'--for Pra*g*âpati
saw this first layer <span id="fr_700"></span>[2](#fn_697);--'on the
back of the waters, on the way of the ocean,' the back of the waters
doubtless is this earth, and the way of the ocean is this earth;--'thee,
the wide, the broad one!' for this earth is both wide and
broad;--'broaden thou: thou art the broad one!' that is, 'broaden thou,
and thou art the broad (earth, p*ri*thivî).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:7">7:4:2:7</span></span>7.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 18\] 'Thou art the earth (bhû),' for this is the
earth;--'thou art the ground (bhûmi),' for this is the ground;--'Thou
art Aditi,'--Aditi is this earth, for this earth gives (dad)

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

everything here;--'the all-containing,' for on this earth everything is
contained;--'supporter of all the world,' that is, supporter of the
whole world;--'sustain the earth, steady the earth, injure not the
earth!' that is, sustain thyself, steady thyself, injure, not thyself!

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:8">7:4:2:8</span></span>8.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 19\] 'For all breathing, out-breathing,
through-breathing, and up-breathing;' for the naturally-perforated
(brick) is the breath, and the breath serves for all that;--'for a
resting-place, for a moving-place;' the naturally-perforated (bricks)
are these worlds <span id="fr_701"></span>[1](#fn_698), and these worlds
are the resting-place, the moving-place;--'May Agni guard thee'--that
is, may Agni protect thee!--'with mighty well-being!' that is, with
great well-being;--'with the safest roof,' that is, with whatever roof
(abode) is the safest. Having 'settled' it <span
id="fr_702"></span>[2](#fn_699), he pronounces the Sûdadohas <span
id="fr_703"></span>[3](#fn_700) on it: the meaning of this has been
explained. He then sings a Sâman: the meaning of this (will be
explained) further on.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:9">7:4:2:9</span></span>9. Here
now they say, 'How is it that that (gold) man is not held (weighed) down
by the naturally-perforated (brick) <span
id="fr_704"></span>[4](#fn_701)?' Well, the naturally-perforated (brick)
is food and breath; and man is not held down either by food or by his
breath.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:10">7:4:2:10</span></span>10. He
then lays the Darya-brick <span id="fr_705"></span>[5](#fn_702)
thereon;--the Dûrvâ-brick being cattle; it is with cattle he

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

thus endows it: these are the same cattle together with which Agni on
that former occasion approached <span id="fr_706"></span>[1](#fn_703);
it is them he now puts thereon. He lays it down immediately on the
naturally-perforated (brick); the naturally-perforated (brick) being
this earth, he thus places the cattle immediately on this earth. Upon
(the brick he places it): upon this earth he thereby places cattle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:11">7:4:2:11</span></span>11.
And, again, why he lays down the Dûrvâ-brick. The hair of Pra*g*âpati
which were lying on the ground when he was disjointed became these
herbs. The vital air then went out from within him, and, that having
gone out, he fell down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:12">7:4:2:12</span></span>12. He
said, 'Verily, this (vital air) has undone me!' and because he said, 'it
has undone (dhûrv) me,' hence (the name) 'dhûrvâ;' 'dhûrvâ' doubtless
being what is mystically called 'dûrvâ,' for the gods love the mystic.
That (dûrvâ grass) is the ruling power (Kshatra), for it is this vital
sap, the breath; and the other plants are the hair: in laying down that
(dûrvâ plant) he lays down all (kinds of) plants.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:13">7:4:2:13</span></span>13.
When the gods restored him, they put that life-sap, the breath, inside
him; and in like manner does this (Sacrificer) now put it into him. He
lays it down immediately on the naturally-perforated (brick); the
naturally-perforated one being this earth, he thus places the plants
immediately on this earth. Upon (the brick he lays it): upon this earth
he thus places the plants. It should be with root and top, for
completeness' sake. Let him lay it on in such manner that while lying on
the naturally-perforated (brick) it touches the ground (with its

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

tops) <span id="fr_707"></span>[1](#fn_704), for on this earth those
(plants) spring up, and along her they grow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:14">7:4:2:14</span></span>14. He
lays it on, with (Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 20-21), 'Growing up joint by joint,
knot by knot;' for joint by joint, and knot by knot that (grass) does
grow up;--'so do thou prolong us, O Dûrvâ (plant), by a thousand, and a
hundred (descendants)!' as the text, so its meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:15">7:4:2:15</span></span>15.
'Thou that spreadest by a hundred, and branchest out by a thousand
(shoots);' for by a hundred (shoots) it spreads, and by a thousand it
branches out;--'to thee, O divine brick, we will do homage by offering;'
as the text, so the meaning. With two (verses) he puts it on: the
meaning of this has been explained. Having 'settled' it, he pronounces
the Sûdadohas upon it: the meaning of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:16">7:4:2:16</span></span>16. He
then puts down a Dviya*g*us <span id="fr_708"></span>[2](#fn_705)
(brick). Indra and Agni desired, 'May we go to the heavenly world!' They
saw that dviya*g*us brick, even this earth, and laid it down; and having
laid it down, they went to the heavenly world from that foundation. In
like manner when this Sacrificer lays down a dviya*g*us (brick), (he
does so) thinking, 'I want to go to the heavenly world by the same means
(rûpa), by performing the same rite by which Indra and Agni went to the
heavenly world!' And as to its being called 'dviya*g*us,' it is because
two deities saw it. And as to why he lays down a dviya*g*us one: the
dviya*g*us doubtless is the Sacrificer.

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:17">7:4:2:17</span></span>17.
Here now they say, 'If (the dviya*g*us) is that same Sacrificer who is
that gold man, which then is that (real) form of his?' Well, that (gold
man) is his divine body, and this (brick) is his human one. As to that
gold man, that is his immortal form, his divine form; gold being
immortal. And as to this (brick) being made of clay, it is because this
is his human form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:18">7:4:2:18</span></span>18. Now
were he only to lay down that (golden man), and not to let this
dviya*g*us (brick) remain <span id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_706), the
Sacrificer surely would quickly pass away from this world; but now that
he allows this (brick) to remain, he thereby leaves to him this human
form of his; and so he attains with this body the full (measure of)
life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:19">7:4:2:19</span></span>19. And
were he not to put it on after (the gold man), he assuredly would not
afterwards find out that divine body <span
id="fr_710"></span>[2](#fn_707); but now that he puts it on thereafter,
he does so afterwards find out that divine body. He lays it down close
to the dûrvâ-brick the dûrvâ-brick being cattle, he thus establishes the
Sacrificer in (the possession of) cattle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:20">7:4:2:20</span></span>20.
Here now they say, 'How do those two bodies of his come to be connected
together by the breath, and not severed?' Well, the naturally-perforated
(brick) is the breath, and the dûrvâ-brick is the breath, and the
dviya*g*us (-brick) is the Sacrificer:

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

and inasmuch as he lays down the dûrvâ-brick close to the
naturally-perforated one, he thereby connects and joins breath with
breath; and inasmuch as he lays down the dviya*g*us one close to the
dûrvâ-brick--the dûrvâ-brick being the breath, and the dviya*g*us the
Sacrificer--those two bodies of his (the human one and the divine one)
thus become connected together by the breath, and not severed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:21">7:4:2:21</span></span>21.
\[He lays down the dviya*g*us brick, with Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 22, 23\] 'O
Agni, what lights of thine in the sun overspread the sky by their beams,
with all those help us to light and to people!--O ye gods, what lights
of yours are in the sun, and what lights are in kine and horses, O Indra
and Agni, with all those bestow light upon us, O B*ri*haspati!' for
'light' he prays each time: light being immortality, it is immortality
he thus bestows on him (Agni, and the Sacrificer). With two (verses) he
lays it down: the significance of this has been explained. And,
moreover, it is because that material form (of the brick) is a twofold
one, (consisting as it does of) clay and water. Having 'settled' it, he
pronounces the Sûdadohas upon it: the significance of this has been
explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:22">7:4:2:22</span></span>22. He
then lays down two Reta*h*si*k* (seed-shedding bricks);--the
seed-shedders doubtless are these two worlds, for these two worlds do
shed seed;--this (terrestrial world) sheds seed upwards from here (in
the form of) smoke; it becomes rain in yonder world, and that rain
yonder world (sheds) from above: hence (creatures) are born within these
two worlds, and therefore these two worlds are seed-shedders.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:23">7:4:2:23</span></span>23.
\[He lays them down, with Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 24\]

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'The wide-ruling
one contained the light;' the wide-ruling ones doubtless is this
(terrestrial) world: it contains this fire, the light.--'The self-ruling
one contained the light,' the self-ruling <span
id="fr_711"></span>[1](#fn_708) one doubtless is yonder world: it
contains yonder sun, the light. And the wide-ruling one and the
self-ruling one being these two worlds, he lays them down separately,
for separate are these two worlds. He 'settles' them once: he thereby
makes them one and the same (or, joined together), whence the ends of
these two worlds meet.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:24">7:4:2:24</span></span>24.
And, again, why he lays down two seed-shedders; the seed-shedders are
the testicles, for only he who has testicles sheds seed. 'The
wide-ruling one contained the light;--the self-ruling one contained the
light,' he says; for the wide-ruling and the self-ruling ones are the
testicles: they contain that light, the seed, Pra*g*âpati. He lays them
down separately, for separate are these testicles. He 'settles' them
once: he thereby makes them one and the same, whence they have a common
connecting-part. He lays them down close to the dviya*g*us (brick) <span
id="fr_712"></span>[2](#fn_709): the dviya*g*us being the Sacrificer, he
thus puts the testicles together with the Sacrificer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:25">7:4:2:25</span></span>25. He
then lays down a Vi*s*va*g*yotis (all-light brick) <span
id="fr_713"></span>[3](#fn_710);--the first 'all-light' (brick) <span
id="fr_714"></span>[4](#fn_711) is Agni, for Agni

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

is all the light in this (terrestrial) world: it is Agni he thus lays
down. He lays it down close to the seed-shedding ones,--the
seed-shedding ones being these two worlds, he thus places Agni together
with these two worlds. He lays it down between (the two
Reta*h*si*k* <span id="fr_715"></span>[1](#fn_712)), for Agni (the fire)
is within these two worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:26">7:4:2:26</span></span>26.
And, again, why he lays down an 'all-light' (brick);--the 'all-light'
(brick) is progeny, for progeny is all the light: he thus lays
generative power (into Agni). He lays it down so as not to be separated
from the seed-shedding (bricks),--the seed-shedders being the testicles,
he thus makes the generative power inseparable from the testicles. He
lays it down between (those two), for within the testicles progeny is
produced.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:27">7:4:2:27</span></span>27.
\[He lays it down, with Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 24\] 'May Pra*g*âpati settle
thee'--for Pra*g*âpati saw this first layer <span
id="fr_716"></span>[2](#fn_713);--'on the back of the earth, thee the
brilliant one!' for on the back of the earth this brilliant Agni indeed
is.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:28">7:4:2:28</span></span>28.
'For all breathing, out-breathing, through-breathing,'--the all-light
(brick) is breath, and breath is (necessary) for this entire
universe;--'give all the light!' that is, 'give the whole light;'--'Agni
is thine over-lord,' he thus makes Agni the over-lord of this earth.
Having 'settled' it <span id="fr_717"></span>[3](#fn_714), he

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

pronounces the Sûdadohas upon it: the significance of this has been
explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:29">7:4:2:29</span></span>29. He
then lays down two *Ri*tavya (seasonal bricks);--the two seasonal
(bricks) being the same as the seasons, it is the seasons he thus lays
down. \[Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 25\] 'Madhu and Mâdhava, the two spring
seasons,'--these are the names of those two: it is thus by their names
that he lays them down. There are two (such) bricks, for two months are
a season. He 'settles' them once <span id="fr_718"></span>[1](#fn_715):
he thereby makes (the two months) one season.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:30">7:4:2:30</span></span>30. And
as to why he now lays down these two;--this Agni (fire-altar) is the
year, and the year is these worlds; the first layer is this
(terrestrial) world thereof, and the spring season also is this world
thereof; and when he now lays down those two (bricks), he thereby puts
back into him (Agni-Pra*g*âpati) what those two (the first layer and the
spring) are to that body of his <span id="fr_719"></span>[2](#fn_716):
this is why he now lays down those two (bricks).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:31">7:4:2:31</span></span>31.
And, again, why he now lays down these two;--this Agni is Pra*g*âpati,
and Pra*g*âpati is the year; the first layer is his foundation, and the
spring season also is his foundation;--thus when he now lays down these
two (bricks), he thereby puts back into him what those two are to that
body of his: this is why he now lays down those two (bricks). He lays
them down close to the 'all-light' brick: the 'all-light' brick being
progeny, he thus lays progeny close together with the seasons; whence
progeny is produced in accordance with the seasons, for by seasons
people compute (the age of man)

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

whilst in the state of embryo, and by seasons when he is born.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:32">7:4:2:32</span></span>32. He
then lays down the Ashâ*dh*â (invincible brick) <span
id="fr_720"></span>[1](#fn_717),--the 'invincible one' being this earth,
it is this earth he thus lays down. He puts it on the fore-part (of the
altar-site), for this earth was created first.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:33">7:4:2:33</span></span>33. And
as to its being called Ashâ*dh*â. The gods and the Asuras, both of them
sprung from Pra*g*âpati, strove together. The gods saw this invincible
brick, even this earth; they put it on (the altar); and having put it
on, they conquered (and drove) the Asuras, the enemies, the rivals, from
this universe; and inasmuch as (thereby) they conquered (asahanta), it
is called Ashâ*dh*â. In like manner the Sacrificer, after putting on
that (brick), conquers (and drives) his spiteful rival from this
universe (or, from everything here).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:34">7:4:2:34</span></span>34.
And, again, why he lays down the Ashâ*dh*â. The Ashâ*dh*â is speech, and
by speech <span id="fr_721"></span>[2](#fn_718) the gods then indeed
conquered (and drove) the Asuras, the enemies, the rivals, from this
universe; and in like manner the Sacrificer, by means of speech,
conquers (and drives) his spiteful rival from this universe: it was
speech the gods then laid down (or bestowed on Agni), and in like manner
the Sacrificer now lays down speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:35">7:4:2:35</span></span>35.
This earth is the bearer of what is desirable; for--the desirable being
the vital airs--this earth bears everything that breathes, and for that
reason this earth is the bearer of what is desirable. But

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

speech (the mouth) also indeed is the bearer of what is desirable; for
the desirable is the vital airs, and for the (channels of) the vital
airs food is put into the mouth: therefore speech is the bearer of what
is desirable.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:36">7:4:2:36</span></span>36. Now
the Ashâ*dh*â is the same as those vital airs; he lays it down in the
fore-part (of the altar): he thus bestows (on Agni the organs of) the
vital airs in front; whence there are here (organs of) the vital airs in
front (of the body). Let him not in this layer enclose this (Ashâ*dh*â)
in front by any other brick which has a special prayer of its own, lest
he close up (the organs of) the vital airs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:37">7:4:2:37</span></span>37. And
as to why he lays down in front five Apasyâs <span
id="fr_722"></span>[1](#fn_719),--water (ap) is food, and by food (the
organs of) the vital airs are not closed up. He lays down (the
Ashâ*dh*â) close to the two seasonal ones: he thereby establishes speech
in the seasons, and hence speech (the mouth) speaks here, firmly
established in the seasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:38">7:4:2:38</span></span>38.
Here now they say, 'If the Vi*s*va*g*yotis (brick) is progeny, and the
Ashâ*dh*â speech, why does he put the two seasonal ones between them?'
Well, the seasonal ones being the year, he thus separates speech from
progeny by the year, and hence children utter speech at the time (or
age) of a year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:39">7:4:2:39</span></span>39.
\[He lays down the Ashâ*dh*â, with Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 26\] 'Thou art
Ashâ*dh*â, the conquering,' for the gods thereby conquered the
Asuras,--'conquer the enemies! conquer the hostile!' as the text, so the
meaning;--'thou hast a thousand energies: do thou speed me!' a thousand
means

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

all: thus, 'thou hast all energies, do thou speed me!' When he has
'settled' it, he pronounces the Sûdadohas on it: the significance of
this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:4:2:40">7:4:2:40</span></span>40.
Here now they say, 'Why are those other bricks placed in front of the
naturally-perforated one?' Let him say, There are two wombs
(birthplaces)--the one being the womb of the gods, the other the womb of
men: the gods have their birthplace in the east, and men in the west;
and when he lays down those (bricks) in front, he thereby causes the
Sacrificer to be born from the womb of the gods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_695"></span>[377:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_698) ? Viz. inasmuch as
the food is introduced into the body from above. It might also mean, he
makes the food superior to the body, inasmuch as the body cannot exist
without it. Similarly as regards the breath in the next paragraph.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[378:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_699) The 'pratish*th*â'
(basis) of the bird-shaped Agni includes the parts on which the bird
stands or sits, viz. the feet, and the hind-part of the body. Sâya*n*a,
on the other hand, takes it to mean the 'pu*m*liṅga,' which seems very
improbable.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[378:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_700) See [VI, 2, 3,
1](sbe4133.htm#6:2:3:1).

<span id="fn_698"></span>[379:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_701) See [p.
155](sbe4129.htm#page_155), note [8](sbe4129.htm#fn_316).

<span id="fn_699"></span>[379:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_702). That is, by adding
the formula, 'By that deity, Aṅgiras-like, lie thou steady!'

<span id="fn_700"></span>[379:3](sbe4164.htm#fr_703) See [p.
301](sbe4155.htm#page_301), note [3](sbe4155.htm#fn_563).

<span id="fn_701"></span>[379:4](sbe4164.htm#fr_704) That is to say, How
will he (the Sacrificer) be able to rise upwards to heaven, when that
brick is lying on him?

<span id="fn_702"></span>[379:5](sbe4164.htm#fr_705) See [p.
187](sbe4133.htm#page_187), note [3](sbe4133.htm#fn_384).

<span id="fn_703"></span>[380:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_706) See [VI, 2, 3,
2](sbe4133.htm#6:2:3:2).

<span id="fn_704"></span>[381:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_707) The root is to lie
on the brick from which (as representing the earth) it is supposed to
have sprung; the tops then spreading along the ground.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[381:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_708) This brick is
placed close beside the svayamât*rinn*â (naturally-perforated one) in
front (east) of it, on the 'anûka' or spine.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[382:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_709) The verb
'apa-*s*ish' is taken similarly by Sâya*n*a (ava*s*eshayet); whilst the
St. Petersburg dictionary assigns to it the meaning 'to omit, leave out'
(weglassen), which can hardly be correct (? misprint for übriglassen).
It might, however, possibly be taken in the sense of 'vi-*s*ish,' to
specify, to single out.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[382:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_710) That is to say, he
would not, after quitting his mortal body, know or find out that divine
body with which he wishes to invest himself.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[384:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_711) Or, the
wide-shining . . . the self-shining one.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[384:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_712) The two
Reta*h*si*k* bricks are laid down immediately in front (east) of the
Dviya*g*us one, one on each side of the 'spine,' which thus coincides
with their line of separation.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[384:3](sbe4164.htm#fr_713) See [VI, 5, 3,
3](sbe4143.htm#6:5:3:3).

<span id="fn_711"></span>[384:4](sbe4164.htm#fr_714) As in the case of
the Svayamât*rinn*âs (naturally-perforated bricks, see pp.
[155](sbe4129.htm#page_155), note [8](sbe4129.htm#fn_316);
[187](sbe4133.htm#page_187), note [2](sbe4133.htm#fn_383)), so there are
three Vi*s*va*g*yotis or 'all-light' bricks, placed in the first, third,
and fifth layers <span id="page_385">p. 385</span> of the altar, and
representing the light (or ruling deity) of the respective world
represented by the svayamât*rinn*â of the same layer.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[385:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_715) In reality the
Vi*s*va*g*yotis brick is not placed between the two Reta*h*si*k*, but in
front of the line separating them from each other.

<span id="fn_713"></span>[385:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_716) He 'saw' the first
naturally-perforated brick, which, as the central brick of the first
layer, represents the latter, as well as the lowest of the three worlds,
the earth. See [VI, 2, 3, 1](sbe4133.htm#6:2:3:1).

<span id="fn_714"></span>[385:3](sbe4164.htm#fr_717) Viz. by adding, 'by
that deity, Aṅgiras-like, lie thou steady!'

<span id="fn_715"></span>[386:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_718) That is, he
pronounces the sâdana-formula once only.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[386:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_719) Viz. its
foundation.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[387:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_720) See [VI, 5, 3,
1](sbe4143.htm#6:5:3:1)-[2](sbe4143.htm#6:5:3:2).

<span id="fn_718"></span>[387:2](sbe4164.htm#fr_721) Viz. by threats,
vituperation, &c., Sây.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[388:1](sbe4164.htm#fr_722) See [VII, 5, 2,
40](sbe4166.htm#7:5:2:40) seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII, 5, 1. Fifth Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4165)
