[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4139) 
[Next](sbe4141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4">6:4:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:1">6:4:4:1</span></span>1. That
(lump of clay representing Agni) is still in his hand when he addresses
the animals; for the gods, being about to equip <span
id="fr_454"></span>[1](#fn_452) (Agni), now first laid vigour into them;
and in like manner does this (Sacrificer, or priest) now, being about to
equip (Agni), first lay vigour into these (cattle).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:2">6:4:4:2</span></span>2. He
addresses the horse, with (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 43 *Ri*k S. X, 1, 2), 'Thus
born, art thou the child of the two worlds;'--the two worlds, doubtless,
are these two, heaven and earth; and he (Agni) thus born, is the child
of these two;--'O Agni, the lovely (child), distributed among the
plants,'--for he, the lovely one, is indeed distributed among all the
plants <span id="fr_455"></span>[2](#fn_453);--'a brilliant child,
through gloom and night,'--for as a brilliant child, he (Agni) indeed
shines beyond gloom and night;--'crying aloud thou didst go forth from
the mothers;'--his mothers, doubtless, are the plants, and from them he
comes forth crying aloud. He thereby lays vigour into the horse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:3">6:4:4:3</span></span>3. Then
(he addresses) the ass, with (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 44), 'Steadfast be thou,
firm-limbed, and a swift racer be thou, O steed!'--that is, 'be thou
steadfast, and firm-limbed, and swift, and a racer, O steed!'--'Ample be
thou, and well to sit upon, thou, the bearer of Agni's supply!'--that
is, 'be

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

thou ample (broad), well to rest upon, thou, Agni's
provender-bearer <span id="fr_456"></span>[1](#fn_454)!' He thereby lays
vigour into the ass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:4">6:4:4:4</span></span>4. Then
the he-goat, with (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 45), 'Be thou propitious unto human
creatures, O Aṅgiras!'--for Agni is Aṅgiras, and the he-goat is sacred
to Agni: he thus appeases him with a view to his doing no
injury;--'Scorch not heaven and earth, nor the air, nor the
trees!'--that is, 'do not injure anything!' He thereby lays vigour into
the he-goat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:5">6:4:4:5</span></span>5. With
three (verses) he addresses (the animals), for threefold is Agni: as
great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus lays
vigour into them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:6">6:4:4:6</span></span>6. He
then holds it (Agni, the lump of clay) over these animals, whereby he
equips him (Agni) with these cattle. He does not touch them, lest he
should injure that seed by the thunderbolt, for cattle are a
thunderbolt, and this (clay) is seed; or lest that Agni should injure
those cattle, for that (lump of clay) is Agni, and these (animals) are
cattle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:7">6:4:4:7</span></span>7. In the
first place he holds it over the horse, with (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 46), 'Let
the racer start forth neighing lustily,'--that is, 'Let the racer start
forth neighing repeatedly;'--'the running ass, crying aloud!' He thus
mentions the ass in the formula of the horse, and thereby imbues the ass
with sorrow <span id="fr_457"></span>[2](#fn_455);--'bearing Agni
Purîshya, may he

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

not perish before his full measure of time!'--that is, 'bearing Agni
favourable to cattle, may he (the horse) not perish before (the
completion of) this sacred work.' He thereby equips him (Agni) with the
horse.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:8">6:4:4:8</span></span>8. Then
(over) the ass, with, 'The male carrying Agni, the male,'--for Agni is a
male, and the he-ass is a male: that male carries the male;--'the
sea-born child of the waters,'--for he (Agni) is the sea-born child of
the waters. He thereby equips him with the ass.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:9">6:4:4:9</span></span>9. He
then takes it off, with, 'O Agni, come hither to the feast!'--that is,
'in order to rejoice.' By means of the brahman, the ya*g*us (formula),
he thus removes him (Agni) from the *S*ûdra caste.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:10">6:4:4:10</span></span>10.
Then (he holds it over) the he-goat, with (Vâ*g*. S XI, 47), 'The
law--the truth, the law--the truth!'--the (divine) law doubtless is this
Agni; and the truth is yonder sun; or, rather, the law is yonder (sun),
and the truth is this (Agni); but, indeed, this Agni is both the one and
the other: hence he says, 'the law--the truth, the law--the truth.' He
thereby equips him with the he-goat

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:11">6:4:4:11</span></span>11.
With three (beasts) he equips (Agni),--three fold is Agni: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus equips him.
With three (verses) he previously addresses (the beasts),--that mikes
six: the significance of this (number) has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:12">6:4:4:12</span></span>12.
They then make the beasts return (to the Âhavanîya): the he-goat goes
first of them, then the ass, then the horse. Now, in going away from
this

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (Âhavanîya <span
id="fr_458"></span>[1](#fn_456)), the horse goes first, then the ass,
then the he-goat,--for the horse corresponds to the Kshatra (nobility),
the ass to the Vai*s*ya and *S*ûdra, the he-goat to the Brâhma*n*a.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:13">6:4:4:13</span></span>13. And
inasmuch as, in going from here, the horse goes first, therefore the
Kshatriya, going first, is followed by the three other castes; and
inasmuch as, in returning from there, the he-goat goes first, therefore
the Brâhma*n*a, going first, is followed by the three other castes. And
inasmuch as the ass does not go first, either in going from here, or in
coming back from there, therefore the Brâhma*n*a and Kshatriya never go
behind the Vai*s*ya and *S*ûdra hence they walk thus in order to avoid a
confusion between good and bad. And, moreover, he thus encloses those
two castes (the Vai*s*ya and *S*ûdra) on both sides by the priesthood
and the nobility, and makes them submissive.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:14">6:4:4:14</span></span>14. He
then looks at the sham-man, with, 'Agni Purîshya we bear,
Aṅgiras-like;'--that is, 'Agni, favourable to cattle, we bear, like
Agni.' He thereby equips him with the sham-man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:15">6:4:4:15</span></span>15. He
(the Adhvaryu) arrives (near the fire) while holding (the lump of clay)
over the he-goat; for the he-goat is sacred to Agni: he thus equips him
(Agni) with his own self, with his own godhead. And, moreover, the
he-goat is the Brahman (priesthood): with the Brahman he thus equips
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:16">6:4:4:16</span></span>16. He
then takes it down, with, 'O plants, welcome ye with joy this propitious
Agni coming hitherwards!' for the plants are afraid lest he (Agni)
should injure them: it is for them that he

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

now appeases him, saying, 'Welcome ye him with joy, propitious he comes
to you; he will not injure you!'--'Removing all infirmities,
afflictions; settling down, drive off from us evil intention!' that is,
'removing all infirmities and afflictions, settling down, drive off from
us all evil!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:17">6:4:4:17</span></span>17.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XI, 48\] 'O plants, receive him joyfully, ye blossoming,
full-berried ones!' for that is their perfect form when they are
blossoming and full-berried: thus, 'Being perfect, receive ye him
joyfully!'--'this timely child of yours hath settled down in his old
seat;' that is, 'this seasonable child of yours has settled down in his
eternal seat.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:18">6:4:4:18</span></span>18.
With two (verses) he takes it down,--two-footed is the Sacrificer, and
the Sacrificer is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure,
with so much he thus takes it down. He takes it down from the right
(south) to the left (north) side: the significance of this has been
explained. Raised and sprinkled is (the place) where he takes it down,
for on a (mound), raised and sprinkled, the (sacrificial) fire is laid
down. Gravel is strewed thereon: the significance of this (will be
explained) hereafter <span id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_457).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:19">6:4:4:19</span></span>19. It
is enclosed on all sides <span id="fr_460"></span>[2](#fn_458); for at
that time the gods were afraid, thinking, 'We hope the Rakshas, the
fiends, will not smite here this (Agni) of ours!' They enclosed him with
this stronghold; and in like manner does this one now enclose him with
this stronghold. And, again, this is a womb;

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

and this (clay) is seed; and in secret, as it were, the seed is infused
into the womb: it is thus made of the form of the womb; and hence it is
only in secret that one would have intercourse even with his own wife.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:20">6:4:4:20</span></span>20. He
then unties it (the lump of clay): whatever part of his (body) pains him
(Agni) when tied up, that pain he now puts outside of him; and,
moreover, he causes him to be born from that womb (the antelope skin).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:21">6:4:4:21</span></span>21.
\[He unties it, with Vâ*g*. S. XI, 49; *Ri*k S. III, 15, 1\] 'Blazing
forth with wide glare,'--that is, 'Shining brightly with wide
glare;'--'chase away the terrors of the hating demons!'--that is, 'chase
away all evils!'--'May I be in the protection of the great, the good
protector, in the guidance of Agni, ready to our call!' thereby he
invokes a blessing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:4:4:22">6:4:4:22</span></span>22. He
then cuts off some goat's hair, and lets loose the animals towards the
north-east; for this, the north-east, is the region of both gods and
men: he thus bestows cattle on that region, and hence both gods and men
subsist on cattle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[224:1](sbe4140.htm#fr_454) For the ceremony of
'equipping' Agni, see part i, p. 276, note 1.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[224:2](sbe4140.htm#fr_455) Viz. inasmuch as
fire may be elicited from dry wood. See also I, 6, 4, 5, where Soma,
frequently identified with Agni (see [VI, 5, 1,
1](sbe4141.htm#6:5:1:1)), is said at new moon to come down to the earth,
and enter the waters and plants in order to be born anew from them.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[225:1](sbe4140.htm#fr_456) Literally, Agni's
bearer of what is suitable for the cattle, or perhaps, be thou, for
Agni, the bearer of (himself) favourable to cattle;--'pa*s*avya' being
here as elsewhere used (see [p. 201](sbe4134.htm#page_201), note
\*[1](sbe4134.htm#fn_415)\*) to explain 'purîsha,' that which fills, the
mould or soil used as mortar for the layers of bricks, in building up
the fire-altar.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[225:2](sbe4140.htm#fr_457) On account of his
being compared with the horse, Sây. The author probably alludes to the
dejected, spiritless look of the ass, as <span id="page_226">p.
226</span> compared with that of the horse. The word '*s*u*k*' might,
however, perhaps also be taken in the sense of 'fervour, fire.'

<span id="fn_456"></span>[227:1](sbe4140.htm#fr_458) See [VI, 3, 2,
6](sbe4135.htm#6:3:2:6) seq.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[228:1](sbe4140.htm#fr_459) See [VII, 1, 1,
9](sbe4155.htm#7:1:1:9).

<span id="fn_458"></span>[228:2](sbe4140.htm#fr_460) The lump of clay is
deposited on a raised mound (or perhaps rather on a cut-out piece of
ground, uddhata), in an enclosed shed, (with a door on the east side)
north of the Âhavanîya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 5, 1. Fifth Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4141)
