[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4131.md) 
[Next](sbe4133.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2">6:2:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:1">6:2:2:1</span></span>1. The
*K*arakas slaughter (a he-goat) for Pra*g*âpati, saying, 'Pra*g*âpati,
having built up the fire-altar (agni), became Agni. When he slaughters
that one, then indeed he reaches the end of Agni (the fire-altar).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:2">6:2:2:2</span></span>2. It is
a dark grey one; for the grey has two kinds of hair, the white and the
black; and two make a productive pair: that is its
Pra*g*âpati-characteristic. It is a hornless one, for Pra*g*âpati is
hornless.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:3">6:2:2:3</span></span>3. For
this (animal sacrifice) there are twenty-one kindling-verses <span
id="fr_347"></span>[1](#fn_347.md);--twelve months, five seasons, these
three worlds, and yonder sun,--that is the twenty-onefold Pra*g*âpati;
and Pra*g*âpati is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, by so much he thus kindles him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:4">6:2:2:4</span></span>4. And,
again, why there are twenty-one;--man (purusha) doubtless is
twenty-onefold, ten fingers of the hand, ten toes, and the body (make)
the twenty-onefold man Pra*g*âpati; and Pra*g*âpati is Agni: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, by so much he thus kindles him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:5">6:2:2:5</span></span>5. He
recites both gâyatrî and trish*t*ubh verses: their significance has been
told; and (what applies to) the order of the verses has been told. The
libation of ghee <span id="fr_348"></span>[2](#fn_348.md) he makes with the
verse containing (the name) Hira*n*yagarbha <span
id="fr_349"></span>[3](#fn_349.md); for Hira*n*yagarbha.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

is Pra*g*âpati, and Pra*g*âpati is Agni. There are twelve Âprî-verses:
their significance has been told; and (what applies to) the order of the
verses has been told. The animal cake belongs to Pra*g*âpati, for the
relation of the victim is also that of the animal cake <span
id="fr_350"></span>[1](#fn_350.md). It is one on twelve potsherds: twelve
months are a year, and the year is Pra*g*âpati. The offering and
invitatory formulas contain the word 'Ka,' for Pra*g*âpati is Ka <span
id="fr_351"></span>[2](#fn_351.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:6">6:2:2:6</span></span>6. He
then slaughters for Vâyu Niyutvat (the wind, driving a team of horses)
that white, bearded (he-goat). When Pra*g*âpati had produced living
beings, he looked about him, and from exceeding delight his seed fell:
it became that white, hornless, bearded he-goat (a*g*a, 'unborn'); for
seed is life-sap, and as far as there is life-sap, so far extends the
self. And when he slaughters that one, then indeed he reaches the end of
Agni (the fire-altar). It is a white one, because seed is white. It is
hornless, because seed is hornless. It belongs to Vâyu, because Vâyu
(the wind) is the out-breathing; and to Niyutvat, because the teams
(niyut <span id="fr_352"></span>[3](#fn_352).md) are the in-breathing: the
out-breathing and in-breathing he thus lays into him.

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:7">6:2:2:7</span></span>7. And,
again, why he slaughters that white, hornless (he-goat);--when the gods
restored the relaxed Pra*g*âpati, they, by means of this victim, put
into him that out-breathing which had gone out of him; and in like
mariner this one now puts it into him. It belongs to Vâyu, because Vâyu
is the out-breathing; and to Niyutvat, because the teams are the
in-breathing: he thus puts the out-breathing and in-breathing into him.
It is white, because Vâyu (the wind) is white; and it is hornless,
because Vâyu is hornless.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:8">6:2:2:8</span></span>8. For
this (animal sacrifice) there are seventeen kindling-verses <span
id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_353.md); for the year is seventeenfold--there
are twelve months and five seasons--Pra*g*âpati is the year, and
Pra*g*âpati is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, by
so much he thus kindles him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:9">6:2:2:9</span></span>9. And,
again, why there are seventeen,--man is seventeenfold,--there are ten
vital airs, four limbs, the body the fifteenth, the neck-joints the
sixteenth, and the head the seventeenth,--Pra*g*âpati is the Person (or
man, purusha), and Pra*g*âpati is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as
is his measure, by so much he thus kindles him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:10">6:2:2:10</span></span>10. He
recites both gâyatrî and trish*t*ubh verses: their significance has been
told; and (what applies to) the order of the verses has been told. There
are twelve Âprî-verses: their significance has been told; and (what
applies to) the order of the verses has been told. The animal cake
belongs to Pra*g*âpati: 'Therein then that wish was obtained,'

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mâhitthi once
said,--'which the *K*arakâs say is in the victim to Pra*g*âpati.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:11">6:2:2:11</span></span>11. And
as to why the victim belongs to Vâyu, and the animal cake to
Pra*g*âpati;--one half of Pra*g*âpati doubtless is Vâyu, and one half is
Pra*g*âpati: thus, were they both to belong to Vâyu, or both to
Pra*g*âpati, then only one half of him (Pra*g*âpati) would be made up,
and one half would not (be made up). But in that the victim belongs to
Vâyu, and the animal cake to Pra*g*âpati, thereby he puts together
(restores) him, Pra*g*âpati, wholly and entirely.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:12">6:2:2:12</span></span>12.
And, again, why the victim belongs to Vâyu, and the animal cake to
Pra*g*âpati;--when the gods restored the relaxed Pra*g*âpati, they, by
means of this victim, put into him that out-breathing which had gone out
of him; and by means of this cake they restored that body (trunk) of
his. And as to why it belongs to Pra*g*âpati, it is because the body
(self) is Pra*g*âpati; and (why it is) one on twelve potsherds,--twelve
months are a year, and Pra*g*âpati is the year. One of the offering
prayers and one of the invitatory prayers <span
id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_354) contain (the word.md) 'ka,' for Pra*g*âpati
is Ka.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:13">6:2:2:13</span></span>13. Now
when in the first place he offers the omentum, he thereby puts into him
(Pra*g*âpati) that vital air which is here in front. And when they
proceed with that (cake) in the middle, it is because this trunk is in
the middle. And when they proceed thereafter with the (meat) oblation,
he thereby puts into him that vital air which is behind. The (remaining)
offering and invitatory prayers should contain the word 'bright,' with
the view of the obtainment of bright forms; and the word 'niyut' (team),
for the obtainment of that form which has a team <span
id="fr_355"></span>[1](#fn_355.md).

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:14">6:2:2:14</span></span>14. As
to this they say, 'It is rather the two (prayers) of the Omentum that
should contain (the word) "bright," for so far as the two (prayers) of
the omentum containing (the word) "bright" extend, extends what is
bright in the animal (sacrifice); and the two (prayers) of the (meat)
oblation should contain (the word) "team," for the obtainment of that
form of him (Pra*g*âpati) which has a team.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:15">6:2:2:15</span></span>15.
And, again, why he slaughters this animal;--in this animal doubtless the
form of all (the five kinds of) animals is (contained): inasmuch as it
is hornless and bearded, that is the form of man, for man is hornless
and bearded; inasmuch as it is hornless and furnished with a mane, that
is the form of the horse, for the horse is hornless and furnished with a
mane; inasmuch as it is eight-hoofed, that is the bull's form, for the
bull is eight-hoofed; inasmuch as its hoofs are like those of the sheep,
that is the form of the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

sheep; and inasmuch as it is a he-goat, that is that of the goat. Thus
when he slaughters this one, thereby indeed all those (five) animals are
slaughtered for him. Whichever of these may suit him--either those five
animals, or that (he-goat) for Pra*g*âpati, or that one for (Vâyu)
Niyutvat <span id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_356.md)--

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:16">6:2:2:16</span></span>16. Let
him slaughter it at full moon. 'Let him slaughter at new moon,' so say
some, 'for Pra*g*âpati is yonder moon: during that night (of new moon)
he dwells here (on earth) <span id="fr_357"></span>[2](#fn_357.md), and it
would be just as if he slaughtered him while staying near.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:17">6:2:2:17</span></span>17.
But, indeed, this (takes place) at full moon, for the victim is yonder
moon, and him the gods slaughter at full moon <span
id="fr_358"></span>[3](#fn_358.md): 'I will slaughter him at the time when
the gods slaughter him,' thus he thinks, and therefore (he does so) at
full moon. And, again, why at full moon;--the full moon no

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

doubt was the first to shine forth, hence also (the sacrifice takes
place) at full moon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:18">6:2:2:18</span></span>18. And
furthermore, at the Phâlguna (full moon), for that full moon of
Phâlguna, that is, the second (Phâlguna) <span
id="fr_359"></span>[1](#fn_359.md), is the first night of the year; and
that first (Phâlguna) is the last (night of the year): he thus begins
the year at the very mouth (beginning).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:19">6:2:2:19</span></span>19.
Now, as soon as he has performed the full-moon offering, let him
slaughter the victim. For Indra, having driven away V*ri*tra, evil, by
means of the full-moon offering, thus freed from evil entered upon this
sacrificial performance; and in like manner the Sacrificer, having
driven away V*ri*tra, evil, by means of the full-moon offering, thus
freed from evil now enters on this (sacred) performance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:20">6:2:2:20</span></span>20.
This is (performed) in a low voice, for by means of these victims
Pra*g*âpati sought to obtain this (sacred) work <span
id="fr_360"></span>[2](#fn_360); but that (work.md) was then, as it were,
uncertain, indistinct: hence in a low voice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:21">6:2:2:21</span></span>21.
And, again, why in a low voice;--this performance assuredly belongs to
Pra*g*âpati, for it is Pra*g*âpati he enters upon by this performance;
and Pra*g*âpati is undefined.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:22">6:2:2:22</span></span>22.
And, again, why in a low voice;--there is seed here in the sacrifice,
and seed is cast silently--the

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

omentum, the animal cake, and the chief oblation, for of that much
consists the animal sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:23">6:2:2:23</span></span>23. On
the eighth day (after full moon) he collects (the materials for) the
fire-pan; for sacred to Pra*g*âpati is that day, the eighth (after full
moon), and sacred to Pra*g*âpati is this (sacred) piece of work, the
fire-pan: on a day sacred to Pra*g*âpati he thus performs the work
sacred to Pra*g*âpati.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:24">6:2:2:24</span></span>24. And
as to why (it is performed) on the eighth day;--that eighth day no doubt
is a joint of the year, and that fire-pan is a joint of Agni (the
fire-altar): he thus makes joint upon joint.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:25">6:2:2:25</span></span>25.
And, again, why on the eighth day;--eightfold doubtless is the pan <span
id="fr_361"></span>[1](#fn_361.md)--the bottom part, the two side-parts,
the horizontal belt (or rim), that makes four; and four upright (bands),
that makes eight: he thus makes the eightfold on the eightfold (or
eighth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:26">6:2:2:26</span></span>26. He
performs the initiation on the day of new moon; for from out of the new
moon the sacrifice is spread: 'Whence the sacrifice is spread, thence
will I generate the sacrifice,' so he thinks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:27">6:2:2:27</span></span>27.
And, again, why he (does so) at new moon;--when he performs the
initiation, he verily pours out his 'own self, as seed, into the
fire-pan, the womb; and when he becomes initiated, he makes for it (his
self) that world (or place) beforehand <span
id="fr_362"></span>[2](#fn_362.md), and he is

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

born into the world made by him: hence they say, Man is born into the
world made (by him) <span id="fr_363"></span>[1](#fn_363.md).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:28">6:2:2:28</span></span>28.
Now, were he to be initiated during less than a year, he would build up
bricks without space (for them) <span id="fr_364"></span>[2](#fn_364.md):
the bricks would exceed the spaces. And if, after making more
spaces <span id="fr_365"></span>[3](#fn_365.md), he were not to fill up
bricks in accordance therewith, the spaces would exceed the bricks. And
when, after initiating himself at new moon, he buys (Soma) at new
moon <span id="fr_366"></span>[4](#fn_366.md), he piles up as many bricks
as he (during the interval) makes space for; and when his (Agni's
second) wing is covered (with loose soil), the whole Agni is built up.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:29">6:2:2:29</span></span>29. As
to this they say, 'If at the time of the buying (of Soma) the days and
nights (of the initiation-period) amount to just as many as there are
bricks of that fire-altar, why then are not those

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

spaces of his filled up (which are prepared) during the days there are
after the buying (of Soma) <span id="fr_367"></span>[1](#fn_367.md)? Well,
when he buys (Soma) at new moon, after becoming initiated at new moon (a
year previously), then he piles up just as many bricks as (during that
interval) he makes space for; and what days there then are after the
buying (of Soma), during that interval the Adhvaryu builds up the
fire-altar. But when should he build up, if there were not that
interval? As many as there are days and nights in the year, so many are
the bricks of that fire-altar. Thereto (comes) a thirteenth month, for
there is that thirteenth month;--thus during the days there are after
the buying (of Soma), those spaces of it (the altar) are filled up
afterwards with those bricks of the thirteenth month: thus the spaces
and the bricks become equal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:30">6:2:2:30</span></span>30.
Thus, then, what first full moon there is (in the year) on that he
slaughters the victim; and what first eighth-day there is, on that he
prepares the fire-pan; and what first new moon there is, on that he
becomes initiated: thus whatever first days there are in the year, of
those he thereby takes possession for him (Agni, the altar), those he
thereby gains. Now then as to the total amount (of the fire-altar) <span
id="fr_368"></span>[2](#fn_368.md).

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:31">6:2:2:31</span></span>31.
Here now they say, 'How does that sacrificial performance of his (the
animal sacrifice) gain the year, Agni? how does it correspond <span
id="fr_369"></span>[1](#fn_369.md) with the year, with Agni?' Well, for
those five victims there are twenty-five kindling-verses, twelve
Âprî-verses,--that makes thirty-six;--eleven after-offerings, eleven
by-offerings <span id="fr_370"></span>[2](#fn_370.md),--that makes
fifty-eight.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:32">6:2:2:32</span></span>32. Now
what forty-eight there are (in these fifty-eight), they are the *G*agatî
(metre) consisting of forty-eight syllables;--the *G*agatî doubtless is
this earth, for it is thereon that everything is that moves (*g*agat);
and Agni also is this earth, for it is thereof that the whole Agni is
built up: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does
this become <span id="fr_371"></span>[3](#fn_371.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:33">6:2:2:33</span></span>33.
And, again, why there are forty-eight;--of forty-eight syllables
consists the *G*agatî; the *G*agatî (comprises) all the metres; all the
metres are Pra*g*âpati (the sacrifice <span
id="fr_372"></span>[4](#fn_372).md); and Pra*g*âpati is Agni as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:34">6:2:2:34</span></span>34. And
what (remaining) ten there are (in those fifty-eight), they are the
Virâ*g*, consisting of ten syllables; and the Virâ*g* is Agni,--there
are ten regions, and the regions are Agni; ten vital airs, and the vital
airs are Agni: as great as Agni is,

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:35">6:2:2:35</span></span>35. The
omentum and the animal cake, that makes sixty;--sixty are the days and
nights of a month: thus he gains the month; the month gained gains the
season; and the season (gains) the year: he thus gains the year, Agni,
and the wishes which are contained in the year, and what other food than
that there is in the year, all that (he gains).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:36">6:2:2:36</span></span>36. And
for that (victim) of Pra*g*âpati there are twenty-one kindling-verses,
and twelve Âprî-verses, that makes thirty-three;--eleven
after-offerings, eleven by-offerings, that makes fifty-five;--omentum,
animal cake, and chief oblation, that makes fifty-eight: whatever wish
is contained in the fifty-eight, that he gains even here <span
id="fr_373"></span>[1](#fn_373.md);--two libations of ghee, that makes
sixty: whatever wish is contained in the sixty, that he gains even here;
and what other food than that there is in the year, all that (he gains).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:37">6:2:2:37</span></span>37. And
for that (victim) of (Vâyu) Niyutvat, there are seventeen
kindling-verses, and twelve Âprî-verses, that makes twenty-nine;--eleven
after-offerings, and eleven by-offerings, that makes
fifty-one;--omentum, animal cake, and chief oblation, that makes
fifty-four;--two libations of ghee, two (oblations to Agni)
Svish*t*ak*ri*t, that makes fifty-eight: whatever wish is contained in
the fifty-eight, that he gains even here;--the wood-lord <span
id="fr_374"></span>[2](#fn_374) (tree.md) and the oblation of gravy, that
makes sixty: whatever wish is contained

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

in the sixty, that he gains even here, and what other food than that
there is in the year, all that (he gains); and thus that sacrificial
performance gains for him the year, Agni; thus it (the animal sacrifice)
corresponds with the year, with Agni.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:38">6:2:2:38</span></span>38. As
to this they say, 'Of that animal he should offer no Samish*t*aya*g*us,
nor should he go down with the heart-spit to the purificatory bath <span
id="fr_375"></span>[1](#fn_375); for that animal (sacrifice.md) is the
commencement of Agni; the Samish*t*aya*g*us are the gracious dismissal
of the deities <span id="fr_376"></span>[2](#fn_376.md); and the
purificatory bath is the completion;--lest he should at the very
commencement dismiss the deities, and complete the sacrifice.' Let him
nevertheless complete (the sacrifice): Pra*g*âpati, having offered that
animal, saw that he had not reached the end of him, Agni,--let him
therefore complete (the sacrifice). And, again, why he completes
it;--that animal sacrifice is his vital air, and if anything were to cut
him off from that, it would cut him off from the vital air; and if
anything were to cut him off from the vital air, he would thus die: let
him therefore complete (the sacrifice). Now, then, as to the vows (rites
of abstinence).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:39">6:2:2:39</span></span>39.
Here now they say, 'After he has performed that animal offering, he must
not sleep upon (a couch), nor eat flesh, nor hold carnal intercourse;
for that animal sacrifice is the first Dîkshâ, and improper surely it
would be, were the initiated to sleep upon (a couch), or were he to eat
flesh, or hold carnal intercourse.' But in no way is this a Dîkshâ, for
there is neither a girdle, nor a black

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

antelope skin <span id="fr_377"></span>[1](#fn_377.md); but he makes this
the first brick <span id="fr_378"></span>[2](#fn_378.md): let him
therefore, if he like, sleep upon (a couch); and whatever food animals
here eat, all that is here obtained and taken possession of by him; and
whatever kinds of food there are other than honey, of all those he may
eat at pleasure, if he can get them. Carnal intercourse, however, he may
not hold prior to the (offering of) clotted curds to Mitra and
Varu*n*a <span id="fr_379"></span>[3](#fn_379.md): the purport of this
(will be explained) hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:2:2:40">6:2:2:40</span></span>40.
Here now they say, 'At this sacrifice he should give a Dakshi*n*â
(sacrificial gift); thinking, "Lest my sacrifice should be without a
dakshi*n*â!" let him give to the Brahman the prescribed dakshi*n*â, for
the Brahman is the entire sacrifice: thus the entire sacrifice of his
becomes healed.' Let him not do so; for he makes this a brick, and it
would be just as if he were to give a present with each brick: only at
that (proper) time <span id="fr_380"></span>[4](#fn_380.md) let him
therefore give what it befits him (to give).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_347"></span>[172:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_347.md) Viz. the eleven
ordinary gâyatrî verses raised, by repetitions, to the number of
fifteen; with six special trish*t*ubh inserted ([p.
167](sbe4131.htm#page_167), note [1](sbe4131.htm#fn_339).md). Kâty. XVI, 1,
34.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[172:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_348.md) On the two
libations of ghee, see part i, p. 124 note; p. 128, n. 2. It is doubtful
which of the two libations is intended here; whether the first which in
any case belongs to Pra*g*âpati, but is usually made with a different
formula from the one prescribed here, or the second. The later
ritualists themselves seem to have been doubtful on this point; but
Kâtyâyana (XVI, 1, 35-37) leans to the opinion, that the second libation
must be intended; both libations thus being made to Pra*g*âpati on this
occasion. Sâya*n*a remarks,--hira*n*yavatyâ *ri*kâ 'hira*n*yagarbha*h*
samavartatety' ata uttara*m* samaprakam (? samaprakâram) âghâram
âghârayati; pra*g*âpatir vai hira*n*yagarbha*h* sa *k*âgnis tam evam
tarpayitvâpnotîty abhiprâya*h*.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[172:3](sbe4132.htm#fr_349.md) That is, Vâ*g*. S.
XXV, 10 (XIII, 4; Rd S. X, 321, 1, 'Hira*n*yagarbha*h* samavartatâgre'),
'Hira*n*yagarbha (the golden child) came first into existence; he was
born as the only lord of all being; he sustained this earth and sky:
what god (or the god K a) shall we serve with offering.'

<span id="fn_350"></span>[173:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_350.md) See III, 8, 3, 1
seq.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[173:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_351.md) See I, 1, 1, 13
with note.--The above verse, *Ri*k S. X, 121, I, and following five
verses,--each of which ends with, 'what god (or the god Ka) shall we
serve with offering,'--are used with the omentum, the animal cake
(pa*s*upuro*d*â*s*a), and the animal oblations respectively; viz. the
first three verses as invitatory formulas (anuvâkayâ) and the last three
as offering formulas (yâ*g*yâ). Â*s*v. *S*r. III, 8, 1.--Vâ*g*. S. XXV,
10-13, only the first four verses are given together; whilst Sâya*n*a,
in accordance with Â*s*valâyana, remarks,--vapâ puro*d*â*s*apa*s*ûnâ*m*
'hira*n*yagarbha*h* samavartatâgra' ity âdaya*h* syu*h*.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[173:3](sbe4132.htm#fr_352.md) Probably
'niyuta*h*' here with allusion to 'niyuta,' shut in.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[174:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_353.md) That is, only two
additional trish*t*ubh verses are to be inserted between the 11 (or 15)
gâyatrî ones.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[175:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_354.md) The three chief
oblations of the Animal Sacrifice, requiring each an invitatory prayer
(anuvâkyâ) and an offering prayer (yâ*g*yâ), are the omentum-oblation
(vapâ), the animal cake (pa*s*upuro*d*â*s*a), and the meat oblations
(pa*s*u-havis). This is the order on the present occasion, whilst
usually the cake-oblation succeeds the offering of meat portions. Now
the first of the three invitatory prayers (that of the omentum), viz.
Vâ*g*. S. XXVII, 26 (*Ri*k S. X, 121, 8), and the last of the three
offering prayers (that of the meat portions), viz. Vâ*g*. S. XXVII, 25
(*Ri*k S. X, 121, 7), end with the refrain, 'what god (or, the god Ka)
should we serve with offering.' Thus, then, the first and the last of
the six formulas would be <span id="page_176">p. 176</span> addressed to
Pra*g*âpati; and to him is also exceptionally offered the animal cake,
which is here assigned the central position, and which, in the normal
sacrificial order, would belong to the recipient of the animal sacrifice
itself, or in the present case, to Vâyu Niyutvat. Sâya*n*a, on the other
hand, makes the above two verses, containing the word Ka, the invitatory
and offering prayers of the cake-offering, as the MS. makes him
say,--kadvatyau yâ*g*yânuvâkye puro*d*â*s*asya, 'âpo ha yad b*ri*hatîr'
(*Ri*k S. X, 121, 7), 'ya*sk*id âpo' (X, 121, 8) ity ete. This, indeed,
would also seem to be the opinion of Kâtyâyana, whose rules (XVI, I,
39-43) are,--39. To Pra*g*âpati belongs the animal cake at both (animal
sacrifices); 40. The offering and invitatory formulas of the
Prâ*g*âpatya (animal sacrifice) contain the word 'Ka;' 41. Those of the
Vâyavya contain the word 'bright;' 42. Optionally so, those of the
omentum (but not at the meat portion, commentary); 43. The remainder is
equal in all (three views).--Now it would indeed be the most natural,
that the formulas of the cake-offering, here exceptionally assigned to
Pra*g*âpati, should be made to correspond to that deity; but the order
in which the formulas are given in the Vâ*g*. S. XXVII, 23-28 (cf.
Â*s*val. III, 8, I, as well as [paragraph 13](sbe4132.htm#6:2:2:13.md)
above, seems to favour the first view; though the next paragraph shows
that there were differences of opinion on this point. Cf. next note.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[176:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_355.md) The form of
Pra*g*âpati which has a team of horses is Vâyu, the god of wind; while
his bright forms are represented by Agni, the fire (VI, I, 3, 20, 'Agni
is all bright things').--Vâ*g*. S. XXVII, 29-34 gives six verses for use
as invitatory and offering formulas <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> at
the ish*t*akâpa*s*u to Vâyu. Five of these contain the word 'niyut,'
team, but only the first two contain the word '*s*ukra' (bright): these
two are presumably to be used on the present occasion; though I am at a
loss to see what other two verses containing the word 'bright' are to be
used; unless indeed '*s*uklavatya*h*' in the text means verses
containing some word for 'bright,' in which case the ordinary verses
used at an animal offering to Vâyu Niyutvat, viz. Vâ*g*. S. XXVII, 23
and 24 (*Ri*k S. VII, 91, 3; 90, 3) which contain the word '*s*veta'
(white, light), might be used. The MS. of Sâya*n*a's commentary is
unfortunately very corrupt in this place; it alludes to the latter two
verses, but whether to recommend them, or set them aside, for the
present occasion, is not clear. He does, however, specially except the
formulas of the animal cake from being included in the above
specification. In the view put forth in [paragraph
14](sbe4132.htm#6:2:2:14.md), the above-mentioned two verses would
apparently have to be used for the omentum-oblation, the two verses
containing 'Ka' for the cake-oblation, and (any) two verses containing
the word 'team' (either the ordinary ones, *Ri*k S. VII, 92, 5; VI, 49,
4; or some of the special ones) for the meat-oblation.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[178:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_356.md) Sâya*n*a here
supplies 'let him perform that,'--eshâm karma*n*â*m* madhye yat karmâsya
sampadyeta tat kuryâd iti *s*esha*h*; but he then adds, that the pronoun
'it' (tam) at the beginning of the next paragraph is caused by proximity
of the Niyutvatîya.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[178:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_357.md) See I, 6, 4, 5.
'Now this king Soma, the food of the gods, is no other than the moon.
When he (the moon, masc.) is not seen that night either in the east or
in the west, then he visits this world, and here he enters into the
waters (f.) and plants (f.).' Thus Pra*g*âpati is here identified with
Soma, the moon, and food.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[178:3](sbe4132.htm#fr_358.md) Cp. I, 6, 4, 12-13.
'The full-moon oblation, assuredly, belongs to the V*ri*tra-slayer, for
by means of it Indra slew V*ri*tra; and this new-moon oblation also
represents the slaying of V*ri*tra, since they prepared that
invigorating draught for him who had slain V*ri*tra. An offering in
honour of the V*ri*tra-slayer, then, is the full-moon sacrifice.
V*ri*tra, assuredly, is no other than the moon; and when during that
night (of new moon) he is not seen either in the east or in the west,
then he (Indra) finishes in destroying him by means of that (new-moon
sacrifice), and leaves nothing remaining of him.'

<span id="fn_359"></span>[179:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_359.md) In the older
division of the year the first or spring season (vasanta) begins with
the month of Phâlguna, that is the month when the moon is in conjunction
with the nakshatra of the Uttare Phalgunî, whence that full moon, in the
Kaush. Br. 5, 1, is called the mouth, and that of the first Phalgunî the
tail, of the year. See A. Weber, Nachrichten von den Naxatra, II, p.
329. In the above, somewhat bold figure, we are, Sâya*n*a reminds us, to
understand the fifteenth or last day (of the dark fortnight) of the
first Phalgunî, and the pratipad, or first day of the second Phalgunî.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[179:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_360.md) That is, the
construction of the fire-altar.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[180:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_361.md) For the
construction of the fire-pan, in which the sacred fire has to be kept up
for a year, during which the initiation-ceremony is repeated day after
day, see [VI, 5, 2, 1](sbe4142.htm#6:5:2:1.md) seq.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[180:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_362.md) There is kept up in
these paragraphs a play on the word 'loka,' meaning both 'space' and
'world (or place of living),'--and applying both to the space occupied
by a brick, in building up the altar; and to the place which the
Sacrificer, by this performance, gains for himself in another world. The
initiation period is here represented <span id="page_181">p. 181</span>
as the time during which the Sacrificer prepares both the requisite
space for the altar (as it were, adding day by day so many brick-spaces,
thus becoming available for the altar-pile at the time of construction),
and an adequate place for himself in the celestial regions.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[181:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_363.md) That is, man
receives, in a future existence, the reward or punishment for his deeds
during this life.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[181:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_364.md) The author argues
in support of the orthodox initiation-period of just one year, as just
the amount of time required for preparing the exact amount of space (or
brick-spaces) requisite for an altar of proper size. If the initiation
were to last less than a year, he would not have had sufficient time to
prepare the necessary amount of space, or rather, number of spaces
required for the bricks; and, by implication, he would not acquire for
himself an adequate place hereafter.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[181:3](sbe4132.htm#fr_365.md) That is to say, if
he were to make the initiation-period last longer than a year, thus
providing for more space than his supply of bricks would suffice to fill
up.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[181:4](sbe4132.htm#fr_366.md) That is, after the
expiration of the period of initiation, or just a year after the
commencement of the latter.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[182:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_367.md) That is, during the
days from the commencement to the completion of the altar. These are the
upasad-days (part ii, p. 104 seq.), the number of which varies from
three days up to three years. During this period the Upasads have to be
performed twice daily, and in the interval between the two performances
the building of the altar takes place, a certain number of bricks being
added each day.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[182:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_368.md) Or, rather, the
correspondence, in toto, of the sacrificial performance with the object
to be attained, viz. Agni, the fire-altar.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[183:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_369.md) Or, come up to,
tally with,--katha*m* sa*m*vatsare*n*a sampadyate
sa*m*ga*kkh*ate<sup>ऽ</sup>vayavasâmyena, Sây.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[183:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_370.md) For these
supplementary oblations at the animal sacrifice, see III, 8, 4, 10 seq.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[183:3](sbe4132.htm#fr_371.md) That is, the animal
sacrifice that has been performed is thus made out to be equal to Agni,
or to the object for which it was performed.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[183:4](sbe4132.htm#fr_372.md) That is, because
all the metres are employed in the chants and recitations during the
sacrifice.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[184:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_373.md) ? That is, also in
this calculation, or in the parts of the sacrifice here enumerated.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[184:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_374.md) For the oblation to
Vanaspati, see part ii, p. 208; for the vasâhoma, ib. 205.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[185:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_375.md) See III, 8, 5, 8
seq.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[185:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_376.md) See I, 9, 2, 26-27.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[186:1](sbe4132.htm#fr_377.md) For the antelope
skin used at the initiation-ceremony, see III, 2, 1, 1; for the girdle,
ib. 10.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[186:2](sbe4132.htm#fr_378.md) See above, [VI, 2,
1, 20](sbe4131.htm#6:2:1:20.md).

<span id="fn_379"></span>[186:3](sbe4132.htm#fr_379.md) This is the
concluding oblation of the Soma-sacrifice, performed at the close of the
Agni*k*ayana; see IX, 5, 1, 54.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[186:4](sbe4132.htm#fr_380.md) Viz. at the proper
time when the priests receive their fees, after the mid-day
Soma-service, see part ii, p. 340.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 2, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe4133.md)
