[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4141.md) 
[Next](sbe4143.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2">6:5:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:1">6:5:2:1</span></span>1. He
then takes a lump of clay, as much as he thinks sufficient for the
bottom part, with, 'Makha's head thou art!'--Makha, doubtless, is the
sacrifice, and this is its head; for the Âhavanîya fire is the head of
the sacrifice, and that Âhavanîya (fire-altar) he is now about to build:
hence he says, 'Makha's head thou art!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:2">6:5:2:2</span></span>2. And,
again, as to why he says, 'Makha's head thou art!'--when he (Agni) is
built up, then he is born, and it is by the head (issuing first), by the
top, that he who is born is born: 'when he is born, may he be born by
the head, by the top!' so he thinks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:3">6:5:2:3</span></span>3. He
spreads it out, with (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 58), 'May the Vasus, Aṅgiras-like,
fashion thee by the Gâyatrî metre!'--for the bottom part is this
(terrestrial) world, and this the Vasus fashioned by means of the
Gâyatrî metre; and in like manner does this one now fashion it by means
of the Gâyatrî metre;--'Aṅgiras-like,' he says, for Aṅgiras is the
breath. 'Thou art steadfast!'--that is, 'thou art firm,' or, 'thou art
fixed;'--'Thou art the earth!'--for this bottom part is indeed the
earth;--'Establish in me offspring, increase of wealth, lordship of
cattle, manhood, clansmen for the Sacrificer!' For the Vasus, having
fashioned this (terrestrial) world, invoked this blessing thereon; and
in like manner does the Sacrificer, having fashioned this world, now
invoke this blessing thereon. Having made it of the measure of a span
(in each direction), he then turns up its edge on each side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:4">6:5:2:4</span></span>4. He
then lays thereon the first (lower) side-part,

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

with, 'May the Rudras, Aṅgiras-like, fashion thee by the Trish*t*ubh
metre!'--for this side-part is the air, and this the Rudras fashioned by
means of the Trish*t*ubh metre; and in like manner does this one now
fashion it by means of the Trish*t*ubh metre;--'Aṅgiras-like,' he says,
for Aṅgiras is the breath;--'Thou art steadfast!'--that is, 'thou art
firm,' or 'thou art fixed;'--'Thou art the air!' for this side-part is
indeed the air;--'Establish in me offspring, increase of wealth,
lordship of cattle, manhood, clansmen for the Sacrificer!' For the
Rudras, having fashioned the air, invoked this blessing thereon; and in
like manner does this Sacrificer, having fashioned the air, now invoke
this blessing thereon. Having stroked and smoothed it all over--

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:5">6:5:2:5</span></span>5. He
lays on the upper side-part, with, 'May the Âdityas, Aṅgiras-like,
fashion thee by the *G*agatî metre!' for this side-part is yonder sky,
and this the Âdityas fashioned by means of the *G*agatî metre; and in
like manner does this one now fashion it by means of the *G*agatî
metre;--'Aṅgiras-like,' he says, for Aṅgiras is the breath;--'Thou art
steadfast!'--that is, 'thou art firm,' or 'thou art fixed;'--'Thou art
the sky!' for that side-part is indeed the sky;--'Establish in me
offspring, increase of wealth, lordship of cattle, manhood, clansmen for
the Sacrificer!' For the Âdityas, having fashioned the sky, invoked this
blessing thereon; and in like manner the Sacrificer, having fashioned
the sky, now invokes this blessing thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:6">6:5:2:6</span></span>6. He
then makes it (complete), with this fourth prayer, 'May the All-gods,
the friends of all

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

men, fashion thee, Aṅgiras-like, by the Anush*t*ubh metre!'--this
prayer, doubtless, is the (four) quarters, and the All-gods, the friends
of all men, did then, by means of this prayer, put the quarters into
these worlds, (that is) into the fire-pan; and in like manner does the
Sacrificer, by means of this prayer, now put the quarters into these
worlds, into the fire-pan;--'Aṅgiras-like,' he says, because Aṅgiras is
the breath;--'Thou art steadfast!'--that is, 'thou art firm,' or 'thou
art fixed;'--'Thou art the quarters!' for this prayer indeed is the
quarters;--'Establish in me offspring, increase of wealth, lordship of
cattle, manhood, clansmen for the Sacrificer!' For the All-gods, the
friends of all men, having fashioned the quarters, invoked this blessing
on them; and in like manner the Sacrificer, having fashioned the
quarters, now invokes this blessing on them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:7">6:5:2:7</span></span>7. With
that same formula he fashions it both inside and outside, whence the
quarters are both inside and outside these worlds. He therewith fashions
it without restriction (to any part of the pan), for unrestricted are
the quarters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:8">6:5:2:8</span></span>8. He
makes it just a span high, and a span sideways; for Vish*n*u, when an
embryo, was a span long, and this (fire-pan) is the womb: he thus makes
the womb of equal size with the embryo <span
id="fr_467"></span>[1](#fn_465.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:9">6:5:2:9</span></span>9. Were
it larger than a span, he would make it smaller by that prayer; and were
it smaller, (he would make it) larger thereby <span
id="fr_468"></span>[2](#fn_466.md).

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:10">6:5:2:10</span></span>10. If
there be one victim, let him make it (the pan) one span wide; and if
there be five victims, let him make it five spans wide, or an arrow's
width; for the arrow means strength: he thus makes it to be composed of
strength. But, indeed, an arrow formerly used to be five spans
long <span id="fr_469"></span>[1](#fn_467.md).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:11">6:5:2:11</span></span>11. He
then lays round the horizontal belt (or rim);--that is the quarters; for
the gods, having made these worlds, the fire-pan, strengthened and
encircled them by the quarters; and in like manner the Sacrificer,
having made these worlds, the fire-pan, thus strengthens and encircles
them by the quarters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:12">6:5:2:12</span></span>12. He
lays this (rim) on the upper third (of the side), for it is there the
ends of these worlds meet, and he thus makes them firm thereby.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:13">6:5:2:13</span></span>13.
\[He does so, with Vâ*g*. S. XI, 59\] 'Thou art Aditi's girdle!'--in the
sacrifice the string relates to Varu*n*a: he thus lays this belt round
after (expressly) making it one not relating to Varu*n*a.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:14">6:5:2:14</span></span>14. He
then silently makes four upright (bands), for these are the
quarters;--for the gods, having made these worlds, the fire-pan, made
them firm on all sides by means of the quarters <span
id="fr_470"></span>[2](#fn_468.md); and in like manner the Sacrificer,
having made these worlds, the fire-pan, now makes them firm on all sides
by means of the quarters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:15">6:5:2:15</span></span>15.
These (vertical bands) run up to (the rim of) it, for they did then
support it, and so do they now support it: thus that upper part of it
becomes firm

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

by means of the horizontal belt, and that lower part of it by means of
these (vertical bands).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:16">6:5:2:16</span></span>16. At
their tops they form nipples; for the gods, having made these worlds,
the fire-pan, drew forth for themselves from these nipples all (objects
of) their desires; and in like manner the Sacrificer, having made these
worlds, the fire-pan, draws forth from these nipples all his desires.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:17">6:5:2:17</span></span>17.
This (fire-pan) indeed is a cow, for the fire-pan is these worlds, and
these worlds are a cow: that horizontal belt is its udder; it is in the
(upper) third of it, for the udder is in one-third of the cow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:18">6:5:2:18</span></span>18. He
forms nipples to it, whereby he forms the nipples of the udder: it has
four nipples, for the cow has four nipples.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:19">6:5:2:19</span></span>19.
Some, indeed, make it with two nipples, or also with eight nipples; but
let him not do so, for those cattle which have fewer nipples than a cow,
and those which have more nipples, are less fit to yield him a
livelihood: hence they make this (fire-pan) less fit to yield a
livelihood; and, indeed, they do not make it (like) a cow, but (like) a
bitch, or a ewe, or a mare; hence let him not do so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:20">6:5:2:20</span></span>20. He
then takes hold of its bowl, with, 'May Aditi seize thy bowl!' Aditi,
doubtless, is Speech; and the gods, having then fashioned it, perfected
it by means of Aditi, speech; and in like manner this one, having
fashioned it, now perfects it by means of Aditi, speech.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:21">6:5:2:21</span></span>21.
Having grasped it with both hands, he sets it down, with, 'She, having
fashioned the great (mahîm) fire-pan,'--that is, 'she, having fashioned
the great (mahatîm) fire-pan;'--'the earthen womb for Agni;'--for this
is indeed Agni's

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

earthen womb;--'Aditi offered it unto her sons, thinking, They shall
bake it!'--for Aditi, indeed, having fashioned it, offered it to the
gods, her sons, to bake it; and in like manner does this one now, after
fashioning it, offer it to the gods to bake it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:5:2:22">6:5:2:22</span></span>22. Now
some make three (fire-pans), saying, 'Three (in number) are these
worlds, and the fire-pans are these worlds;' and also for mutual
expiation, thinking, 'If the one will break, we shall carry (Agni) in
the other, and if the other (breaks), then in the other (or third).' Let
him not do so; for that first bottom part is this world; and that first
(lower) side-part is the air; and the upper one is the sky; and that
fourth, the prayer, doubtless is the quarters; and just as much as these
worlds and the quarters are, so much is this whole (universe). But were
he to add anything thereto, he would make it to be redundant, and
whatever redundant (act) is done in the sacrifice is left over for the
Sacrificer's spiteful rival. And as to the expiation in case of the
(fire-pan being) broken, that (will be told) in a subsequent
chapter <span id="fr_471"></span>[1](#fn_469.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_465"></span>[235:1](sbe4142.htm#fr_467.md) Vish*n*u is
identical with Agni, inasmuch as both are the sacrifice.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[235:2](sbe4142.htm#fr_468.md) That is to say, if
the pan, thus fashioned, is not quite of the exact measure, the formula
is supposed to set this right.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[236:1](sbe4142.htm#fr_469.md) Yasmin kâle
dhanurvedânusâre*n*a dharmata*h* kshatriyâ yudhyante tasmin kâle
pa*ñk*aprâde*s*eshur âsît, adhunâ tv iyam aniyataparimâ*n*â vartante,
Sây.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[236:2](sbe4142.htm#fr_470.md) Viz. by means of
the mountains, according to Sâya*n*a.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[238:1](sbe4142.htm#fr_471.md) [VI, 6, 4,
8](sbe4148.htm#6:6:4:8.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 5, 3. Third Brâhma*n*a](sbe4143.md)
