[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index.md) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4164.md) 
[Next](sbe4166.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1">7:5:1</span></span>

### FIFTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:1">7:5:1:1</span></span>1. He
then puts down a (living) tortoise;--the tortoise means life-sap: it is
life-sap (blood) he thus bestows on (Agni). This tortoise is that
life-sap of these worlds which flowed away from them when plunged into
the waters <span id="fr_723"></span>[1](#fn_720): that (life-sap.md) he now
bestows on (Agni). As far as the life-sap extends, so far the body
extends: that (tortoise) thus is these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:2">7:5:1:2</span></span>2. That
lower shell of it is this (terrestrial) world; it is, as it were, fixed;
for fixed, as it were, is this (earth-)world. And that upper shell of it
is yonder sky; it has its ends, as it were, bent down; for yonder sky
has its ends, as it were, bent down. And what is between (the shells) is
the air;--that (tortoise) thus is these worlds: it is these worlds he
thus lays down (to form part of the altar).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:3">7:5:1:3</span></span>3. He
anoints it with sour curds, honey, and ghee,--sour curds doubtless are a
form of this (earth-)world,

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

ghee of the air, and honey of yonder sky: he thus supplies it (the
tortoise) with its own form. Or, sour curds are the life-sap of this
(earth-)world, ghee that of the air, and honey that of yonder sky: he
thus supplies it with its own life-sap.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:4">7:5:1:4</span></span>4. \[He
anoints it, with Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 27-29; *Ri*k S. I, 90, 6-8\] 'Honey the
winds pour forth for the righteous, honey the rivers; full of honey may
the plants be for us!--Honey by night and morn, rich in honey may the
region of the earth be for us, honey the father Heaven!--rich in honey
may the tree be for us, rich in honey the sun, full of honey the kine!'
To whatever deity a Rik-verse, and to whatever (deity) a Ya*g*us formula
applies, that very deity the verse is, and that very deity the
sacrificial formula is <span id="fr_724"></span>[1](#fn_721.md). This
triplet then is honey (madhu); and honey being life-sap, it is life-sap
he thus puts into him (Agni). With three Gâyatrî verses (he performs):
the significance of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:5">7:5:1:5</span></span>5. And as
to its being called 'kûrma' (tortoise);Pra*g*âpati, having assumed that
form, created living beings. Now what he created, he made; and inasmuch
as he made (kar), he is (called) 'kûrma;' and 'kûrma' being (the same
as) 'ka*s*yapa' (a tortoise), therefore all creatures are said to be
descended from Ka*s*yapa.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:6">7:5:1:6</span></span>6. Now
this tortoise is the same as yonder sun: it is yonder sun he thus lays
down (on the altar). He lays it down in front with the head towards the
back (west): he thus places yonder sun in the east

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

looking thitherwards (or moving westward); and hence yonder sun is
placed in the east looking thitherwards. On the right (south) of the
Ashâ*dh*â (he places it), for the tortoise (kûrma, masc.) is a male, and
the Ashâ*dh*â a female, and the male lies on the right side of the
female;--at a cubit's distance <span id="fr_725"></span>[1](#fn_722.md),
for at a cubit's distance the male lies by the female. That Ashâ*dh*â is
the consecrated queen (mahishî) of all the bricks, hence being on the
right (south) side of her, it (the tortoise) is on the right side of all
the bricks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:7">7:5:1:7</span></span>7. And,
again, why he puts down a tortoise;--the tortoise (kûrma) is the breath,
for the breath makes (kar) all these creatures: it is breath he thus
puts into him (Agni). He puts it down in front looking towards the back:
he thus puts in the breath in front tending towards the back; whence the
breath is taken in from the front backwards. \[He puts it down so as to
be\] turned towards the (gold) man: he thus puts breath into the
Sacrificer. South of the Ashâ*dh*â (he puts it), for the tortoise is
breath, and the Ashâ*dh*â speech; and the breath (prâ*n*a, masc.) is the
male, the mate, of speech (vâ*k*, fem.).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:8">7:5:1:8</span></span>8. \[He
sets it down, with Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 30-32\] Seat thee in the depth of the
waters for that indeed is the deepest (place) of the (heavenly) waters
where yonder (sun) burns;--'lest the sun, lest Agni Vai*s*vânara should
scorch thee!' that is, lest the Sun, lest Agni Vai*s*vânara injure
thee;--'Overlook the creatures with unbroken wings,' that is, overlook
all these uninjured, unharmed creatures, that is, these bricks;--'may

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

heaven's rain favour thee!' this he says in order that the rain of
heaven may favour him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:9">7:5:1:9</span></span>9. He
then makes it move <span id="fr_726"></span>[1](#fn_723.md), with, 'Over
the heaven-reaching three oceans he crept,' the three heaven-reaching
oceans doubtless are these worlds, and over them he crept in the shape
of a tortoise;--'the lord of waters, the bull of the bricks,' for he
(the tortoise) indeed is the lord of waters, and the bull of the
bricks;--'induing the covering of him, the well-made, in the world,' the
covering (purîsha) means the cattle: thus, entering the (form of the)
cattle of the well-made (Agni) in the world;--'go thither whither the
former have passed away!' that is, go thither whither by this
performance former (tortoises) went.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:10">7:5:1:10</span></span>10.
'The mighty sky and the earth,' that is, the great sky and the
earth;--'shall mix (prepare) this our sacrifice!' that is, shall favour
this sacrifice;--'they shall fill us with nourishments!' that is, they
shall nourish us with nourishments! With the last (verse) relating to
heaven and earth he puts it down, for the tortoise represents heaven and
earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:11">7:5:1:11</span></span>11.
With three (formulas) he puts it on (the altar);--three are these
worlds, and threefold is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, by so much he thus puts it on. With three (formulas) he anoints
it; that makes six: the significance of this (number) has been
explained. There are avakâ-plants <span id="fr_727"></span>[2](#fn_724.md)
below and avakâ-plants above (the

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

tortoise),--the avakâ-plant means water: he thus places it in the midst
of water. Having 'settled' it, he pronounces the Sûdadohas upon it: the
significance of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:12">7:5:1:12</span></span>12. He
then puts down a mortar and pestle. Vish*n*u desired, 'May I be an eater
of food!' He saw these two bricks, the mortar and pestle. He placed them
on (the altar); and by placing them thereon, he became an eater of food.
In like manner, when the Sacrificer now places a mortar and pestle
thereon, (he does so) thinking, 'I want to be an eater of food by the
same means (rûpa), by performing the same rite by which Vish*n*u became
an eater of food.' Now the mortar and pestle mean all (kinds of) food;
for by the mortar and pestle food is prepared, and by means of them it
is eaten.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:13">7:5:1:13</span></span>13. He
puts them down at the distance of the two reta*h*si*k* <span
id="fr_728"></span>[1](#fn_725.md),--the reta*h*si*k* being the ribs, and
the ribs being the middle: he thus puts food into the middle of him
(Agni);--on the north (upper) side (of the central brick): he thus puts
the food upon him;--at the distance of a cubit, for from a cubit's
distance food is (taken by the hand and) eaten.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:14">7:5:1:14</span></span>14.
They measure a span, for Vish*n*u, when an embryo, was a span long; and
these (mortar and pestle) being food, he thus puts food into him
(Agni-Vish*n*u) proportionate to his body. And indeed the food which is
proportionate to the body satisfies,

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

and does no harm; but that which is excessive does harm; and that which
is too little does not satisfy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:15">7:5:1:15</span></span>15.
They are made of Udumbara wood;--the Udumbara (ficus glomerata) being
strength, life-sap, he thus puts strength, life-sap into him. And,
again, the Udumbara being all the trees, by putting on those two, he
puts all trees on (the altar). At the distance of the two reta*h*si*k*
(bricks, he places the mortar and pestle),--the 'seed-shedders' being
these two (worlds <span id="fr_729"></span>[1](#fn_726).md), he thus puts
the trees in these two (worlds), and hence there are trees in these two
(worlds). It (the mortar) is four-cornered,--there being four quarters,
he thus places trees in all the quarters; whence there are trees in all
the quarters. It is contracted in the middle, to give it the form of a
(real) mortar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:16">7:5:1:16</span></span>16.
And, again, why he places a mortar and pestle thereon. From Pra*g*âpati,
when relaxed, the breath wanted to go out from within. He kept it back
by means of food: hence the breath is kept back by food, for he who eats
food, breathes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:17">7:5:1:17</span></span>17. The
breath being kept back, the food wanted to go out of him. He kept it
back by means of the breath: hence food is kept back by the breath, for
he who breathes, eats food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:18">7:5:1:18</span></span>18.
Those two being kept back, strength wanted to go out of him. He kept it
back by those two: hence strength is kept back by those two; for he who
eats food, breathes; and to him it gives strength.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:19">7:5:1:19</span></span>19.
Strength being kept back, those two wanted

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

to go out of him. He kept them back by means of strength: hence those
two are kept back by strength; for he to whom one gives strength,
breathes and eats food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:20">7:5:1:20</span></span>20.
Those (energies) thus were kept back by one another. Having kept them
back by one another, he (Pra*g*âpati) caused them to enter his own self;
and that food having entered, all the gods entered along with it; for
everything here lives on food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:21">7:5:1:21</span></span>21. It
is thereto that this verse applies,--'Then, indeed, he became that
breath,'--for that breath he then indeed became;--'having become the
great Pra*g*âpati,'--for great he indeed then became, when those gods
entered him;--'having obtained the benefits, the beneficial,'--the
benefits doubtless are the vital airs (breaths), and the beneficial are
the food: thus, having obtained all that;--'when he breathed the breaths
in the stronghold;'--the stronghold doubtless is the self (body), and
inasmuch as he breathed the breaths, the gods are the breaths; and
inasmuch as Pra*g*âpati breathed, the breath also is Pra*g*âpati; and
verily he who is that breath, he is that Gâyatrî;--and as to that food,
that is Vish*n*u, the deity; and as to that strength, that is the
Udumbara (tree).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:22">7:5:1:22</span></span>22. He
said, 'Verily this one has lifted me from out of all evil;' and because
he said he has lifted me out (udabhârshît),' hence (the name)
'udumbhara;'--'udumbhara' doubtless being what is mystically called
Udumbara, for the gods love the mystic. 'Wide space (uru) shall it make
(karat) for me!' he said, hence 'urukara;' 'urukara' doubtless being
what is mystically called 'ulûkhala' (the mortar); for the gods love the
mystic. Now that mortar is

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

the birth-place of all breaths; and the birth-place of the breaths being
the head-

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:23">7:5:1:23</span></span>23. It
(the mortar) is of the measure of a span, for the head is, as it were,
of the measure of a span;--four-cornered, for the head is, as it were,
four-cornered;--contracted in the middle, for the head is, as it were,
contracted in the middle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:24">7:5:1:24</span></span>24. Now
when the gods restored him (Pra*g*âpati-Agni), they put all that inside
him--breath, food, strength; and in like manner this (Sacrificer) now
puts that into him. At the distance of the two reta*h*si*k* (he places
it),--the reta*h*si*k* being the ribs, and the ribs the middle, it is
thus in the middle of (or, inside) him that he puts all that.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:25">7:5:1:25</span></span>25.
\[He sets them down <span id="fr_730"></span>[1](#fn_727.md), with Vâ*g*.
S. XIII, 33; *Ri*k S. I, 22, 191 'See ye the deeds of Vish*n*u'--deed
doubtless means power: thus, see ye the powers of Vish*n*u;--'whereby he
beheld the sacred ordinances,'--ordinance means food: thus, whereby he
did behold the food;--'Indra's allied friend,' for he is indeed Indra's
allied friend. With a (verse) relating to two deities he sets them down,
for the mortar and pestle are two. Once he 'settles' them: he thereby
makes them one and the same; for one and the same is that food. Having
'settled' it, he pronounces the Sûdadohas on it: the significance of
this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:26">7:5:1:26</span></span>26. He
then places the fire-pan thereon,--the fire-pan is a womb: a womb
(birth-place) he thus gives to him (Agni). He places it on the
mortar,--the mortar is the air, and everything that is above this

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

earth is air; and the air is the middle: he thus places the womb in the
middle; whence the womb of all beings, even of trees <span
id="fr_731"></span>[1](#fn_728.md), is in the middle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:27">7:5:1:27</span></span>27.
And, again, why he places the fire-pan thereon;--that same Pra*g*âpati
who became disjointed doubtless is this same fire-pan, for the fire-pan
is these worlds, and Pra*g*âpati is these worlds. He places it on the
mortar: he thereby establishes him (Pra*g*âpati) in all that--breath,
food, strength; and thus he places him se as not to be separated from
all that.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:28">7:5:1:28</span></span>28.
Thereupon, having pounded the remainder (of the clay), and having put
the fire-pan in its place, he throws (the pounded clay) in front of the
fire-pan; for this is the place of that (remainder <span
id="fr_732"></span>[2](#fn_729)), and thus that (remainder.md) is not
separated therefrom <span id="fr_733"></span>[3](#fn_730.md).

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:29">7:5:1:29</span></span>29.
Here now they say, 'How does that (remainder) of his come to be put on
as cooked, as baked?'--In that it is prepared with a sacrificial
formula; and, moreover, whatever comes in contact with Agni Vai*s*vânara
even thereby comes to be put on as something cooked, as baked.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:30">7:5:1:30</span></span>30.
\[He sets the fire-pan down, with Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 34-35\] 'Steady thou
art, supporting,' the meaning of this has been explained <span
id="fr_734"></span>[1](#fn_731.md);--'from here he was at first born, from
these wombs, the knower of beings;' for from these wombs the knower of
beings (Agni) was indeed born at first;--'by the Gâyatrî, the
Trish*t*ubh, and the Anush*t*ubh, may he, the knowing, bear the offering
to the gods!'--by means of these metres he, the knowing, indeed bears
the offering to the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:31">7:5:1:31</span></span>31.
'For sap, for wealth, do thou rest, for might in glory, for strength,
for offspring!' that is, for all that do thou rest!--'all-ruling thou
art, self-ruling thou art!' for both all-ruling and self-ruling he
(Agni) indeed is;--'may the two Sârasvata wells cheer thee!' Sarasvat
(m.) is the Mind, and Sarasvatî (f.) Speech,--these two are the
Sârasvata wells: thus, may these two cheer thee! With two (formulas) he
sets it down: the significance of this has been explained; and,
moreover, twofold is that form, (consisting as it does of) clay and
water. Having 'settled' it, he pronounces the Sûdadohas on it: the
significance of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:32">7:5:1:32</span></span>32. He
then offers upon it;--now seed was poured into it before, (in the shape
of) sand <span id="fr_735"></span>[2](#fn_732.md); that he now

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

fashions <span id="fr_736"></span>[1](#fn_733.md), whence the seed injected
into the womb is fashioned. He offers with the dipping-spoon, with
'Hail!' with two Gâyatrî verses relating to Agni: the significance of
this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:33">7:5:1:33</span></span>33.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 36-37; *Ri*k S. VI, 16, 43 VIII, 75,1\] 'O Agni,
harness those good steeds of thine: they draw equal to thy mettle!--Like
a chariot-fighter, harness thou the steeds, the best callers of the
gods, O Agni! take thy seat as the old Hot*ri*!' with two (verses)
containing the (verb) 'yu*g*' (to harness, fasten),--he thus settles
that seed injected into the womb, whence the seed settled in the womb
does not escape.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:34">7:5:1:34</span></span>34. If
(the fire in the pan) has been carried about for a year <span
id="fr_737"></span>[2](#fn_734.md), in that case he should now offer; for
(the fire) which has been carried about for a year is everything, and
that also whereon he offers is everything. But if it has not been
carried about for a year, let him only stand by (worshipping) it; for
(the fire) which has not been carried about for a year is not
everything; and that by which he stands (worshipping) is not everything.
Let him nevertheless offer thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:35">7:5:1:35</span></span>35. Now
that Agni is an animal, and even now he is (being) made up whole and
complete: the naturally-perforated (brick) is his lower vital air, the

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

dviya*g*us the hip, the two reta*h*si*k* the ribs, the vi*s*va*g*yotis
the breast-bone, the two seasonal ones the back, the ashâ*dh*â the neck,
the tortoise the head, and the vital airs in the tortoise are those
vital airs in the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:36">7:5:1:36</span></span>36. Now
that (Agni) he builds upwards from here (as flying) towards the east,
and that Agni being yonder sun, he thereby places yonder sun upwards
from here in the east; whence yonder sun is placed upwards from here in
the east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:37">7:5:1:37</span></span>37. He
then turns him towards the right <span
id="fr_738"></span>[1](#fn_735.md),--he thereby turns yonder sun towards
the right, whence yonder sun moves round these worlds (from left) to
right.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:5:1:38">7:5:1:38</span></span>38. The
fire-pan is the belly, the mortar the womb;--the fire-pan is above, and
the mortar below; for the belly is above, and the womb below. The pestle
is the *s*i*s*na; it is round-like, for the *s*i*s*na is round-like. He
places it to the right (south of the mortar), for the male lies on the
right side of the female. And what food there is for the consecrated
animal, that is the dûrvâ-brick. The left (north) side of that (Agni or
altar) is more raised,--that Agni is an animal, and hence the left side
of the belly of a well-filled beast is more raised (than the right
side).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_720"></span>[389:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_723.md) See [VI, 1, 1,
12](sbe4128.htm#6:1:1:12.md).

<span id="fn_721"></span>[390:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_724.md) That is to say,
each Vedic text is identical with the deity to which it is addressed.
Cf. [VI, 5, 1, 2](sbe4141.htm#6:5:1:2.md).

<span id="fn_722"></span>[391:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_725.md) While the bricks
generally measure a pâda or foot square, the cubit measures about two
feet.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[392:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_726.md) He sets the
tortoise down with three verses; and in muttering the second verse he
makes it move while he still holds it in his hand.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[392:2](sbe4165.htm#fr_727.md) Blyxa octandra, a
grassy plant growing in marshy land ('lotus-flower,' Weber, Ind. Stud.
XIII, p. 250).

<span id="fn_725"></span>[393:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_728.md) The mortar and
pestle are to be placed as far north of the central
(naturally-perforated) brick, as the two reta*h*si*k* lie in front
(towards the east) of it. This distance is ascertained by means of a
cord stretched across the bricks hitherto laid down (from the
Svayamât*rinn*â to the Ashâ*dh*â), and knots made in the cord over the
centre of the respective bricks.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[394:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_729.md) I do not see what
else could here be referred to than the heaven and the earth (cf. [VII,
4, 2, 22](sbe4164.htm#7:4:2:22).md), though in that case one might rather
expect 'imau (lokau)' instead of 'ime.' Possibly, however, the earth and
atmosphere may be intended.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[396:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_730.md) The mortar,
according to the commentaries to Katy., is partly dug into the ground,
with the open part upwards; the pestle being then placed to the right
(south) of it.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[397:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_731.md) Viz., according to
Sâya*n*a, because they spring from the germ in the centre of the fruit.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[397:2](sbe4165.htm#fr_732.md) ? Or, of it (the
fire-pan). There is some uncertainty regarding this item of the
ceremonial. Kâtyâyana's rule (XVII, 5, 4)--'Having placed the Ukhâ (pan)
on the mortar, pounded the remainder of clay, and thrown it down in
front, with the text "Dhruvâ asi," (of) the Ukhâ'--is evidently
intentionally vague. Mahîdhara (on Vâ*g*. S. XIII, 34) gives the
following interpretation of it,--'Having first silently placed the Ukhâ
on the mortar, then pounded the remaining clay, and thrown it down on
the ground in front of the Ukhâ, let him place the Ukhâ thereon with two
formulas.' According to this, the Ukhâ would only temporarily be placed
on the mortar, its proper and permanent place (loka) being on the
powdered clay in front (to the east) of the mortar. The text of the
Brâhma*n*a, as it stands, however, cannot possibly be construed so as to
accord with Mahîdhara's interpretation. This would require some such
reading as,--athopa*s*ayâm pish*t*vâ, purastâd ukhâyâ upanivapya
lokabhâ*g*am ukhâm karoti. See, however, paragraph
[38](sbe4165.htm#7:5:1:38.md) below, which evidently applies to the
permanent position of the pan.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[397:3](sbe4165.htm#fr_733.md) For the genitive
'asya' (viz. lokasya) with 'antarita'--instead <span id="page_398">p.
398</span> of the more usual ablative--see [VI, 2, 2,
38](sbe4132.htm#6:2:2:38.md), 'prâ*n*asya tad antariyât.'

<span id="fn_731"></span>[398:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_734.md) [VII. 4, 2,
5](sbe4164.htm#7:4:2:5.md).

<span id="fn_732"></span>[398:2](sbe4165.htm#fr_735.md) See [VII, 1, 1,
41](sbe4155.htm#7:1:1:41.md).

<span id="fn_733"></span>[399:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_736.md) The verb
'abhi-k*ri*' is here taken in the sense of 'vi-k*ri*' (he gives form to
it); and in that sense I would now take it at II, 3; I, 4, 'he fashions
(gives human shape to) that embryo,' instead of 'he benefits that
embryo.' The St. Petersburg dictionary proposes the meaning, 'to do
something with reference to (or, for the benefit of).' The proper German
meaning would rather seem to be 'bearbeiten.' The preposition 'abhi' is
probably used here with reference to the 'abhi-*g*uhoti.'

<span id="fn_734"></span>[399:2](sbe4165.htm#fr_737.md) See [p.
269](sbe4149.htm#page_269), note [3](sbe4149.htm#fn_510.md).

<span id="fn_735"></span>[400:1](sbe4165.htm#fr_738.md) ? Viz. by filling
up the vacant spaces of the altar from left to right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII, 5, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4166.md)
