[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4151) 
[Next](sbe4153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4">6:7:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:1">6:7:4:1</span></span>1. He
then stands by him worshipping with the Vâtsapra rite <span
id="fr_538"></span>[1](#fn_536), For Pra*g*âpati, having by means of the
Vish*n*u-strides produced creatures, created vital power for them by
means of the Vâtsapra rite; and in like manner the Sacrificer, having,
by means of the Vish*n*u-strides, produced creatures (or, subjects),
creates vital power for them by means of the Vâtsapra rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:2">6:7:4:2</span></span>2. Now
the Vâtsapra rite, doubtless, is he, the golden-handed <span
id="fr_539"></span>[2](#fn_537) (Agni);--hence whomsoever that is born
one may wish to obtain the full (measure of) life, let him touch that
one with the Vâtsapra rite, and he thereby creates vital power for that
newborn one; and accordingly that one obtains the full (measure of)
life. And whomsoever one may wish to be vigorous, let him first address
that one with the Vik*ri*ti (fashioning) formula <span
id="fr_540"></span>[3](#fn_538), and that one accordingly becomes
vigorous.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:3">6:7:4:3</span></span>3.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XII, 18-20\] 'From the sky Agni was first born;'--the sky,
doubtless, is the breath, and from the breath he (Agni) was indeed first
born,--'from us the second time, the knower of beings,'--inasmuch as he,
man-like, on that occasion generated him a second time <span
id="fr_541"></span>[4](#fn_539);--'the

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

third time in the waters,'--inasmuch as he there did generate him a
third time from the waters;--'he, the manly-minded, (kindling him) the
imperishable,'--the manly-minded, doubtless, is Pra*g*âpati; and the
imperishable, Agni <span id="fr_542"></span>[1](#fn_540);--'kindling him
the mindful praises (*g*ar) him,'--for he who kindles him generates him,
mindful.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:4">6:7:4:4</span></span>4. 'We
know, O Agni, thy threefold three,'--Agni, Vâyu (wind), Âditya (sun),
these are his three in three forms;--'We know thy manifold scattered
sites,'--inasmuch as he (Agni) is here distributed [many
ways](errata.htm#13);--'we know thy highest name which is in
secret,'--'the youngest,' that indeed is his highest name in
secret;--'we know that source whence thou art come;'--the source,
doubtless, is the (heavenly) waters, for from the waters he first came.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:5">6:7:4:5</span></span>5. 'In
the sea the manly-minded (kindled) thee, in the waters,'--the
manly-minded is Pra*g*âpati: thus, 'In the waters Pra*g*âpati (kindled)
thee;'--'the man-watcher hath kindled thee, O Agni, in the udder of the
sky,'--the man-watcher, doubtless, is Pra*g*âpati, and the udder of the
sky is the waters ;--'thee, whilst standing in the third region,'--the
third region, doubtless, is the sky;--'the buffaloes made (thee) grow in
the lap of the waters ;'--the buffaloes, doubtless, are

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

the vital airs: thus, 'the vital airs made thee grow in the sky.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:6">6:7:4:6</span></span>6. These
(three verses <span id="fr_543"></span>[1](#fn_541)) have one and the
same explanation regarding him (Agni): they are Trish*t*ubh verses
relating to Agni. Inasmuch as they relate to Agni, they are Agni; and
inasmuch as they are Trish*t*ubhs, and eleven (syllables), they are
Indra;--but Agni consists of Indra and Agni: as great as Agni is, as
great as is his measure, with so much he thus stands worshipping by him.
And Indra and Agni are all the gods, and Agni includes (or belongs to)
all the deities: as great as Agni is, as

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

great as is his measure, with so much he thus stands worshipping by him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:7">6:7:4:7</span></span>7. And,
again, why the Vish*n*u-strides and the Vâtsapra rite are
(performed);--by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati created this world,
and by the Vâtsapra the fire (Agni); by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati
created the air, and by the Vâtsapra the wind (Vâyu); by the
Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati created the sky, and by the Vâtsapra the
sun (Âditya); by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati created the regions,
and by the Vâtsapra the moon; by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati
created that which has been, and by the Vâtsapra that which shall be; by
the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati created possession (wealth), and by the
Vâtsapra hope; by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati created the day, and
by the Vâtsapra the night; by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati created
the former (bright) fortnights, and by the Vâtsapra the latter (dark)
fortnights; by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati created the half-months,
and by the Vâtsapra the months; by the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati
created the seasons, and by the Vâtsapra the year: thus the reason why
the Vish*n*u-strides and Vâtsapra are (performed) is that he thereby
even now creates everything.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:8">6:7:4:8</span></span>8. And,
again, why the Vish*n*u-strides and the Vâtsapra rite are (performed).
By the Vish*n*u-strides Pra*g*âpati drove up to heaven. He saw that
unyoking-place, the Vâtsapra, and unyoked thereat to prevent chafing;
for when the yoked (beast) is not unloosed, it is chafed. In like manner
the Sacrificer drives up to heaven by the Vish*n*u-strides; and unyokes
by means of the Vâtsapra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:9">6:7:4:9</span></span>9. Having
stridden the Vish*n*u-strides, he then

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

forthwith stands by the fire worshipping it with the Vâtsapra, just as
one who has journeyed would forthwith unyoke. Men (proceed) after the
manner of the gods: hence even now, when a troop of men have journeyed
they forthwith unyoke.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:10">6:7:4:10</span></span>10.
Now, the Vish*n*u-strides indeed are the day and the night, and the
Vâtsapra is the day and the night: he thus journeys for a day and a
night, and takes rest for a day and a night: and hence even now when a
troop of men have journeyed for a day and a night they take rest for a
day and a night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:11">6:7:4:11</span></span>11.
Only for one half of the year he strides the Vish*n*u-strides, and for
one half he worships the fire with the Vâtsapra; for the world of heaven
is in the midst of the year: thus were he to stride for less than half
(a year), he would not reach that world of heaven; and were he to do so
for more than half (a year), he would pass beyond that world of heaven
and lose it; but when he strides for one half, and worships the fire for
one half, he unyokes forthwith after reaching the world of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:12">6:7:4:12</span></span>12. He
proceeds with these two alternately <span
id="fr_544"></span>[1](#fn_542), even as one would accomplish a long way
by (repeatedly) unyoking. Both before and after (the Dîkshâ), he
combines both, the Vish*n*u-strides and the Vâtsapra; for the
Vish*n*u-strides are the day, and the Vâtsapra the night; and
Pra*g*âpati, both when he was about to generate and when he had
generated this universe, enclosed it on both sides by day and night: in
like

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

manner the Sacrificer now, both when he is about to generate and when he
has generated this universe, encloses it on both sides by day and night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:13">6:7:4:13</span></span>13. As
to this they say, 'If the Vish*n*u-strides are the day, and the Vâtsapra
the night, and both of them are (performed) during the day, not during
the night, how then are they both performed for (or by) him also during
the night?' Well, on that (first) occasion, when he is being initiated,
he, at the outset, combines both (performances) in the afternoon; for
the afternoon is the same thing as the night. Then throwing them thus
together, he at the end combines them both in the forenoon; for the
forenoon is the same thing as the day; and in this way they are both
performed during the day, and both during the night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:14">6:7:4:14</span></span>14. Now
early on the day on which he may intend to combine them, when the sun
has risen, he first throws out the ashes (from the pan); having thrown
out the ashes, he releases his speech; having released his speech, he
puts on a kindling-stick; having put on a kindling-stick, he takes the
ashes down to (and throws them into) the water. In the same way as he
takes them down he returns after taking some of the ashes; and having
thrown it into the pan he stands reverentially by the fire. He then
performs two expiations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:4:15">6:7:4:15</span></span>15. And
if the day should be one for the Vish*n*u-strides, let him, after
striding the Vish*n*u-strides, worship the fire with the Vâtsapra; and
if it be one for the Vâtsapra, let him, after worshipping with the
Vâtsapra, and striding the Vish*n*u-strides, finally perform the
Vâtsapra. Let him not conclude by performing the Vish*n*u-strides, for
that would be as if

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

after going for a drive he were not to unyoke; but when he concludes by
performing the Vâtsapra--the Vâtsapra being a halting-place--(it is) as
if he made a halt and unloosed (the team): let him therefore conclude by
performing the Vâtsapra.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_536"></span>[283:1](sbe4152.htm#fr_538) That is, the
recitation of Vâ*g*. S. XII, 18-28 or 29 (*Ri*k S. X, 45), ascribed to
the poet Vatsaprî Bhâlandana. The Brâhma*n*a, however, comments only on
the first three verses, and perhaps these alone were used for the
purpose at the time when the Brâhma*n*a was composed.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[283:2](sbe4152.htm#fr_539) This is a somewhat
doubtful meaning of 'dâkshâya*n*a-hasta.' The synonyms (if correct),
hira*n*yapâ*n*i and hira*n*yahasta, always refer to Savit*ri*, the sun.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[283:3](sbe4152.htm#fr_540) See [VI, 7, 2,
5](sbe4150.htm#6:7:2:5)-[6](sbe4150.htm#6:7:2:6).

<span id="fn_539"></span>[283:4](sbe4152.htm#fr_541) ? Or, as a second;
see above, [VI, 1, 1, 11](sbe4128.htm#6:1:1:11).

<span id="fn_540"></span>[284:1](sbe4152.htm#fr_542) The construction of
the text here favoured by the author is very doubtful. It has probably
to be construed,--'the third time (he, Agni, was born) in the waters,
he, the manly-minded (or, friendly to men). Kindling him, the
imperishable (Agni), the heedful (? or pious) one praises him,'--or
perhaps, 'While kindling him, the considerate one praises him
unceasingly.' A point which favours the author's construction is that,
in verse 3, 'n*ri*ma*n*aas' certainly refers not to Agni, but to him who
generated him.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[285:1](sbe4152.htm#fr_543) The remaining
verses (XII, 21-29) are as follows:--

1\. Agni roared like the thundering sky, &c. (see VI, 7, 3, 2).

2\. The upraiser of glories, the upholder of riches, the inspirer of
thoughts, the guardian of Soma; the excellent son of power, shines forth
as king in the waters, kindled before the dawns.

3\. A beacon unto all that is, the child of the world filled the two
spheres even when born; even the hard rock he broke going thither when
the five peoples worshipped Agni.

4\. An eager cleanser, a wise messenger, the immortal Agni has been set
up among the mortals; flickering (?) he sends forth the red smoke,
striving with his bright flame to reach the sky.

5\. Looking like a golden disk, &c. (see [VI, 7, 2](sbe4150.htm#6:7:2)).

6\. Whoso maketh for thee this day a ghee-baked cake, O divine Agni of
auspicious flame, lead him onwards to bliss, unto god-allotted glory, O
youngest!

7\. Make him share in the songs of triumph, make him share in every hymn
that is sung! Dear be he unto Sûrya, dear unto Agni; let him prevail
with the living one and with them that are to be born!

8\. They that worship thee day by day, O Agni, win all desirable boons;
ardently wishing for wealth, they have opened with thee the stable
filled with cows!

9\. Agni Vai*s*vânara has been celebrated by the *Ri*shis, the guardian
of Soma, most gracious unto men: let us invoke heaven and earth who are
free from hatred! grant us wealth, ye gods, with abundance of men!

<span id="fn_542"></span>[287:1](sbe4152.htm#fr_544) That is, whilst on
the first day of the Dîkshâ, as well as on the day after its completion,
both the Vish*n*u-strides and the Vâtsapra are performed, during the
intermediate period of one year they are performed on alternate
days,--the Vish*n*u-strides on even, and the Vâtsapra on uneven days.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 8, 1. Eighth Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4153)
