[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4155) 
[Next](sbe4157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2">7:1:2</span></span>

### SECOND BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:1">7:1:2:1</span></span>1.
Pra*g*âpati produced creatures. Having produced creatures, and run the
whole race, he became relaxed <span id="fr_595"></span>[1](#fn_593).
From him, when relaxed, the vital air went out from within: then his
vigour went out of him. That having gone out, he fell down. From him,
thus fallen, food flowed forth: it was from that eye on which he lay
that his food flowed. And, verily, there teas then no firm foundation
whatever here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:2">7:1:2:2</span></span>2. The
gods spake, 'Verily, there is no other foundation than this: let us
restore even him, our father Pra*g*âpati; he shall be our foundation.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:3">7:1:2:3</span></span>3. They
said unto Agni, 'Verily, there is no foundation other than this: in thee
we will restore this our father Pra*g*âpati; he shall be our
foundation.'--'What will then be my reward?' said he.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:4">7:1:2:4</span></span>4. They
spake, 'This Pra*g*âpati is food: with thee for our mouth we will eat
that food, and he (Pra*g*âpati) shall be the food of us, having thee for
our month.' He said, 'So be it!' Therefore the gods eat food with Agni
as their mouth; for to whatsoever deity men offer, it is into Agni that
they offer, since it is with Agni for their mouth that the gods thus
took in the food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:5">7:1:2:5</span></span>5. Now
the vital air which went out from within him is no other than the wind
that blows yonder; and the vigour which went out of him is yonder sun;
and the food which flowed from him is all the food which there is within
the year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:6">7:1:2:6</span></span>6. The
gods heated him in the fire; and when the

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

fire rose over him thus heated, that same vital air which had gone out
from within him came back to him, and they put it into him; and the
vigour which had gone out of him they put into him; and the food which
had flowed from him they put into him. Having made him up entire and
complete, they raised him (so as to stand) upright; and inasmuch as they
thus raised him upright he is these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:7">7:1:2:7</span></span>7. This
(terrestrial) world truly is his foundation; and what fire there is in
this world that is his (Pra*g*âpati's) downward vital air. And the air
is his body, and what wind there is in the air, that is that vital air
of his in the body. And the sky is his head; the sun and the moon are
his eyes. The eye on which he lay is the moon: whence that one is much
closed up, for the food flowed therefrom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:8">7:1:2:8</span></span>8. Now
that same foundation which the gods thus restored is the foundation here
even to this day, and will be so even hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:9">7:1:2:9</span></span>9. And
the Pra*g*âpati who became relaxed is this same Agni who is now being
built up. And when that fire-pan lies there empty before being heated,
it is just like Pra*g*âpati, as he lay there with the vital air and the
vigour gone out of him, and the food having flowed out.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:10">7:1:2:10</span></span>10. He
heats it on the fire, even as the gods then heated him (Pra*g*âpati).
And when the fire rises over it thus heated, then that same vital air
which went out from within him comes back to him, and he puts it into
him. And when, putting on the gold plate, he wears it, he puts into him
that very vigour which had gone out of him. And when he puts on
kindling-sticks, he puts into him that very food which had flowed from
him.

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:11">7:1:2:11</span></span>11. He
puts them on in the evening and morning, for the food both of the day
and the night was flowing out. These same (ceremonies) should be
(performed) during a whole year, for that Pra*g*âpati whence those
(substances) went out is the year: into that whole (Pra*g*âpati) he thus
puts all that (which belongs to him). And in whatever part of this
(year) he should therefore <span id="fr_596"></span>[1](#fn_594) not do
so, into that part of him (Pra*g*âpati) he would not put that (which
belongs therein). 'One must not even be a looker-on at the (building up
of a fire) not carried about for a year,' Vâmakakshâya*n*a was wont to
say, 'lest he should see this our father Pra*g*âpati being torn to
pieces <span id="fr_597"></span>[2](#fn_595).' He restores him so as to
be whole and complete, and raises him to stand upright, even as the gods
then raised him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:12">7:1:2:12</span></span>12.
This (terrestrial) world in truth is his (Pra*g*âpati's) Gârhapatya
(hearth); and what fire there is in this world that to him is the fire
on the Gârhapatya. And what space there is between the Âhavanîya and the
Gârhapatya, that is the air <span id="fr_598"></span>[3](#fn_596); and
that wind in

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

the air is for him the fire on the Âgnîdhrîya. The sky is his Âhavanîya
(hearth), and those two, the sun and the moon, are the fire on the
Âhavanîya. This then is indeed his own self <span
id="fr_599"></span>[1](#fn_597).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:13">7:1:2:13</span></span>13. The
Âhavanîya truly is his head; and the fire which is on the Âhavanîya is
that vital air of his in the head. And as to why it (the Âhavanîya) has
wings and tail, it is because that vital air in the head has wings and
tail <span id="fr_600"></span>[2](#fn_598);--the eye is its head, the
right ear its right wing, the left ear its left wing, the vital air its
central body <span id="fr_601"></span>[3](#fn_599), and the voice is the
tail (and) the foundation (the feet): inasmuch as the vital airs subsist
by eating food with speech (voice) <span
id="fr_602"></span>[4](#fn_600), the voice is the tail, the foundation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:14">7:1:2:14</span></span>14. And
what space there is between the Âhavanîya and Gârhapatya, that is the
body (trunk); and the fire on the Âgnîdhrîya is to him that vital air
inside the body. The Gârhapatya is his foundation; and the fire on the
Gârhapatya is his downward vital air.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:15">7:1:2:15</span></span>15. Now
some build it (the Gârhapatya) in three layers, saying, 'There are here
three downward vital airs.' Let him not do so: they who do so do what is
excessive,--one amounting to twenty-one, one amounting to the
Anush*t*ubh, and one amounting to the B*ri*hatî; for this (altar) is of
one single form--a

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

womb. And as to those downward vital airs, they are indeed a bringing
forth, for even the urine and faeces he voids are 'brought forth.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:16">7:1:2:16</span></span>16. Now
then the (mystic) correspondence,--twenty-one bricks, nine
formulas <span id="fr_603"></span>[1](#fn_601), that makes thirty;--and
the 'settling' and Sûdadohas verse, that makes thirty-two,--the
anush*t*ubh verse consists of thirty-two syllables: this is an
anush*t*ubh <span id="fr_604"></span>[2](#fn_602).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:17">7:1:2:17</span></span>17.
And, again, there are twenty-one enclosing-stones; the formula the
twenty-second; the formula for the sweeping, the saline earth and its
formula, the sand and its formula, the filling (soil) and its formula;
with four (formulas) he pours (the two fires) together; with a fifth he
unties (the pan); then this (Nir*ri*ti) with three <span
id="fr_605"></span>[3](#fn_603),--the anush*t*ubh verse consists of
thirty-two syllables: this then is an anush*t*ubh.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:18">7:1:2:18</span></span>18.
Then there are these two formulas <span id="fr_606"></span>[4](#fn_604),
and they are indeed an anush*t*ubh--the Anush*t*ubh is speech: thus what
twofold form of speech there is, the divine and the human, loud and low,
that is those two.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:19">7:1:2:19</span></span>19. The
Gârhapatya pile thus is those three

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

anush*t*ubh verses. And as to why they make up three anush*t*ubhs in
this (Gârhapatya), it is because all these (three) worlds then come to
be (contained) therein. From it they take one of the two (first)
anush*t*ubhs of thirty-two syllables (to be) the Âhavanîya,--that
Âhavanîya is that sky, that head (of Pra*g*âpati). Then one of the two
(anush*t*ubhs) is left here (to be) this Gârhapatya, this foundation,
this very (terrestrial) world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:20">7:1:2:20</span></span>20. And
as to those two formulas, they are that space between the Âhavanîya and
the Gârhapatya, that air (-world), that body (of Pra*g*âpati). And
because there are two of them (making up one anush*t*ubh), therefore
that space (and hearth) between the Âhavanîya and the Gârhapatya (viz.
the Âgnîdhrîya hearth <span id="fr_607"></span>[1](#fn_605)) is smaller;
and therefore the air-world is the smallest of these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:21">7:1:2:21</span></span>21.
That same Anush*t*ubh, speech, is threefold. That fire, taking the form
of the vital air, goes along with it (speech),--the fire which is on the
Âhavanîya (altar) is the out-breathing, and yonder sun; and the fire
which is on the Âgnîdhrîya is the through-breathing, and the wind which
blows yonder; and the fire which is on the Gârhapatya is the
in-breathing, and what fire there is here in this (earth-) world. And
verily he who knows this makes up for himself the whole Vâ*k* (speech),
the whole vital air, the whole body (of Pra*g*âpati).

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:22">7:1:2:22</span></span>22.
Then that B*ri*hatî (metre),--the two (verses) of thirty-two syllables:
that makes thirty-two; then those two formulas: that makes thirty-four;
Agni the thirty-fifth;--a metre does not vanish by a syllable (too much
or too little), neither by one nor by two <span
id="fr_608"></span>[1](#fn_606);--moreover, that (Agni) consists of two
syllables: that makes thirty-six. The B*ri*hatî consists of thirty-six
syllables,--it is the B*ri*hatî that that (Âhavanîya) pile thus amounts
to; for whatlike the seed which is infused into the womb, suchlike
(offspring) is born therefrom: thus in that he makes up that B*ri*hatî
(metre) in this (Gârhapatya hearth), thereby that (Âhavanîya) fire-altar
amounts to the B*ri*hatî.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:1:2:23">7:1:2:23</span></span>23. As
to this they say, 'As the Gârhapatya is this (terrestrial) world, the
Dhish*n*ya hearths the air, and the Âhavanîya the sky, and the air-world
is not separated from this (earth-) world, why then, after building the
Gârhapatya, does he build the Âhavanîya, and (only) then the
Dhish*n*yas?' Well, at first these two worlds (heaven and earth) were
together; and when they parted asunder, the space which was between
(antar) them became that air (antariksha); for 'îksha <span
id="fr_609"></span>[2](#fn_607)' indeed it was theretofore, and 'Now
this "îksha" has come between (antarâ),' they said, whence 'antariksha'
(air). And as to why, after building the Gârhapatya, he builds the
Âhavanîya, it is because these two worlds were created first. Then,
going back, he throws up the Dhish*n*ya hearths, just to prevent
discontinuity of

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

the sacred work; and thus indeed the middle is completed, after the two
ends have been completed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_593"></span>[312:1](sbe4156.htm#fr_595) Literally, fallen
asunder, i.e. broken to pieces, or disjointed ('opened,' Delbrück, Synt.
F. V, p. 385).

<span id="fn_594"></span>[314:1](sbe4156.htm#fr_596) Or, in whatever
part of this (year) from henceforward he should not do so.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[314:2](sbe4156.htm#fr_597) It is very doubtful
whether. this second clause of the oratio directa is really meant to
belong to Vâmakakshâya*n*a's argument, or whether it is the author's
own, in which case it has to be taken with what follows. 'Lest he should
. . . pieces, he (first) restores him,' &c. That is, he is not to place
him (Pra*g*âpati) in an upright position, until he has been completely
restored. The particular form of the participle qualifying Pra*g*âpati
(vi*kh*idyamâna) might seem to favour the former alternative; see,
however, [paragraph 23](sbe4156.htm#7:1:2:23), antayo*h*
sa*m*skriyamâ*n*ayor, 'after the two ends have been perfected.'

<span id="fn_596"></span>[314:3](sbe4156.htm#fr_598) In this and the
following paragraphs the ordinary position of subject and predicate
seems often reversed: in the present case one would expect--that air is
to him the space between the two fires.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[315:1](sbe4156.htm#fr_599) Viz. the
sacrificial ground thus becomes identical with the universe, i.e. with
Pra*g*âpati.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[315:2](sbe4156.htm#fr_600) That is, it is
(like) a bird. The word 'prâ*n*a' might almost be rendered here by 'the
living being.'

<span id="fn_599"></span>[315:3](sbe4156.htm#fr_601) In the text this is
reversed, the head is the eye, the right wing the right ear, the left
wing the left ear, the central body the vital air, which can scarcely be
the construction intended by the author.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[315:4](sbe4156.htm#fr_602) Or, with the mouth.
In VIII, 5, 4, 1; X, 5, 2, 15, 'vâ*k*' is identified with the tongue.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[316:1](sbe4156.htm#fr_603) Viz. XII, 47-54
(XII, 53, consisting of two formulas).

<span id="fn_602"></span>[316:2](sbe4156.htm#fr_604) That is to say,
these thirty-two items form, as it were, an Anush*t*ubh verse consisting
of thirty-two syllables.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[316:3](sbe4156.htm#fr_605) See [VII, 2, 1,
1](sbe4157.htm#7:2:1:1) seq.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[316:4](sbe4156.htm#fr_606) I do not see what
other formulas can be intended here except those addressed to the
enclosing stones, concluding with the sâdana,' or 'settling' formula,
viz. Vâ*g*. S. XII, 53; see above, [VII, 1, 1,
30](sbe4155.htm#7:1:1:30); though these do not exactly yield thirty-two
syllables, but thirty-four (see, however, [paragraph
22](sbe4156.htm#7:1:2:22)). Our available MSS. of the commentary are
unfortunately defective at this place.--On the artificial manipulation
of making up imaginary metres by the mere number of syllables,
irrespective of their real prosodic value, see Professor Weber, Ind.
Stud., VIII, p. 23 seq.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[317:1](sbe4156.htm#fr_607) Or, the Dhish*n*ya
hearths (see [paragraph 23](sbe4156.htm#7:1:2:23)), which are more
properly situated between the Gârhapatya and the Âhavanîya fireplaces.
See the plan of the sacrificial ground in part ii; where, however, the
Âhavanîya of the Prâ*k*înava*ms*a (hall), or the so-called *s*âlâdvârya
(hall-door fire), would represent the Gârhapatya for the Âhavanîya of
the Mahâvedi.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[318:1](sbe4156.htm#fr_608) The same latitude
in the computation of the number of syllables constituting a metre is
conceded, Ait. Br. I, 6.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[318:2](sbe4156.htm#fr_609) ? That is,
'visible,' or, 'capable of being seen through.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII, 2, 1. Second Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4157)
