[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4115) 
[Next](sbe4117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4">5:3:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:1">5:3:4:1</span></span>1. He
collects (various kinds of) water. The reason why he collects water, is
that--water being vigour--he thereby collects vigour, the essence of die
waters.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:2">5:3:4:2</span></span>2. In a
vessel of udumbara wood,--the udumbara (ficus glomerata) being
sustenance, (that is) food---for the obtainment of sustenance, food:
hence in an udumbara vessel (he mixes the different liquids).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:3">5:3:4:3</span></span>3. He
first takes (water) <span id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156) from the
(river) Sarasvatî, with (Vâ*g*. S. X, i), 'The gods took honey-sweet
water,'--whereby he says, 'the gods took water full of
essence;'--'sapful, deemed king-quickening,'--by 'sapful' he means to
say, 'full of essence;' and by 'deemed king-quickening' he means to say,
'(water) which is recognised as king-quickening;'--'wherewith they
anointed Mitra and Varu*n*a,' for therewith they did anoint (sprinkle)
Mitra and Varu*n*a;--'wherewith they guided

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indra past his
enemies,' for therewith they indeed guided Indra past the fiends, the
Rakshas. Therewith he sprinkles him,--Sarasvatî being (the goddess of)
Speech: it is with speech he thereby sprinkles him. This is one kind of
water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:4">5:3:4:4</span></span>4.
Thereupon the Adhvaryu, having taken ghee in four ladlings, steps down
into the water, and takes the two waves which flow away (in different
directions) after an animal or a man has stept (or plunged) into it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:5">5:3:4:5</span></span>5. The
one which rises in front of him he catches up with (Vâ*g*. S. X, 2),
'Thou art the male's wave, a bestower of kingship: bestow kingship on
me, hail!--Thou art the male's wave, a bestower of kingship: bestow
kingship on N.N.!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:6">5:3:4:6</span></span>6. He
then catches up that (wave) which rises up behind him with, 'Thou art
the lord of a host of males, a bestower of kingship: bestow kingship on
me, hail!--Thou art the lord of a host of males, a bestower of kingship:
bestow kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he sprinkles; for indeed
that is the vigour of the water which rises when either beast or man
plunges into it: it is with vigour he thus sprinkles him. This is one
kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:7">5:3:4:7</span></span>7. He
then takes flowing (water) with (Vâ*g*. S. X, 3), 'Task-plying ye are,
bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--Task-plying ye
are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With that
(water) he sprinkles; for with vigour these (waters) flow, whence
nothing stops them flowing along: it is

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

with vigour he thus sprinkles him. This is one kind of water: it is that
he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:8">5:3:4:8</span></span>8. He
then takes such (water) as flows against the stream of the flowing water
with, 'Powerful ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on me,
hail!--Powerful ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on
N.N.!' With that (water) he sprinkles, for with vigour indeed those
(waters) flow against the stream of the flowing ones: it is with vigour
he thus sprinkles him. This is one kind of water: it is that he now
brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:9">5:3:4:9</span></span>9. He
then takes (water) that flows off (the main current) with, 'Overflowing
waters ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on me,
hail!--Overflowing waters ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye
kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he sprinkles. Now that (flow of
water), after separating itself from that (main current), comes to be
that again <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157); and so there is in his
kingdom even one belonging to some other kingdom, and even that man from
another kingdom he absorbs: thus he (the Adhvaryu) bestows abundance
upon him (the king), and it is with abundance that he thus consecrates
him. This is one kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:10">5:3:4:10</span></span>10. He
then takes the lord of rivers (sea-water) with, 'Thou art the lord of
waters, a bestower of kingship: bestow thou kingship on me, hail!--Thou
art the lord of waters, a bestower of kingship: bestow thou kingship on
N.N.!'

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> With that (water)
he sprinkles him; and that lord of rivers (the ocean) being the same as
the lord of waters, he thereby makes him (the king) the lord of the
people. This is one kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:11">5:3:4:11</span></span>11. He
then takes (water from) a whirlpool with, 'Thou art the offspring of the
waters, a bestower of kingship: bestow thou kingship on me, hail!--Thou
art the offspring of the waters, a bestower of kingship: bestow thou
kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he sprinkles. Now the waters
enclose the offspring (embryo): he thus makes him the offspring of the
people. This is one kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:12">5:3:4:12</span></span>12.
Then what standing pool of flowing water there is in a sunny spot, that
(water) he takes with (Vâ*g*. S. X, 4), 'Sun-skinned ye are, bestowers
of kingship: bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--Sun-skinned ye are,
bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he
sprinkles: it is with lustre he thereby sprinkles him, and makes him
sun-skinned. Now it is to Varu*n*a that those waters belong which,
(whilst being part) of flowing water, do not flow: and Varu*n*a's
quickening (sava) is that Râ*g*asûya: therefore he sprinkles him
therewith. This is one kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:13">5:3:4:13</span></span>13. He
then catches such (water) as it rains while the sun shines, with,
'Lustrous as the sun ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship
on me, hail!--Lustrous as the sun ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow
ye kingship on N.N.!' With this (water) he sprinkles: it is with lustre
he thereby sprinkles him, and lustrous

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

as the sun he thereby makes him. And pure indeed is such water as it
rains while the sun shines, for before it has reached this (earth), he
catches it: he thus makes him pure thereby. This is one kind of water:
it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:14">5:3:4:14</span></span>14. He
then takes (water) from a pond with, 'Pleasing ye are, bestowers of
kingship: bestow ye kingship on me!--Pleasing ye are, bestowers of
kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he sprinkles:
he thereby makes the people steady and faithful to him. This is one kind
of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:15">5:3:4:15</span></span>15. He
then draws (water) from a well with, 'Fold-dwellers ye are, bestowers of
kingship: bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--Fold-dwellers ye are,
bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With this (water) he
sprinkles. He thereby brings (some of) the water which is beyond this
(earth), and also (he does so) for the completeness of the waters, this
is why he sprinkles him therewith. This is one kind of water: it is that
he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:16">5:3:4:16</span></span>16. He
then takes dew-drops <span id="fr_158"></span>[1](#fn_158) with,
'Devoted <span id="fr_159"></span>[2](#fn_159)

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--Devoted
ye are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With that
(water) he sprinkles: it is with food he thereby consecrates him, and
food he thereby bestows upon him, For even as this fire burns up (the
wood) so does that sun yonder, even in rising, burn up the plants, the
food. But those waters coming down, quench that (heat), for if those
waters were not to come down, there would be no food left remaining
here: it is with food he thus sprinkles him. This is one kind of water:
it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:17">5:3:4:17</span></span>17. He
then takes honey with, 'Most powerful ye are, bestowers of kingship:
bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--Most powerful ye are, bestowers of
kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With this (water) he sprinkles,
and it is by the essence of the waters and plants that he thereby
sprinkles him. This is one kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:18">5:3:4:18</span></span>18. He
then takes embryonic (waters) of a calving cow with, 'Mighty ye are,
bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--Mighty ye are,
bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he
sprinkles: it is with cattle he thereby consecrates him. This is one
kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:19">5:3:4:19</span></span>19. He
then takes milk with, 'Man-supporting ye are, bestowers of kingship:
bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--Man-supporting ye are, bestowers of
kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he sprinkles:

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

it is with cattle he thereby consecrates him. This is one kind of water:
it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:20">5:3:4:20</span></span>20. He
then takes clarified butter with, 'All-supporting ye are, bestowers of
kingship: bestow ye kingship on me, hail!--All-supporting ye are,
bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' With that (water) he
sprinkles: it is with the essence of cattle he thereby consecrates him.
This is one kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:21">5:3:4:21</span></span>21.
Having then caught up (moist) sun-motes with the hollow of his hands, he
mixes them (with the other kinds of water), with, 'Self-ruling waters ye
are, bestowers of kingship: bestow ye kingship on N.N.!' For those
sun-motes are indeed self-ruling waters, since they are flowing, as it
were, and, not yielding to one another's superiority, keep being now
higher now lower: he thus thereby bestows self-ruling power upon him.
This is one kind of water: it is that he now brings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:22">5:3:4:22</span></span>22.
These then are seventeen (kinds of) water he brings together, for
Pra*g*âpati is seventeenfold, and Pra*g*âpati is the sacrifice: that is
why he brings together seventeen kinds of water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:23">5:3:4:23</span></span>23. Now
sixteen kinds of water are those he offers upon; and he offers sixteen
oblations: that makes thirty-two. On two of them he does not offer, viz.
on the water from the Sarasvatî and on the sun-motes: that makes
thirty-four. For three and thirty are the gods, and Pra*g*âpati is the
thirty-fourth: he thus makes him to be Pra*g*âpati (the lord of
creatures).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:24">5:3:4:24</span></span>24. And
as to why he takes (water) each time after offering,--the ghee, to be
sure, is a thunderbolt:

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

having won them, one by one, by means of that thunderbolt, the ghee, and
made them his own, he takes them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:25">5:3:4:25</span></span>25. And
as to why he does not offer on the (water) from the
Sarasvatî,--Sarasvatî, to be sure, is (the goddess of) Speech, and the
ghee is a thunderbolt: 'Lest I should injure (the goddess of) Speech!
thus (he thinks, and) therefore he does not offer on the water from the
Sarasvatî.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:26">5:3:4:26</span></span>26. And
as to why he does not offer on the sun-motes: 'Lest I should offer that
oblation in a doubtful way <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_160)!' thus
(he thinks, and) therefore he does not offer on the sun-motes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:27">5:3:4:27</span></span>27. He
pours them together into an udumbara vessel with, 'Let the honey-sweet
mix with the honey-sweet!'--'Let those full of essence mix with those
full of essence!' he thereby says;--'Winning great power (kshatra) for
the Kshatriya!' in saying this he prays in a covert way for power to the
Sacrificer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:4:28">5:3:4:28</span></span>28. He
deposits them in front of the Maitrâvaru*n*a's hearth, with, 'Unimpaired
rest ye, the strengthful!'--'unimpaired by the Rakshas rest ye!' he
thereby says; and by 'strengthful' he means to say 'powerful; 'bestowing
great power on the Kshatriya;'--in saying this he prays in an overt way
for power to the Sacrificer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_156"></span>[73:1](sbe4116.htm#fr_156) This water gathered
from an adjacent river and pond, with some admixture of genuine water
from the sacred river Sarasvatî-whence the whole water is also called
'sârasvatya âpa*h*'--is to be used partly in the place of the ordinary
Vasatîvarî water, and partly for the consecration or anointment
(sprinkling) of the king. The different kinds of water or liquids are
first taken in separate vessels of palâ*s*a (butea frondosa) wood, and
then poured together into the udumbara vessel.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[75:1](sbe4116.htm#fr_157) That is to say, it
ultimately flows back and mingles again with the main current.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[77:1](sbe4116.htm#fr_158) Sâya*n*a explains
'prushvâ' by 'nîhârâ*h*' (mist water), the commentators on Kâty. XV, 4,
38, by 'hoar-frost.'

<span id="fn_159"></span>[77:2](sbe4116.htm#fr_159) It is difficult to
see in what sense the author takes vâ*s*a. While Mahîdhara (Vâ*g*. S. X,
4) explains it by 'pleasing' or 'desirable' (u*s*yante *g*anai*h*
kâmyante<sup>ऽ</sup>nnanishpattihetutrât); Sâya*n*a leaves a choice
between that meaning (sarvai*h* kâmyamânâ) and that of 'obedient,
submissive' (yadvâ va*s*yâ stha, nîhâro hi nadîpravâhavan
manushyâdigatim na pratibadhnâti, ato va*s*yatvam prushvâ*n*âm
annâdyâtmakatvam upapâdayati; MS. I. O. 657). The St. Petersburg
dictionary gives the meaning 'submissive,' but leaves it doubtful
whether it may not be derived from va*s*a, 'fat, grease.'

<span id="fn_160"></span>[80:1](sbe4116.htm#fr_160) On account of the
doubtful nature of the watery sun-motes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 3, 5. Fifth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4117)
