[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc07)  [Next](pjc09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

# MEDITATION IV.

### The Chalice used at the Last Supper.

THE chalice which the Apostles brought from Veronica's house was
wonderful and mysterious in its appearance. It had been kept a long time
in the Temple among other precious objects of great antiquity, the use
and origin of which had been forgotten. The same has been in some degree
the case in the Christian Church, where many consecrated jewels have
been forgotten and fallen into disuse with time. Ancient vases and
jewels, buried beneath the Temple, had often been dug up, sold, or
reset. Thus it was that, by God's permission, this holy vessel, which
none had ever been able to melt down on account of its being made of
some unknown material, and which had been found by the priests in the
treasury of the Temple among other objects no longer made use of, had
been sold to some antiquaries. It was bought by Seraphia, was several
times made use of by Jesus in the celebration of festivals, and, from
the day of the Last Supper, became the exclusive property of the holy
Christian community. This vessel was not always the same as when used by
our Lord at his Last Supper, and perhaps it was upon that occasion that
the various pieces which composed it were first put together. The great
chalice stood upon a plate, out of which a species of tablet could also
be drawn, and around it there were six little glasses. The great chalice
contained another smaller vase; above it there was a small plate, and
then came a round cover. A spoon was inserted in the foot of the
chalice, and could be easily drawn out for use. All these different
vessels were covered with fine linen, and, if I am not mistaken, were
wrapped up in a case made of leather. The great chalice was composed of
the cup and of the foot, which last must have been joined on to it at a
later period, for it was of a different material. The cup was
pear-shaped, massive, dark-coloured, and highly polished, with gold
ornaments, and two small handles by which it could be lifted. The

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

foot was of virgin gold, elaborately worked, ornamented with a serpent
and a small bunch of grapes, and enriched with precious stones.

The chalice was left in the Church of Jerusalem, in the hands of St.
James the Less; and I see that it is still preserved in that town--it
will reappear some day, in the same manner as before. Other Churches
took the little cups which surrounded it; one was taken to Antioch, and
another to Ephesus. They belonged to the patriarchs, who drank some
mysterious beverage out of them when they received or gave a
Benediction, as I have seen many times.

The great chalice had formerly been in the possession of Abraham;
Melchisedech brought it with him from the land of Semiramis to the land
of Canaan, when he was beginning to found some settlements on the spot
where Jerusalem was afterwards built; he made use of it then for
offering sacrifice, when he offered bread and wine in the presence of
Abraham, and he left it in the possession of that holy patriarch. This
same chalice had also been preserved in Noah's Ark.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meditation V. Jesus goes up to Jerusalem](pjc09)
