[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc02)  [Next](pjc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### LIFE

###### OF

# ANNE CATHERINE EMMERICH,

###### RELIGIOUS OF THE ORDER OF ST. AUGUSTINE, AT THE CONVENT OF AGNETENBERG, DULMEN, WESTPHALIA.

ANNE CATHERINE EMMERICH was born at Flamske, a village situated about a
mile and a half from Coesfeld, in the bishopric of Munster, on the 8th
of September 1774, and was baptised in the church of St. James at
Coesfeld. Her parents, Bernard Emmerich and Anne Hiller, were poor
peasants, but distinguished for their piety and virtue.

The childhood of Anne Catherine bore a striking resemblance to that of
the Venerable Anne Garzias de St. Barthelemi, of Dominica del Paradiso,
and of several other holy persons born in the same rank of life as
herself. Her angel-guardian used to appear to her as a child; and when
she was taking care of sheep in the fields, the Good Shepherd himself,
under the form of a young shepherd, would frequently come to her
assistance. From childhood she was accustomed to have divine knowledge
imparted to her in visions of all kinds, and was often favoured by
visits from the Mother of God and Queen of Heaven, who, under the form
of a sweet, lovely, and majestic lady, would bring the Divine Child to
be, as it were, her companion, and would assure her that she loved and
would ever protect her. Many of the saints would also appear to her, and
receive from her hands the garlands of flowers which she had prepared in
honour of their festivals. All these

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

favours and visions surprised the child less than if an earthly princess
and the lords and ladies of her court had come to visit her. Nor was
she, later in life, more surprised at these celestial visits, for her
innocence caused her to feel far more at her ease with our Divine Lord,
his Blessed Mother and the Saints, than she could ever be with even the
most kind and amiable of her earthly companions. The names of Father,
Mother, Brother, and Spouse, appeared to her expressive of the real
connections subsisting between God and man, since the Eternal Word had
been pleased to be born of a woman, and so to become our Brother, and
these sacred titles were not mere words in her mouth.

While yet a child, she used to speak with innocent cardour and
simplicity of all that she saw, and her listeners would be filled with
admiration at the histories she would relate from Holy Writ; but their
questions and remarks having sometimes disturbed her peace of mind, she
determined to keep silence on such subjects for the future. In her
innocence of heart, she thought that it was not right to talk of things
of this sort, that other persons never did so, and that her speech
should be only *Yea, yea*, and *Nay, nay*, or *Praise be to Jesus
Christ*. The visions with which she was favoured were so like realities,
and appeared to her so sweet and delightful, that she supposed all
Christian children were favoured with the same; and she concluded that
those who never talked on such subjects were only more discreet and
modest than herself, so she resolved to keep silence also, to be like
them.

Almost from her cradle she possessed the gift of distinguishing what was
good or evil, holy or profane, blessed or accursed, in material as well
as in spiritual things, thus resembling St. Sibyllina of Pavia, Ida of
Louvain, Ursula Benincasa, and some other holy souls. In her earliest
childhood she used to bring out of the fields useful herbs, which no one
had ever before discovered to be good for anything, and plant them near
her father's cottage, or in some spot where she was accustomed to work
and play; while on the other hand she would root up all poisonous
plants, and particularly those ever used for superstitious

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

practices or in dealings with the devil. Were she by chance in a place
where some great crime had been committed, she would hastily run away,
or begin to pray and do penance. She used also to perceive by intuition
when she was in a consecrated spot, return thanks to God, and be filled
with a sweet feeling of peace. When a priest passed by with the Blessed
Sacrament, even at a great distance from her home or from the place
where she was taking care of her flock, she would feel a strong
attraction in the direction whence he was coming, run to meet him, and
be kneeling in the road, adoring the Blessed Sacrament, long before he
could reach the spot.

She knew when any object was consecrated, and experienced a feeling of
disgust and repugnance when in the neighbourhood of old pagan
cemeteries, whereas she was attracted to the sacred remains of the
saints as steel by the magnet. When relies were shown to her, she knew
what saints they had belonged to, and could give not only accounts of
the minutest and hitherto unknown particulars of their lives, but also
histories of the relies themselves, and of the places where they had
been preserved. During her whole life she had continual intercourse with
the souls in purgatory; and all her actions and prayers were offered for
the relief of their sufferings. She was frequently called upon to assist
them, and even reminded in some miraculous manner, if she chanced to
forget them. Often, while yet very young, she used to be awakened out of
her sleep by bands of suffering souls, and to follow them on cold
winter's nights with bare feet, the whole length of the Way of the Cross
to Coesfeld, though the ground was covered with snow.

From her infancy to the day of her death she was indefatigable in
relieving the sick, and in dressing and curing wounds and ulcers, and
she was accustomed to give to the poor every farthing she possessed. So
tender was her conscience, that the slightest sin she fell into caused
her such pain as to make her ill, and absolution then always restored
her immediately to health.

The extraordinary nature of the favours bestowed on

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

her by Almighty God was no hindrance in the way of her devoting herself
to hard labour, like any other peasant-girl; and we may also be allowed
to observe that a certain degree of the spirit of prophecy is not
unusually to be found among her country men and women. She was taught in
the school of suffering and mortification, and there learned lessons of
perfection. She allowed herself no more sleep or food than was
absolutely necessary; passed whole hours in prayer every night; and in
winter often knelt out of doors on the snow. She slept on the ground on
planks arranged in the form of a cross. Her food and drink consisted of
what was rejected by others; she always kept the best parts even of that
for the poor and sick, and when she did not know of any one to give them
to, she offered them to God in a spirit of child-like faith, begging him
to give them to some person who was more in need than herself. When
there was anything to be seen or heard which had no reference to God or
religion, she found some excuse for avoiding the spot to which others
were hastening, or, if there, closed her eyes and ears. She was
accustomed to say that useless actions were sinful, and that when we
denied our bodily senses any gratification of this kind, we were amply
repaid by the progress which we made in the interior life, in the same
manner as pruning renders vines and other fruit-trees more productive.
From her early youth, and wherever she went, she had frequent symbolical
visions, which showed her in parables, as it were, the object of her
existence, the means of attaining it, and her future sufferings,
together with the dangers and conflicts which she would have to go
through.

She was in her sixteenth year, when one day, whilst at work in the
fields with her parents and sisters, she heard the bell ringing at the
Convent of the Sisters of the Annunciation, at Coesfeld. This sound so
inflamed her secret desire to become a nun, and had so great an effect
upon her, that she fainted away, and remained ill and weak for a long
time after. When in her eighteenth year she was apprenticed at Coesfeld
to a dressmaker, with whom she passed two years, and then returned to
her parents. She

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

asked to be received at the Convents of the Augustinians at Borken, of
the Trappists at Darfeld, and of the Poor Clares at Munster; but her
poverty, and that of these convents, always presented an insuperable
obstacle to her being received. At the age of twenty, having saved
twenty thalers (about 3*l*. English), which she had earned by her
sewing, she went with this little sum--a perfect fortune for a poor
peasant-girl--to a pious organist of Coesfeld, whose daughter she had
known when she first lived in the town. Her hope was that, by learning
to play on the organ; she might succeed in obtaining admittance into a
convent. But her irresistible desire to serve the poor and give them
everything she possessed left her no time to learn music, and before
long she had so completely stripped herself of everything, that her good
mother was obliged to bring her bread, milk, and eggs, for her own wants
and those of the poor, with whom she shared everything. Then her mother
said: 'Your desire to leave your father and myself, and enter a convent,
gives us much pain; but you are still my beloved child, and when I look
at your vacant seat at home, and reflect that you have given away all
your savings, so as to be now in want, my heart is filled with sorrow,
and I have now brought you enough to keep you for some time.' Anne
Catherine replied: 'Yes, dear mother, it is true that I have nothing at
all left, because it was the holy will of God that others should be
assisted by me; and since I have given all to him, he will now take care
of me, and bestow his divine assistance upon us all.' She remained some
years at Coesfeld, employed in labour, good works, and prayer, being
always guided by the same inward inspirations. She was docile and
submissive as a child in the hands of her guardian-angel.

Although in this brief sketch of her life we are obliged to omit many
interesting circumstances, there is one which we must not pass over in
silence. When about twenty-four years of age, she received a favour from
our Lord, which has been granted to many persons devoted in an especial
manner to meditation on his painful Passion; namely, to experience the
actual and visible sufferings of

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

his sacred Head, when crowned with thorns. The following is the account
she herself has given of the circumstances under which so mysterious a
favour was bestowed upon her: 'About four years previous to my
admittance into the convent, consequently in 1798, it happened that I
was in the Jesuits' Church at Coesfeld, at about twelve o'clock in the
day, kneeling before a crucifix and absorbed in meditation, when all on
a sudden I felt a strong but pleasant heat in my head, and I saw my
Divine Spouse, under the form of a young man clothed with light, come
towards me from the altar, where the Blessed Sacrament was preserved in
the tabernacle. In his left hand he held a crown of flowers, in his
right hand a crown of thorns, and he bade me choose which I would have.
I chose the crown of thorns; he placed it on my head, and I pressed it
down with both hands. Then he disappeared, and I returned to myself,
feeling, however, violent pain around my head. I was obliged to leave
the church, which was going to be closed. One of my companions was
kneeling by my side, and as I thought she might have seen what happened
to me, I asked her when we got home whether there was not a wound on my
forehead, and spoke to her in general terms of my vision, and of the
violent pain which had followed it. She could see nothing outwardly, but
was not astonished at what I told her, because she knew that I was
sometimes in an extraordinary state, without her being able to
understand the cause. The next day my forehead and temples were very
much swelled, and I suffered terribly. This pain and swelling often
returned, and sometimes lasted whole days and nights. I did not remark
that there was blood on my head until my companions told me I had better
put on a clean cap, because mine was covered with red spots. I let them
think whatever they liked about it, only taking care to arrange my
head-dress so as to hide the blood which flowed from my head, and I
continued to observe the same precaution even after I entered the
convent, where only one person perceived the blood, and she never
betrayed my secret.'

Several other contemplative persons, especially devoted

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

to the passion of our Lord, have been admitted to the privilege of
suffering the torture inflicted by the crown of thorns, after having
seen a vision in which the two crowns were offered them to choose
between, for instance, among others, St. Catherine of Sienna, and
Pasithea of Crogis, a Poor Clare of the same town, who died in 1617.

The writer of these pages may here be allowed to remark that he himself
has, in full daylight, several times seen blood flow down the forehead
and face, and even beyond the linen wrapped round the neck of Anne
Catherine. Her desire to embrace a religious life was at length
gratified. The parents of a young person whom the Augustinian nuns of
Dulmen wished to receive into their order, declared that they would not
give their consent except on condition that Anne Catherine was taken at
the same time. The nuns yielded their assent, though somewhat
reluctantly, on account of their extreme poverty; and on the 13th
November 1802, one week before the feast of the Presentation of the
Blessed Virgin, Anne Catherine entered on her novitiate. At the present
day vocations are not so severely tested as formerly; but in her case,
Providence imposed special trials, for which, rigorous as they were, she
felt she never could be too grateful. Sufferings or privations, which a
soul, either alone or in union with others, imposes upon herself, for
God's greater glory, are easy to bear; but there is one cross more
nearly resembling the cross of Christ than any other, and that is,
lovingly and patiently to submit to unjust punishments, rebuffs, or
accusations. It was the will of God that during her year's novitiate she
should, independently of the will of any creature, be tried as severely
as the most strict mistress of novices could have clone before any
mitigations had been allowed in the rules. She learned to regard her
companions as instruments in the hands of God for her sanctification;
and at a later period of her life many other things appeared to her in
the same light. But as it was necessary that her fervent soul should be
constantly tried in the school of the Cross, God was pleased that she
should remain in it all her life.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

In many ways her position in the convent was excessively painful. Not
one of her companions, nor even any-priest or doctor, could understand
her case. She had learned, when living among poor peasants, to hide the
wonderful gifts which God had bestowed on her; but the case was altered
now that she was in familiar intercourse with a large number of nuns,
who, though certainly good and pious, were filled with ever-increasing
feelings of curiosity, and even of spiritual jealousy in her regard.
Then, the contracted ideas of the community, and the complete ignorance
of the nuns concerning all those exterior phenomena by which the
interior life manifests itself, gave her much to endure, the more so, as
these phenomena displayed themselves in the most unusual and astonishing
manner. She heard everything that was said against her, even when the
speakers were at one end of the convent and she at the other, and her
heart was most deeply wounded as if by poisoned arrows. Yet she bore all
patiently and lovingly without showing that she knew what was said of
her. More than once charity impelled her to cast herself at the feet of
some nun who was particularly prejudiced against her, and ask her pardon
with tears. Then, she was suspected of listening at the doors, for the
private feelings of dislike entertained against her became known, no one
knew how, and the nuns felt uncomfortable and uneasy, in spite of
themselves, when in her company.

Whenever the rule (the minutest point of which was Sacred in her eyes)
was neglected in the slightest degree, she beheld in spirit each
infringement, and at times was inspired to fly to the spot where the
rule was being broken by some infringement of the vow of poverty, or
disregard of the hours of silence, and she would then repeat suitable
passages from the rule, without having ever learned them. She thus
became an object of aversion to all those religious who broke the rule;
and her sudden appearances among them had almost the effect of
apparitions. God had bestowed upon her the gift of tears to so great an
extent, that she often passed whole hours in the church weeping

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

over the sins and ingratitude of men, the sufferings of the Church, the
imperfections of the community, and her own faults. But these tears of
sublime sorrow could be understood by none but God, before whom she shed
them, and men attributed them to mere caprice, a spirit of discontent,
or some other similar cause. Her confessor had enjoined that she should
receive the holy communion more frequently than the other nuns, because,
so ardently did she hunger after the bread of angels, that she had been
more than once near dying. These heavenly sentiments awakened feelings
of jealousy in her sisters, who sometimes even accused her of hypocrisy.

The favour which had been shown her in her admittance into the convent,
in spite of her poverty, was also made a subject of reproach. The
thought of being thus an occasion of sin to others was most painful to
her, and she continually besought God to permit her to bear herself the
penalty of this want of charity in her regard. About Christmas, of the
year 1802, she had a very severe illness, which began by a violent pain
about her heart.

This pain did not leave her even when she was cured, and she bore it in
silence until the year 1812, when the mark of a cross was imprinted
exteriorly in the same place, as we shall relate further on. Her
weakness and delicate health caused her to be looked upon more as
burdensome, than useful to the community; and this, of course, told
against her in all ways, yet she was never weary of working and serving
the others, nor was she ever so happy as at this period of her
life--spent in privations and sufferings of every description.

On the 13th of November 1803, at the age of twenty-nine, she pronounced
her solemn vows, and became the spouse of Jesus Christ, in the Convent
of Agnetenberg, at Dulmen. 'When I had pronounced my vows,' she says,
'my relations were again extremely kind to me. My father and my eldest
brother brought me two pieces of cloth. My father, a good, but stem man,
and who had been much averse to my entering the convent, had told me,
when we parted, that he would willingly pay for my

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

burial, but that he would give nothing for the convent, and he kept his
word, for this piece of cloth was the winding-sheet used for my
spiritual burial in the convent.'

'I was not thinking of myself,' she says again, 'I was thinking of
nothing but our Lord and my holy vows. My companions could not
understand me; nor could I explain my state to them. God concealed from
them many of the favours which he bestowed upon me, otherwise they would
have had very false ideas concerning me. Notwithstanding all my trials
and sufferings, I was never more rich interiorly, and my soul was
perfectly flooded with happiness. My cell only contained one chair
without a seat, and another without a back; yet in my eyes, it was
magnificently furnished, and when there I often thought myself in
Heaven. Frequently during the night, impelled by love and by the mercy
of God, I poured forth the feelings of my soul by conversing with him in
loving and familiar language, as I had always done from my childhood,
and then those who were watching me would accuse me of irreverence and
disrespect towards God. Once, I happened to say that it appeared to me
that I should be guilty of greater disrespect did I receive the Body of
our Lord without having conversed familiarly with him, and I was
severely reprimanded. Amid all these trials, I yet lived in peace with
God and with all his creatures. When I was working in the garden, the
birds would come and rest on my head and shoulders, and we would
together sing the praises of God. I always beheld my angel-guardian at
my side, and although the devil used frequently to assault and terrify
me in various ways, he was never permitted to do me much harm. 'My
desire for the Blessed Sacrament was so irresistible, that often at
night I left my cell and went to the church, if it was open; but if not,
I remained at the door or by the walls, even in winter, kneeling or
prostrate, with my arms extended in ecstasy. The convent chaplain, who
was so charitable as to come early to give me the Holy Communion, used
to find me in this state, but as soon as he was come and had opened, the
church, I always recovered, and hastened to the holy

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

table, there to receive my Lord and my God. When I was sacristan, I used
all on a sudden to feel myself ravished in spirit, and ascend to the
highest parts of the church, on to cornices, projecting parts of the
building, and mouldings, where it seemed impossible for any being to get
by human means. Then I cleaned and arranged everything, and it appeared
to me that I was surrounded by blessed spirits, who transported me about
and held me up in their hands. Their presence did not cause me the least
uneasiness, for I had been accustomed to it from my childhood, and I
used to have the most sweet and familiar intercourse with them. It was
only when I was in the company of certain men that I was really alone;
and so great was then my feeling of loneliness that I could not help
crying like a child that has strayed from home.'

We now proceed to her illnesses, omitting any description of some other
remarkable phenomena of her ecstatic life, only recommending the reader
to compare the accounts we have already given with what is related of
St. Mary Magdalen of Pazzi.

Anne Catherine had always been weak and delicate, and yet had been, from
her earliest childhood, in the habit of practising many mortifications,
of fasting and of passing the night in watching and prayer in the open
air. She had been accustomed to continual hard labour in the fields, at
all seasons of the year, and her strength was also necessarily much
tried by the exhausting and supernatural states through which she so
frequently passed. At the convent she continued to work in the garden
and in the house, whilst her spiritual labours and sufferings were ever
an the increase, so that it is by no means surprising that she was
frequently ill; but her illnesses arose from yet another cause. We have
learned, from careful observations made every day for the space of four
years, and also from what she herself was unwillingly forced to admit,
that during the whole course of her life, and especially during that
part of it which she spent at the convent, when she enjoyed the highest
spiritual favours, a great portion of her illnesses and sufferings came
from taking upon herself the

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

sufferings of others. Sometimes she asked for the illness of a person
who did not bear it patiently, and relieved him of the whole or of a
part of his sufferings, by taking them upon herself; sometimes, wishing
to expiate a sin or put an end to some suffering, she gave herself up
into the hands of God, and be, accepting her sacrifice, permitted her
thus, in union with the merits of his passion, to expiate the sin by
suffering some illness corresponding to it. She had consequently to
bear, not only her own maladies, but those also of others--to suffer in
expiation of the sins of her brethren, and of the faults and negligences
of certain portions of the Christian community--and, finally, to endure
many and various sufferings in satisfaction for the souls of purgatory.
All these sufferings appeared like real illnesses, which took the most
opposite and variable forms, and she was placed entirely under the care
of the doctor, who endeavoured by earthly remedies to cure illnesses
which in reality were the very sources of her life. She said on this
subject--'Repose in suffering has always appeared to me the most
desirable condition possible. The angels themselves would envy us, were
envy not an imperfection. But for sufferings to be really meritorious we
must patiently and gratefully accept unsuitable remedies and comforts,
and all other additional trials. I did not myself fully understand my
state, nor know what it was to lead to. In my soul I accepted my
different sufferings, but in my body it was my duty to strive against
them. I had given myself wholly and entirely to my Heavenly Spouse, and
his holy will was being accomplished in me; but I was living on earth,
where I was not to rebel against earthly wisdom and earthly
prescriptions. Even had I fully comprehended my state, and had both time
and power to explain it, there was no one near who would have been able
to understand me. A doctor would simply have concluded that I was
entirely mad, and would have increased his expensive and painful
remedies tenfold. I have suffered much in this way during the whole of
my life, and particularly when I was at the convent, from having
unsuitable remedies administered to me. Often, when

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

my doctors and nurses had reduced me to the last agony, and that I was
near death, God took pity on me, and sent me some supernatural
assistance, which effected an entire cure.'

Four years before the suppression of her convent she went to Flamske for
two days to visit her parents. Whilst there she went once to kneel and
pray for some hours before the miraculous Cross of the Church of St.
Lambert, at Coesfeld. She besought the Almighty to bestow the gifts of
peace and unity upon her convent, offered him the Passion of Jesus
Christ for that intention, and implored him to allow her to feel a
portion of the sufferings which were endured by her Divine Spouse on the
Cross. From the time that she made this prayer her hands and feet became
burning and painful, and she suffered constantly from fever, which she
believed was the cause of the pain in her hands and feet, for she did
not dare to think that her prayer had been granted. Often she was unable
to walk, and the pain in her hands prevented her from working as usual
in the garden. On the 3d December 1811, the convent was
suppressed, <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) and the church closed. The
nuns dispersed in all directions, but Anne Catherine remained, poor and
ill. A kindhearted servant belonging to the monastery attended upon her
out of charity, and an aged emigrant priest, who said Mass in the
convent, remained also with her. These three individuals, being the
poorest of the Community, did not leave the convent until the spring of
1812. She was still very unwell, and could not be moved without great
difficulty. The priest lodged with a poor widow who lived in the
neighbourhood, and Anne Catherine had in the same house a wretched
little room on the ground-floor, which looked on the street. There she
lived, in poverty and sickness, until the autumn of 1813. Her ecstasies
in prayer, and her spiritual intercourse with the invisible world,
became more and more frequent. She was about to be called to a state
with which she was herself but imperfectly acquainted, and in order

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

to enter which she did nothing but submissively abandon herself to the
will of God. Our Lord was pleased about this time to imprint upon her
virginal body the stigmas of his cross and of his crucifixion, which
were to the Jews a stumbling-block, and to the Gentiles folly, and to
many persons who call themselves Christians, both the one and the other.
From her very earliest childhood she had besought our Lord to impress
the marks of his cross deeply upon her heart, that so she might never
forget his infinite love for men; but she had never thought of receiving
any outward marks. Rejected by the world, she prayed more fervently than
ever for this end. On the 28th of August, the feast of St. Augustine,
the patron of her order, as she was making this prayer in bed, ravished
in ecstasy and her arms stretched forth, she beheld a young man approach
her surrounded with light. It was under this form that her Divine Spouse
usually appeared to her, and he now made upon her body with his right
hand the mark of a common cross. From this time there was a mark like a
cross upon her bosom, consisting of two bands crossed, about three
inches, long and one wide. Later the skin often rose in blisters on this
place, as if from a burn, and when these blisters burst a burning
colourless liquid issued from them, sometimes in such quantities as to
soak through several sheets. She was long without perceiving what the
case really was, and only thought that she was in a strong perspiration.
The particular meaning of this mark has never been known.

Some weeks later, when making the same prayer, she fell into an ecstasy,
and beheld the same apparition, which presented her with a little cross
of the shape described in her accounts of the Passion. She eagerly
received and fervently pressed it to her bosom, and then returned it.
She said that this cross was as soft and white as wax, but she was not
at first aware that it had made an external mark upon her bosom. A short
time after, having gone with her landlady's little girl to visit an old
hermitage near Dulmen, she all on a sudden fell into an ecstasy, fainted
away, and on her recovery was taken home by a poor peasant

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

woman. The sharp pain which she felt in her chest continued to increase,
and she saw that there was what looked like a cross, about three inches
in length, pressed tightly upon her breast-bone, and looking red through
the skin. As she had spoken about her vision to a nun with whom she was
intimate, her extraordinary state began to be a good deal talked of. On
All Souls' day, 1812, she went out for the last time, and with much
difficulty succeeded in reaching the church. From that time till the end
of the year she seemed to be dying, and received the last Sacraments. At
Christmas a smaller cross appeared on the top of that upon her chest. It
was the same shape as the larger one, so that the two together formed a
double forked cross. Blood flowed from this cross every Wednesday, so as
to leave the impression of its shape on paper laid over it. After a time
this happened on Fridays instead. In 1814 this flow of blood took place
less frequently, but the cross became as red as fire every Friday. At a
later period of her life more blood flowed from this cross, especially
every Good Friday; but no attention was paid to it. On the 30th March
1821, the writer of these pages saw this cross of a deep red colour, and
bleeding all over. In its usual state it was colourless, and its
position only marked by slight cracks in the skin. . . . Other
Ecstaticas have received similar marks of the Cross; among others,
Catherine of Raconis, Marina de l’Escobar, Emilia Bichieri, S. Juliani
Falconieri, &c.

She received the stigmas on the last days of the year 1812. On the 29th
December, about three o'clock in the afternoon, she was lying on her bed
in her little room, extremely ill, but in a state of ecstasy and with
her arms extended, meditating on the sufferings of her Lord, and
beseeching him to allow her to suffer with him. She said five Our
Fathers in honour of the Five Wounds, and felt her whole heart burning
with love. She then saw a light descending towards her, and
distinguished in the midst of it the resplendent form of her crucified
Saviour, whose wounds shone like so many furnaces of light. Her heart
was overflowing with joy and sorrow, and, at the sight of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the sacred wounds, her desire to suffer with her Lord became intensely
violent. Then triple rays, pointed like arrows, of the colour of blood,
darted forth from the hands, feet, and side of the sacred apparition,
and struck her hands, feet, and right side. The triple rays from the
side formed a point like the head of a lance. The moment these rays
touched her, drops of blood flowed from the wounds which they made. Long
did she remain in a state of insensibility, and when she recovered her
senses she did not know who had lowered her outstretched arms. It was
with astonishment that she beheld blood flowing from the palms of her
hands, and felt violent pain in her feet and side. It happened that her
landlady's little daughter came into her room, saw her hands bleeding,
and ran to tell her mother, who with great anxiety asked Anne Catherine
what had happened, but was begged by her not to speak about it. She
felt, after having received the stigmas, that an entire change had taken
place in her body; for the course of her blood seemed to have changed,
and to flow rapidly towards the stigmas. She herself used to say: 'No
words can describe in what manner it flows.'

We are indebted to a curious incident for our knowledge of the
circumstances which we have here related. On the 15th December 1819, she
had a detailed vision of all that had happened to herself, but so that
she thought it concerned some other nun who she imagined must be living
not far off, and who she supposed had experienced the same things as
herself. She related all these details with a very strong feeling of
compassion, humbling herself, without knowing it, before her own
patience and sufferings. It was most touching to hear her say: 'I ought
never to complain any more, now that I have seen the sufferings of that
poor nun; her heart is surrounded with a crown of thorns, but she bears
it placidly and with a smiling countenance. It is shameful indeed for me
to complain, for she has a far heavier burden to bear than I have.'

These visions, which she afterwards recognised to be her own history,
were several times repeated, and it is from them that the circumstances
under which she received the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

stigmas became known. Otherwise she would not have related so many
particulars about what her humility never permitted her to speak of, and
concerning which, when asked by her spiritual superiors whence her
wounds proceeded, the utmost she said was: 'I hope that they come from
the hand of God.'

The limits of this work preclude us from entering upon the subject of
stigmas in general, but we may observe that the Catholic Church has
produced a certain number of persons, St. Francis of Assissium being the
first, who have attained to that degree of contemplative love of Jesus
which is the most sublime effect of union with his sufferings, and is
designated by theologians, *Vulnus divinum, Plago amoris viva*. There
are known to have been at least fifty. Veronica Giuliani, a Capuchiness,
who died at Città di Castello in 1727, is the last individual of the
class who has been canonised (on the 26th May 1831). Her biography,
published at Cologne in 1810, gives a description of the state of
persons with stigmas, which in many ways is applicable to Anne
Catherine. Colomba Schanolt, who died at Bamberg in 1787, Magdalen
Lorger, who died at Hadamar in 1806, both Dominicanesses, and Rose
Serra, a Capuchiness at Ozieri in Sardinia, who received the stigmas in
1801, are those of our own times of whom we know the most. Josephine
Kumi, of the Convent of Wesen, near Lake Wallenstadt in Switzerland, who
was still living in 1815, also belonged to this class of persons, but we
are not entirely certain whether she had the stigmas.

Anne Catherine being, as we have said, no longer able to walk or rise
from her bed, soon became unable also to eat. Before long she could take
nothing but a little wine and water, and finally only pure water;
sometimes, but very rarely, she managed to swallow the juice of a cherry
or a plum, but she immediately vomited any solid food, taken in ever so
small a quantity. This inability to take food, or rather this faculty of
living for a great length of time upon nothing but water, we are assured
by learned doctors is not quite unexampled in the history of the sick.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Theologians will be perfectly aware that there are many instances of
contemplative ascetics, and particularly of persons frequently in a
state of ecstasy and who have received the stigmas, remaining long
without taking any other food than the Blessed Sacrament; for instance,
B. Nicholas of Flue, St. Liduvina of Schiedam, St. Catherine of Sienna,
St. Angela of Foligno, and St. Louise de l’Ascension. All the phenomena
exhibited in the person of Anne Catherine remained concealed even from
those who had the most intercourse with her, until the 25th February
1813, when they were discovered accidentally by one of her old convent
companions. By the end of March, the whole town talked of them. On the
23d of March, the physician of the neighbourhood forced her to undergo
an examination. Contrary to his expectation, he was convinced of the
truth, drew up an official report of what be had seen, became her doctor
and her friend, and remained such to her death. On the 28th of March,
commissioners were appointed to examine into her case by the spiritual
authorities of Munster. The consequence of this was that Anne Catherine
was henceforth looked upon kindly by her superiors, and acquired the
friendship of the late Dean Overberg, who from that time paid her every
year a visit of several days' duration, and was her consoler and
spiritual director. The medical counsellor from Druffel, who was present
at this examination in the capacity of doctor, never ceased to venerate
her. In 1814, he published in the Medical Journal of Salzbourg a
detailed account of the phenomena which he had remarked in the person of
Anne Catherine, and to this we refer those of our readers who desire
more particulars upon the subject. On the 4th of April, M. Gamier, the
Commissary-General of the French police, came from Munster to see her;
he inquired minutely into her case, and having learned that she neither
prophesied nor spoke on politics, declared that there was no occasion
for the police to occupy themselves about her. In 1826, he still spoke
of her at Paris with respect and emotion.

On the 22d of July 1813, Overberg came to see her,

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

with Count de Stolberg and his family. They remained two days with her,
and Stolberg, in a letter which has been several times printed, bore
witness to the reality of the phenomena observed in Anne Catherine, and
gave expression to his intense veneration for her. He remained her
friend as long as he lived, and the members of his family never ceased
recommending themselves to her prayers. On the 29th of September 1813,
Overberg took the daughter of the Princess Galitzin (who died in 1806)
to visit her, and they saw with their own eyes blood flow copiously from
her stigmas. This distinguished lady repeated her visit, and, after
becoming Princess of Salm, never varied in her sentiments, but, together
with her family, remained in constant communion of prayer with Anne
Catherine. Many other persons in all ranks of life were, in like manner,
consoled and edified by visiting her bed of suffering. On the 23d of
October 1813, she was carried to another lodging, the window of which
looked out upon a garden. The condition of the saintly nun became day by
day more painful. Her stigmas were a source of indescribable suffering
to her, down to the moment of her death. Instead of allowing her
thoughts to dwell upon those graces to the interior presence of which
they bore such miraculous outward testimony, she learned from them
lessons of humility, by considering them as a heavy cross laid upon her
for her sins. Her suffering body itself was to preach Jesus crucified.
It was difficult indeed to be an enigma to all persons, an object of
suspicion to the greatest number, and of respect mingled with fear to
some few, without yielding to sentiments of impatience, irritability, or
pride. Willingly would she have lived in entire seclusion from the
world, but obedience soon compelled her to allow herself to be examined
and to have judgment passed upon her by a vast number of curious
persons. Suffering, as she was, the most excruciating pains, she was not
even allowed to be her own mistress, but was regarded as something which
every one fancied he had a right to look at and to pass judgment
upon,--often with no good results to any one, but greatly to the
prejudice of her soul

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

and body, because she was thus deprived of so much rest and recollection
of spirit. There seemed to be no bounds to what was expected of her, and
one fat man, who had some difficulty in ascending her narrow winding
staircase, was heard to complain that a person like Anne Catherine, who
ought to be exposed on the public road, where every one could see her,
should remain in a lodging so difficult to reach. In former ages,
persons in her state underwent in private the examination of the
spiritual authorities, and carried out their painful vocation beneath
the protecting shadow of hallowed walls; but our suffering heroine had
been cast forth from the cloister into the world at a time when pride,
coldness of heart, and incredulity were all the vogue; marked with the
stigmas of the Passion of Christ, she was forced to wear her bloody robe
in public, under the eyes of men who scarce believed in the Wounds of
Christ, far less in those which were but their images.

Thus this holy woman, who in her youth had been in the habit of praying
for long hours before pictures of all the stages of Christ's painful
Passion, or before wayside crosses, was herself made like unto a cross
on the public road, insulted by one passer by, bathed in warm tears of
repentance by a second, regarded as a mere physical curiosity by a
third, and venerated by a fourth, whose innocent hands would bring
flowers to lay at her feet.

In 1817 her aged mother came from the country to die by her side. Anne
Catherine showed her all the love she could by comforting and praying
for her, and closing her eyes with her own hands--those hands marked
with the stigmas on the 13th of March of the same year. The inheritance
left to Anne Catherine by her mother was more than sufficient for one so
imbued with the spirit of mortification and suffering; and in her turn
she left it unimpaired to her friends. It consisted of these three
sayings:--'Lord, thy will, not mine, be done;' 'Lord, give me patience,
and then strike hard;' 'Those things which are not good to put in the
pot are at least good to put beneath it.' The meaning of this last
proverb was: If things are not fit to be eaten, they may at least be
burned,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

in order that food may be cooked; this suffering does not nourish my
heart, but by bearing it patiently, I may at least increase the fire of
divine love, by which alone life can profit us anything. She often
repeated these proverbs, and then thought of her mother with gratitude.
Her father had died some little time before.

The writer of these pages became acquainted with her state first through
reading a copy of that letter of Stolberg, to which we have already
alluded, and afterwards through conversation with a friend who had
passed several weeks with her. In September 1818 he was invited by
Bishop Sailer to meet him at the Count de Stolberg's, in Westphalia; and
he went in the first place to Sondermuhlen to see the count, who
introduced him to Overberg, from whom he received a letter addressed to
Anne Catherine's doctor. He paid her his first visit on the 1711 of
September 1818; and she allowed him to pass several hours by her side
each day, until the arrival of Sailer. From the very beginning, she gave
him her confidence to a remarkable extent, and this in the most touching
and ingenuous manner. No doubt she was conscious that by relating
without reserve the history of all the trials, joys, and sorrows of her
whole life, she was bestowing a most precious spiritual alms upon him.
She treated him with the most generous hospitality, and had no
hesitation in doing so, because he did not oppress her and alarm her
humility by excessive admiration. She laid open her interior to him in
the same charitable spirit as a pious solitary would in the morning
offer the flowers and fruit which had grown in his garden during the
night to some way-worn traveller, who, having lost his road in the
desert of the world, finds him sitting near his hermitage. Wholly
devoted to her God, she spoke in this open manner as a child would have
done, unsuspectingly, with no feelings of mistrust, and with no selfish
end in view. May God reward her!

Her friend daily wrote down all the observations that he made concerning
her, and all that she told him about her life, whether interior or
exterior. Her words were

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

characterised alternately by the most childlike simplicity and the most
astonishing depth of thought, and they fore. shadowed, as it were, the
vast and sublime spectacle which later was unfolded, when it became
evident that the past, the present, and the future, together with all
that pertained to the sanctification, profanation, and judgment of
souls, formed before and within her an allegorical and historical drama,
for which the different events of the ecclesiastical year furnished
subjects, and which it divided into scenes, so closely linked together
were all the prayers and sufferings which she offered in sacrifice for
the Church militant.

On the 22d of October 1818 Sailer came to see her, and having remarked
that she was lodging at the back of a public-house, and that men were
playing at nine-pins under her window, said in the playful yet
thoughtful manner which was peculiar to him: 'See, see; all things are
as they should be--the invalid nun, the spouse of our Lord, is lodging
in a public-house above the ground where men are playing at nine-pins,
like the soul of man in his body.' His interview with Anne Catherine was
most affecting; it was indeed beautiful to behold these two souls, who
were both on fire with the love of Jesus, and conducted by grace through
such different paths, meet thus at the foot of the Cross, the visible
stamp of which was borne by one of them. On Friday, the 23d of October,
Sailer remained alone with her during nearly the whole of the day; he
saw blood flow from her head, her hands, and her feet, and he was able
to bestow upon her great consolation in her interior trials. He most
earnestly recommended her to tell everything without reserve to the
writer of these pages, and he came to an understanding upon the subject
with her ordinary director. He heard her confession, gave her the Holy
Communion on Saturday, the 24th, and then continued his journey to the
Count de Stolberg's. On his return, at the beginning of November, he
again passed a day with her. He remained her friend until death, prayed
constantly for her, and asked her prayers whenever he found himself in
trying or

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

difficult positions. The writer of these pages remained until January.
He returned again in May 1819, and continued to watch Anne Catherine
almost uninterruptedly until her death.

The saintly maiden continually besought the Almighty to remove the
exterior stigmas, on account of the trouble and fatigue which they
occasioned, and her prayer was granted at the end of seven years.
Towards the conclusion of the year 1819, the blood first flowed less
frequently from her wounds, and then ceased altogether. On the 25th of
December, scabs fell from her feet and hands, and there only remained
white scars, which became red on certain days, but the pain she suffered
was undiminished in the slightest degree. The mark of the cross, and the
wound on her right side, were often to be seen as before but not at any
stated times. On certain days she always had the most painful sensations
around her head, as though a crown of thorns were being pressed upon it.
On these occasions she could not lean her head against anything nor even
rest it on her hand, but had to remain for long hours, sometimes even
for whole nights, sitting up in her bed, supported by cushions, whilst
her pallid face, and the irrepressible groans of pain which escaped her,
made her like an awful living representation of suffering. After she had
been in this state, blood invariably flowed more or less copiously from
around her head. Sometimes her head-dress only was soaked with it, but
sometimes the blood would flow down her face and neck. On Good Friday,
April 19th, 1819, all her wounds re-opened and bled, and closed again on
the following days. A most rigorous inquiry into her state was made by
some doctors and naturalists. For that end she was placed alone in a
strange house, where she remained from the 7th to the 29th of August;
but this examination appears to have produced no particular effects in
any way. She was brought back to her own dwelling on the 29th of August,
and from that time until she died she was left in peace, save that she
was occasionally annoyed by private disputes and public insults. On this
subject Overberg wrote her the

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

following words: 'What have you had to suffer personally of which you
can complain? I am addressing a soul desirous of nothing so much as to
become more and more like to her divine Spouse. Have you not been
treated far more gently than was your adorable Spouse? Should it not be
a subject of rejoicing to you, according to the spirit, to have been
assisted to resemble him more closely, and thus to be more pleasing in
his eyes? You had suffered much with Jesus, but hitherto insults had
been for the most part spared you. With the crown of thorns you had not
worn the purple mantle and the robe of scorn, much less had you yet
heard the cry, *Away with him! Crucify him! Crucify him*! I cannot doubt
but that these sentiments are yours. Praise be to Jesus Christ.'

On Good Friday, the 30th of March 1820, blood flowed from her head,
feet, hands, chest, and side. It happened that when she fainted, one of
the persons who were with her, knowing that the application of relies
relieved her, placed near her feet a piece of linen in which some were
wrapped, and the blood which came from her wounds reached this piece of
linen after a time. In the evening, when this same piece of linen with
the relies was being, placed on her chest and shoulders, in which she
was suffering much, she suddenly exclaimed, while in a state of ecstasy:
'It is most wonderful, but I see my Heavenly Spouse lying in the tomb in
the earthly Jerusalem; and I also see him living in the heavenly
Jerusalem surrounded by adoring saints, and in the midst of these saints
I see a person who is not a saint--a nun. Blood flows from her head, her
side, her hands, and her feet, and the saints are above the bleeding
parts.'

On the 9th February 1821 she fell into an ecstasy at the time of the
funeral of a very holy priest. Blood flowed from her forehead, and the
cross on her breast bled also. Some one asked her, 'What is the matter
with you?' She smiled, and spoke like one awakening from a dream: 'We
were by the side of the body. I have been accustomed lately to hear
sacred music, and the *De Profundis* made a great impression upon me.'
She died upon the same

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

day three years later. In 1821, a few weeks before Easter, she told us
that it had been said to her during her prayer, 'Take notice, you will
suffer on the real anniversary of the Passion, and not on the day marked
this year in the Ecclesiastical Calendar.' On Friday, the 30th of March,
at ten o'clock in the morning, she sank down senseless. Her face and
bosom were bathed in blood, and her body appeared covered with bruises
like what the blows of a whip would have inflicted. At twelve o'clock in
the day, she stretched herself out in the form of a cross, and her arms
were so extended as to be perfectly dislocated. A few minutes before two
o'clock, drops of blood flowed from her feet and hands. On Good Friday,
the 20th of April, she was simply in a state of quiet contemplation.
This remarkable exception to the general rule seemed to be an effect of
the providence of God, for, at the hour when her wounds usually bled, a
number of curious and ill-natured individuals came to see her with the
intention of causing her fresh annoyances, by publishing what they saw;
but they thus were made unintentionally to contribute to her peace, by
saying that her wounds had ceased to bleed.

On the 19th of February 1822 she was again warned that she would suffer
on the last Friday of March, and not on Good Friday.

On Friday the 15th, and again on Friday the 29th, the cross on her bosom
and the wound of her side bled. Before the 29th, she more than once felt
as though a stream of fire were flowing rapidly from her heart to her
side, and down her arms and legs to the stigmas, which looked red and
inflamed. On the evening of Thursday the 28th, she fell into a state of
contemplation on the Passion, and remained in it until Friday evening.
Her chest, head, and side bled; all the veins of her hands were swollen,
and there was a painful spot in the centre of them, which felt damp,
although blood did not flow from it. No blood flowed from the stigmas
excepting upon the 3d of March, the day of the finding of the Holy
Cross. She had also a vision of the discovery of the true cross by St.
Helena, and imagined herself to be lying in the excavation near the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

cross. Much blood came in the morning from her head and side, and in the
afternoon from her hands and feet, and it seemed to her as though she
were being made the test of whether the cross was really the Cross of
Jesus Christ, and that her blood was testifying to its identity.

In the year 1823, on Holy Thursday and Good Friday, which came on the
27th and 28th of March, she had visions of the Passion, during which
blood flowed from all her wounds, causing her intense pain. Amid these
awful sufferings, although ravished in spirit, she was obliged to speak
and give answers concerning all her little household affairs, as if she
had been perfectly strong and well, and she never let fall a complaint,
although nearly dying. This was the last time that her blood gave
testimony to the reality of her union with the sufferings of him who has
delivered himself up wholly and entirely for our salvation. Most of the
phenomena of the ecstatic life which are shown us in the lives and
writings of Saints Bridget, Gertrude, Mechtilde, Hildegarde, Catherine
of Sienna, Catherine of Genoa, Catherine of Bologna, Colomba da Rieti,
Lidwina of Schiedam, Catherine Vanini, Teresa of Jesus, Anne of St.
Bartholomew, Magdalen of Pazzi, Mary Villana, Mary Buonomi, Marina
d’Escobar, Crescentia de Kaufbeuern, and many other nuns of
contemplative orders, are also to be found in the history of the
interior life of Anne Catherine Emmerich. The same path was marked out
for her by God. Did she, like these holy women, attain the end? God
alone knows. Our part is only to pray that such may have been the case,
and we are allowed to hope it. Those among our readers who are not
acquainted with the ecstatic life from the writings of those who have
lived it, will find information on this subject in the Introduction of
Goërres to the writings of Henry Suso, published at Ratisbonne in 1829.

Since many pious Christians, in order to render their life one perpetual
act of adoration, endeavour to see in their daily employments a
symbolical representation of some manner of honouring God, and offer it
to him in

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

union with the merits of Christ, it cannot appear extra. ordinary that
those holy souls who pass from an active life to one of suffering and
contemplation, should sometimes see their spiritual labours under the
form of those earthly occupations which formerly filled their days. Then
their acts were prayers; now their prayers are acts; but the form
remains the same. It was thus that Anne Catherine, in her ecstatic life,
beheld the series of her prayers for the Church under the forms of
parables bearing reference to agriculture, gardening, weaving, sowing,
or the care of sheep. All these different occupations were arranged,
according to their signification, in the different periods of the common
as well as the ecclesiastical year, and were pursued under the patronage
and with the assistance of the saints of each day, the special graces of
the corresponding feasts of the Church being also applied to them. The
signification of this circle of symbols had reference to all the active
part of her interior life. One example will help to explain our meaning.
When Anne Catherine, while yet a child, was employed in weeding, she
besought God to root up the cockle from the field of the Church. If her
hands were stung by the nettles, or if she was obliged to do afresh the
work of idlers, she offered to God her pain and her fatigue, and
besought him, in the name of Jesus Christ, that the pastor of souls
might not become weary, and that none of them might cease to labour
zealously and diligently. Thus her manual labour became a prayer.

I will now give a corresponding example of her life of contemplation and
ecstasy. She had been ill several times, and in a state of almost
continual ecstasy, during which she often moaned, and moved her hands
like a person employed in weeding. She complained one morning that her
hands and arms smarted and itched, and on examination they were found to
be covered with blisters, like what would have been produced by the
stinging of nettles. She then begged several persons of her acquaintance
to join their prayers to hers for a certain intention. The next day her
hands were inflamed and painful, as they would

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

have been after hard work; and when asked the cause, she replied: 'Ah! I
have had so many nettles to root up in the vineyard, because those whose
duty it was to do it only pulled off the stems, and I was obliged to
draw the roots with much difficulty out of a stony soil.' The person who
had asked her the question began to blame these careless workmen, but he
felt much confused when she replied: 'You were one of them,--those who
only pull off the stems of the nettles, and leave the roots in the
earth, are persons who pray carelessly.' It was afterwards discovered
that she had been praying for several dioceses which were shown to her
under the figure of vineyards laid waste, and in which labour was
needed. The real inflammation of her hands bore testimony to this
symbolical rooting up of the nettles; and we have, perhaps, reason to
hope that the churches shown to her under the appearances of vineyards
experienced the good effects of her prayer and spiritual labour; for
since the door is opened to those who knock, it must certainly be opened
above all to those who knock with such energy as to cause their fingers
to be wounded.

Similar reactions of the spirit upon the body are often found in the
lives of persons subject to ecstasies, and are by no means contrary to
faith. St. Paula, if we may believe St. Jerome, visited the holy places
in spirit just as if she had visited them bodily; and a like thing
happened to St. Colomba of Rieti and St. Lidwina of Schiedam. The body
of the latter bore traces of this spiritual journey, as if she had
really travelled; she experienced all the fatigue that a painful journey
would cause: her feet were wounded and covered with marks which looked
as if they had been made by stones or thorns, and finally she had a
sprain from which she long suffered.

She was led on this journey by her guardian angel, who told her that
these corporeal wounds signified that she had been ravished in body and
spirit.

Similar hurts were also to be seen upon the body of Anne Catherine
immediately after some of her visions. Lidwina began her ecstatic
journey by following her good

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

angel to the chapel of the Blessed Virgin before Schiedam; Anne
Catherine began hers by following her angel guardian either to the
chapel which was near her dwelling, or else to the Way of the Cross of
Coesfeld.

Her journeys to the Holy Land were made, according to the accounts she
gave of them, by the most opposite roads; sometimes even she went all
round the earth, when the task spiritually imposed upon her required it.
In the course of these journeys from her home to the most distant
countries., she carried assistance to many persons, exercising in their
regard works of mercy, both corporal and spiritual, and this was done
frequently in parables. At the end of a year she would go over the same
ground again, see the same persons, and give an account of their
spiritual progress or of their relapse into sin. Every part of this
labour always bore some reference to the Church, and to the king dom. of
God upon earth.

The end of these daily pilgrimages which she made in spirit was
invariably the Promised Land, every part of which she examined in
detail, and which she saw sometimes in its present state, and sometimes
as it was at, different periods of sacred history; for her
distinguishing characteristic and special privilege was an intuitive
knowledge of the history of the Old and New Testaments, and of that of
the members of the Holy Family, and of all the saints whom she was
contemplating in spirit. She saw the signification of all the festival
days of the ecclesiastical year under both a devotional and an
historical point of view. She saw and described, day by day, with the
minutest detail, and by name, places, persons, festivals, customs, and
miracles, all that happened during the public life of Jesus until the
Ascension, and the history of the apostles for several weeks after the
Descent of the Holy Ghost. She regarded all her visions not as mere
spiritual enjoyments, but as being, so to speak, fertile fields,
plentifully strewn with the merits of Christ, and which had not as yet
been cultivated; she was often engaged in spirit in praying that the
fruit of such and such Sufferings of our Lord might be given to the
Church, and she would beseech God to apply to his

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Church the merits
of our Saviour which were its inheritance, and of which she would, as it
were, take possession, in its name, with the most touching simplicity
and ingenuousness.

She never considered her visions to have any reference to her exterior
Christian life, nor did she regard them as being of any historical
value. Exteriorly she knew and believed nothing but the catechism, the
common history of the Bible, the gospels for Sundays and festivals, and
the Christian almanack, which to her far-sighted vision was an
inexhaustible mine of hidden riches, since it gave her in a few pages a
guiding thread which led her through all time, and by means of which she
passed from mystery to mystery, and solemnised each with all the saints,
in order to reap the fruits of eternity in time, and to preserve and
distribute them in her pilgrimage around the ecclesiastical year, that
so the will of God might be accomplished on earth as it is in Heaven.
She had never read the Old or the New Testaments, and when she was tired
of relating her visions, she would sometimes say: 'Read that in the
Bible,' and then be astonished to learn that it was not there; 'for,'
she would add, 'people are constantly saying in these days that you need
read nothing but the Bible, which contains everything, &c. &c.'

The real task of her life was to suffer for the Church and for some of
its members, whose distress was shown her in spirit, or who asked her
prayers without knowing that this poor sick nun had something more to do
for them than to say the *Pater noster*, but that all their spiritual
and corporal sufferings became her own, and that she had to endure
patiently the most terrible pains, without being assisted, like the
contemplatives of former days, by the sympathising prayers of an entire
community. In the age when she lived, she had no other assistance than
that of medicine. While thus enduring sufferings which she had taken
upon herself for others, she often turned her thoughts to the
corresponding sufferings of the Church, and when thus suffering, for one
single person, she would likewise offer all she endured for the whole
Church.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

The following is a remarkable instance of the sort:--During several
weeks she had every symptom of consumption; violent irritation of the
lungs, excessive perspiration, which soaked her whole bed, a racking
cough, continual expectoration, and a strong continual fever. So fearful
were her sufferings that her death was hourly expected and even desired.
It was remarked that she had to struggle strangely against a strong
temptation to irritability. Did she yield for an instant, she burst into
tears, her sufferings increased tenfold, and she seemed unable to exist
unless she immediately gained pardon in the sacrament of penance. She
had also to combat a feeling of aversion to a certain person whom she
had not seen for years. She was in despair because this person, with
whom nevertheless she declared she had nothing in common, was always
before her eyes in the most evil dispositions, and she wept bitterly,
and with much anxiety of conscience, saying that she would not commit
sin, that her grief must be evident to all, and other things which were
quite unintelligible to the persons listening to her. Her illness
continued to increase, and she was thought to be on the point of death.
At this moment one of her friends saw her, to his great surprise,
suddenly raise herself up on her bed, and say:--

'Repeat with me the prayers for those in their last agony.' He did as
requested, and she answered the Litany in a firm voice. After some
little time, the bell for the agonising was heard, and a person came in
to ask Anne Catherine's prayers for his sister, who was just dead. Anne
Catherine asked for details concerning her illness and death, as if
deeply interested in the subject, and the friend above-mentioned heard
the account given by the new comer of a consumption resembling in the
minutest particulars the illness of Anne Catherine herself. The deceased
woman had at first been in so much pain and so disturbed in mind that
she had seemed quite unable to prepare herself for death; but during the
last fortnight she had been better, had made her peace with God, having
in the first place been reconciled to a person with whom

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

she was at enmity, and had died in peace, fortified by the last
sacraments, and attended by her former enemy. Anne Catherine gave a
small sum of money for the burial and funeral-service of this person.
Her sweatings, cough, and fever now left her, and she resembled a person
exhausted with fatigue, whose linen has been changed, and who has been
placed on a fresh bed. Her friend said to her, 'When this fearful
illness came upon you, this woman grew better, and her hatred for
another was the only obstacle to her making peace with God. You took
upon yourself, for the time, her feelings of hatred, she died in good
dispositions, and now you seem tolerably well again. Are you still
suffering on her account?' 'No, indeed!' she replied; 'that would be
most unreasonable; but how can any person avoid suffering when even the
end of his little finger is in pain? We are all one body in Christ.' 'By
the goodness of God,' said her friend, 'you are now once more somewhat
at ease.' 'Not for very long, though,' she replied with a smile; 'there
are other persons who want my assistance.' Then she turned round on her
bed, and rested awhile.

A very few days later, she began to feel intense pain in all her limbs,
and symptoms of water on the chest manifested themselves. We discovered
the sick person for whom Anne Catherine was suffering, and we saw that
his sufferings suddenly diminished or immensely increased in exact
inverse proportion to those of Anne Catherine.

Thus did charity compel her to take upon herself the illnesses and even
the temptations of others, that they might be able in peace to prepare
themselves for death. She was compelled to suffer in silence, both to
conceal the weaknesses of her neighbour, and not to be regarded as mad
herself; she war, obliged to receive all the aid that medicine could
afford her for an illness thus taken voluntarily for the relief of
others, and to be reproached for temptations which were not her own;
finally, it was necessary that she should appear perverted in the eyes
of men, that so those for whom she was suffering might be converted
before God.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

One day a friend in deep affliction was sitting by her bedside, when she
suddenly fell into a state of ecstasy, and began to pray aloud: 'O, my
sweet Jesus, permit me to carry that heavy stone!' Her friend asked her
what was the matter. 'I am on my way to Jerusalem,' she replied, 'and I
see a poor man walking along with the greatest difficulty, for there is
a large stone upon his breast, the weight of which nearly crushes him.'
Then again, after a few moments, she exclaimed: 'Give me that heavy
stone, you cannot carry it any farther; give it to me.' All on a sudden
she sank down fainting, as if crushed beneath some heavy burden, and at
the same moment her friend felt himself relieved from the weight of
sorrow which oppressed him, and his heart overflowing with extraordinary
happiness. Seeing her in such a state of suffering, he asked her what
the matter was, and she looking at him with a smile, replied: 'I cannot
remain here any longer. Poor man, you must take back your burden.'
Instantly her friend felt all the weight of his affliction return to
him, whilst she, becoming as well again as before, continued her journey
in spirit to Jerusalem.

We will give one more example of her spiritual exertions. One morning
she gave her friend a little bag containing some rye-flour and eggs, and
pointed out to him a small house where a poor woman, who was in a
consumption, was living with her husband and two little children. He was
to tell her to boil and take them, as when boiled they would be good for
her chest. The friend, on entering the cottage, took the bag from under
his cloak, when the poor mother, who, flushed with fever, was lying on a
mattress between her half-naked children, fixed her bright eyes upon
him, and holding out her thin hands, exclaimed: 'O, sir, it must be God
or Sister Emmerich who sends you to me! You are bringing me some
rye-flour and eggs.' Here the poor woman, overcome by her feelings,
burst into tears, and then began to cough so violently that she had to
make a sign to her husband to speak for her. He said that the previous
night Gertrude had been much disturbed, and had talked a great

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

deal in her sleep, and that on awaking she had told him her dream in
these words: 'I thought that I was standing at the door with you, when
the holy nun came out of the door of the next house, and I told you to
look at her. She stopped in front of us, and said to me: "Ah, Gertrude,
you look very ill; I will send you some rye-flour and eggs, which will
relieve your chest." Then I awoke.' Such was the simple tale of the poor
man; he and his wife both eagerly expressed their gratitude, and the
bearer of Anne Catherine's alms left the house much overcome. He did not
tell her anything of this when he saw her, but a few days after, she
sent him again to the same place with a similar present, and he then
asked her how it was she knew that poor woman? 'You know,' she replied,
'that I pray every evening for all those who suffer; I should like to go
and relieve them, and I generally dream that I am going from one abode
of suffering to another, and that I assist them to the best of my power.
In this way I went in my dream to that poor woman's house; she was
standing at the door with her husband, and I said to her: "Ah, Gertrude,
you look very ill; I will send you some rye-flour and eggs, which will
relieve your chest." And this I did through you, the next morning.' Both
persons had remained in their beds, and dreamed the same thing, and the
dream came true. St. Augustin, in his *City of God*, book xviii., c. 18,
relates a similar thing of two philosophers, who visited each other in a
dream, and explained some passages of Plato, both remaining asleep in
their own houses.

These sufferings, and this peculiar species of active labour, were like
a single ray of light, which enlightened her whole life. Infinite was
the number of spiritual labours and sympathetic sufferings which came
from all parts and entered into her heart--that heart so burning with
love of Jesus Christ. Like St. Catherine of Sienna and some other
ecstatics, she often felt the most profound feeling of conviction that
our Saviour had taken her heart out of her bosom, and placed his own
there instead for a time.

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

The following fragment will give some idea of the mysterious symbolism
by which she was interiorly directed. During a portion of the year 1820
she performed many labours in spirit, for several different parishes;
her prayers being represented under the figure of most severe labour in
a vineyard. What we have above related concerning the nettles is of the
same character.

On the 6th of September her heavenly guide said to her: '"You weeded,
dug around, tied, and pruned the vine; you ground down the weeds so that
they could never spring up any more; and then you went away joyfully and
rested from your prayers. Prepare now to labour hard from the feast of
the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin to that of St. Michael; the grapes
are ripening and must be well watched." Then he led me,' she continued,
'to the vineyard of St. Liboire, and showed me the vines at which I had
worked. My labour had been successful, for the grapes were getting their
colour and growing large, and in some parts the red juice was running
down on the ground from them. My guide said to me: "When the virtues of
the good begin to shine forth in public, they have to combat bravely, to
be oppressed, to be tempted, and to suffer persecution. A hedge must be
planted around the vineyard in order that the ripe grapes may not be
destroyed by thieves and wild beasts, *i.e.* by temptation and
persecution." He then showed me how to build a wall by heaping up
stones, and to raise a thick hedge of thorns all around. As my hands
bled from such severe labour, God, in order to give me strength,
permitted me to see the mysterious signification of the vine, and of
several other fruit trees. Jesus Christ is the true Vine, who is to take
root and grow in us; all useless wood must be cut away, in order not to
waste the sap, which is to become the wine, and in the Most Blessed
Sacrament the Blood of Christ. The pruning of the vine has to be done
according to certain rules which were made known to me. This pruning is,
in a spiritual sense, the cutting off whatever is useless, penance and
mortification, that so the true Vine may grow in us, and bring forth

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

fruit. in the place of corrupt nature, which only bean wood and leaves.
The pruning is done according to fixed rules, for it is only required
that certain useless shoots should be cut off in man, and to lop off
more would be to mutilate in a guilty manner. No pruning should ever be
done upon the stock which has been planted in humankind through the
Blessed Virgin, and is to remain in it for ever. The true Vine unites
heaven to earth, the Divinity to humanity; and it is the human part that
is to be pruned, that so the divine alone may grow. I saw so many other
things relating to the vine that a book as large as the Bible could not
contain them. One day, when I was suffering acute pain in my chest, I
besought our Lord with groans not to give me a burthen above my strength
to bear; and then my Heavenly Spouse appeared, and said to me, . . . "I
have laid thee on my nuptial couch, which is a couch of suffering; I
have given thee suffering and expiation for thy bridal garments and
jewels. Thou must suffer, but I will not forsake thee; thou art fastened
to the Vine, and thou wilt not be lost." Then I was consoled for all my
sufferings. It was likewise explained to me why in ray visions relating
to the feasts of the family of Jesus, such, for instance, as those of
St. Anne, St. Joachim, St. Joseph, &c., I always saw the Church of the
festival under the figure of a shoot of the vine. The same was the case
on the festivals of St. Francis of Assissium, St. Catherine of Sienna,
and of all the saints who have had the stigmas.

'The signification of my sufferings in all my limbs was explained to me
in the following vision: I saw a gigantic human body in a horrible state
of mutilation, and raised upwards towards the sky. There were no fingers
or toes on the hands and feet, the body was covered with frightful
wounds, some of which were fresh and bleeding, others covered with dead
flesh or turned into excrescences. The whole of one aide was black,
gangrened, and as it were half eaten away. I suffered as though it had
been my own body that was in this state, and then my guide said to me,
"This is the body of the Church, the body of all

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

men and thine also." Then, pointing to each wound, he showed me at the
same time some part of the world; I saw an infinite number of men and
nations separated from the Church, all in their own peculiar way, and I
felt pain as exquisite from this separation as if they had been torn
from my body. Then my guide said to me: "Let thy sufferings teach thee a
lesson, and offer them to God in union with those of Jesus for all who
are separated. Should not one member call upon another, and suffer in
order to cure and unite it once more to the body? When those parts which
are most closely united to the body detach themselves, it is as though
the flesh were torn from around the heart. In my ignorance, I thought
that he was speaking of those brethren who are not in communion with us,
but my guide added: "Who are our brethren? It is not our blood relations
who are the nearest to our hearts, but those who are our brethren in the
blood of Christ--the children of the Church who fall away." He showed me
that the black and gangrened side of the body would soon be cured; that
the putrified flesh which had collected around the wounds represented
heretics who divide one from the other in proportion as they increase;
that the dead flesh was the figure of all. who are spiritually dead, and
who are void of any feeling; and that the ossified parts represented
obstinate and hardened heretics. I saw and felt in this manner every
wound and its signification. The body reached up to heaven. It was the
body of the Bride of Christ, and most painful to behold. I wept
bitterly, but feeling at once deeply grieved and strengthened by sorrow
and [compassion](errata.htm#0), I began again to labour with all my
strength.'

Sinking beneath the weight of life and of the task imposed upon her she
often besought God to deliver her, and she then would appear to be on
the very brink of the grave. But each time she would say: 'Lord, not my
will but thine be done! If my prayers and sufferings are useful let me
live a thousand years, but grant that I may die rather than ever offend
thee.' Then she would receive orders to live, and arise, taking up her
cross, once more to

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

bear it in patience and suffering after her Lord. From time to time the
road of life which she was pursuing used to be shown to her, leading to
the top of a mountain on which was a shining and resplendent city--the
heavenly Jerusalem. Often she would think she had arrived at that
blissful abode, which seemed to be quite near her, and her joy would be
great. But all on a sudden she would discover that she was still
separated from it by a valley, and then she would have to descend
precipices. and follow indirect paths, labouring, suffering, and
performing deeds of charity everywhere. She had to direct wanderers into
the right road, raise up the fallen, sometimes even carry the paralytic,
and drag the unwilling by force, and all these deeds of charity were as
so many fresh weights fastened to her cross. Then she walked with more
difficulty, bending beneath her burden and sometimes even falling to the
ground.

In 1823 she repeated more frequently than usual that she could not
perform her task in her present situation, that she had not strength for
it, and that it was in a peaceful convent that she needed to have lived
and died. She added that God would soon take her to himself, and that
she had besought him to permit her to obtain by her prayers in the next
world what her weakness would not permit her to accomplish in this. St.
Catherine of Sienna, a short time before death, made a similar prayer.

Anne Catherine had previously had a vision concerning what her prayers
might obtain after death, with regard to things that were not in
existence during her life. The year 1823, the last of which she
completed the whole circle, brought her immense labours. She appeared
desirous to accomplish her entire task, and thus kept the promise which
she had previously made of relating the history of the whole Passion. It
formed the subject of her Lenten meditations during this year, and of
them the present volume is composed. But she did not on this account
take less part in the fundamental mystery of this penitential season, or
in the different mysteries of each of the festival days of the Church,
if indeed the words *to* 

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

*take part* be sufficient to express the wonderful manner in which she
rendered visible testimony to the mystery celebrated in each festival by
a sudden change in her corporal and spiritual life. See on this subject
the chapter entitled *Interruption of the Pictures of the Passion*.

Every one of the ceremonies and festivals of the Church was to her far
more than the consecration of a remembrance. She beheld in the
historical foundation of each solemnity an act of the Almighty, done in
time for the reparation of fallen humanity. Although these divine acts
appeared to her stamped with the character of eternity, yet she was well
aware that in order for man to profit by them in the bounded and narrow
sphere of time, he must, as it were, take possession of them in a series
of successive moments, and that for this purpose they had to be repeated
and renewed in the Church, in the order established by Jesus Christ and
the Holy Spirit. All festivals and solemnities were in her eyes eternal
graces which returned at fixed epochs in every ecclesiastical year, in
the same manner as the fruits and harvests of the earth come in their
seasons in the natural year.

Her zeal and gratitude in receiving and treasuring up these graces were
untiring, nor was she less eager and zealous in offering them to those
who neglected their value. In the same manner as her compassion for her
crucified Saviour had pleased God and obtained for her the privilege of
being marked with the stigmas of the Passion as with a seal of the most
perfect love, so all the sufferings of the Church and of those who were
in affliction were repeated in the different states of her body and
soul. And all these wonders took place within her, unknown to those who
were around her; nor was she herself even more fully conscious of them
than is the bee of the effects of its work, while yet she was tending
and cultivating, with all the care of an industrious and faithful
gardener, the fertile garden of the ecclesiastical year. She lived on
its fruits, and distributed them to others; she strengthened herself and
her friends with the flowers and herbs which she cultivated; or, rather,
she herself was in this garden like a

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

sensitive plant, a sunflower, or some wonderful plant in which,
independent of her own will, were reproduced all the seasons of the
year, all the hours of the day, and all the changes of the atmosphere.

At the end of the ecclesiastical year of 1823, she had for the last time
a vision on the subject of making up the accounts of that year. The
negligences of the Church militant and of her servants were shown to
Anne Catherine, under various symbols; she saw how many graces had not
been coöperated with, or been rejected to a greater or less extent, and
how many had been entirely thrown away. It was made known to her how our
Blessed Redeemer had deposited for each year in the garden of the Church
a complete treasure of his merits, sufficient for every requirement, and
for the expiation of every sin. The strictest account was to be given of
all graces which had been neglected, wasted, or wholly rejected, and the
Church-militant was punished for this negligence or infidelity of her
servants by being oppressed by her enemies, or by temporal humiliations.
Revelations of this description raised to excess her love for the
Church, her mother. She passed days and nights in praying for her, in
offering to God the merits of Christ, with continual groans, and in
imploring mercy. Finally, on these occasions, she gathered together all
her courage, and offered to take upon herself both the fault and the
punishment, like a child presenting itself before the king's throne, in
order to suffer the punishment she had incurred. It was then said to
her, 'See how wretched and miserable thou art thyself; thou who art
desirous to satisfy for the sins of others.' And to her great terror she
beheld herself as one mournful mass of infinite imperfection. But still
her love remained undaunted, and burst forth in these words, 'Yes, I am
full of misery and sin; but I am thy spouse, O my Lord, and my Saviour!
My faith in thee and in the redemption which thou hast brought us covers
all my sins as with thy royal mantle. I will not leave thee until thou
hast accepted my sacrifice, for the superabundant treasure of thy merits
is closed to none of thy faithful

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

servants.' At length her prayer became wonderfully energetic, and to
human ears there was like a dispute and combat with God, in which she
was carried away and urged on by the violence of love. If her sacrifice
was accepted, her energy seemed to abandon her, and she was left to the
repugnance of human nature for suffering. When she had gone through this
trial, by keeping her eyes fixed on her Redeemer in the Garden of
Olives, she next had to endure indescribable sufferings of every
description, bearing them all with wonderful patience and sweetness. We
used to see her remain several days together, motionless and insensible,
looking like a dying lamb. Did we ask her how she was, she would half
open her eyes, and reply with a sweet smile, 'My sufferings are most
salutary.'

At the beginning of Advent, her sufferings were a little soothed by
sweet visions of the preparations made by the Blessed Virgil, to leave
her home, and then of her whole journey with St. Joseph to Bethlehem.
She accompanied them each day to the humble inns where they rested for
the night, or went on before them to prepare their lodgings. During this
time she used to take old pieces of linen, and at night, while sleeping,
make them into baby clothes and caps for the children of poor women, the
times of whose confinements were near at hand. The next day she would be
surprised to see all these things neatly arranged in her drawers. This
happened to her every year about the same time, but this year she had
more fatigue and less consolation. Thus, at the hour of our Saviour's
birth, when she was usually perfectly overwhelmed with joy, she could
only crawl with the greatest difficulty to the crib where the Child
Jesus was lying, and bring him no present but myrrh, no offering but her
cross, beneath the weight of which she sank down half dying at his feet.
It seemed as though she were for the last time making up her earthly
accounts with God, and for the last time also offering herself in the
place of a countless number of men who were spiritually and corporally
afflicted. Even the little that is known of the manner in which she took
upon herself

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

the sufferings of others is almost incomprehensible. She very truly
said: 'This year the Child Jesus has only brought me a cross and
instruments of suffering.'

She became each day more and more absorbed in her sufferings, and
although she continued to see Jesus travelling from city to city during
his public life, the utmost she ever said on the subject was, briefly to
name in which direction he was going. Once, she asked suddenly in a
scarcely audible voice, 'What day is it?' When told that it was the 14th
of January, she added: 'Had I but a few days more, I should have related
the entire life of our Saviour, but now it. is no longer possible for me
to do so.' These words were the more incomprehensible as she did not
appear to know even which year of the public life of Jesus she was then
contemplating in spirit. In 1820 she had related the history of our
Saviour down to the Ascension, beginning at the 28th of July of the
third year of the public life of Jesus, after which she returned to the
first year of the life of Jesus, and had continued down to the 10th of
January of the third year of his public life. On the 27th of April 1823,
in consequence of a journey made by the writer, an interruption of her
narrative took place, and lasted down to the 21st of October. She then
took up the thread of her narrative where she had left it, and continued
it to the last weeks of her life. When she spoke of a few days being
wanted, her friend himself did not know how far her narrative went, not
having had leisure to arrange what he had written. After her death he
became convinced that if she had been able to speak during the last
fourteen days of her life, 'she would have brought it down to the 28th
of July of the third year of the public life of our Lord, consequently
to where she had taken it up in 1820.

Her condition daily became more frightful. She, who usually suffered in
silence, uttered stifled groans, so awful was the anguish she endured.
On the 15th of January she said: 'The Child Jesus brought me great
sufferings at Christmas. I was once more by his manger at Bethlehem. He
was burning with fever, and showed me his sufferings

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

and those of his mother. They were so poor that they had no food but a
wretched piece of bread. He bestowed still greater sufferings upon me,
and said to me: "Thou art mine; thou art my spouse; suffer as I
suffered, without asking the reason why." I do not know what my
sufferings are to be, nor how long they will last. I submit blindly to
my martyrdom, whether for life or for death: I only desire that the
hidden designs of God may be accomplished in me. On the other hand, I am
calm, and I have consolations in my sufferings. Even this morning I was
very happy. Blessed be the holy Name of God!'

Her sufferings continued, if possible, to increase. Sitting up, and with
her eyes closed, she fell from one side to another, while smothered
groans escaped her lips. If she laid down, she was in danger of being
stifled; her breathing was hurried and oppressed, and all her nerves and
muscles were shaken and trembled with anguish. After violent retching,
she suffered terrible pain in her bowels, so much so that it was feared
gangrene must be forming there. Her throat was parched and burning, her
mouth swollen, her cheeks crimson with fever, her hands white as ivory.
The scars of the stigmas shone like silver beneath her distended skin.
Her pulse gave from 160 to 180 pulsations per minute. Although unable to
speak from her excessive suffering, she bore every duty perfectly in
mind. On the evening of the 26th, she said to her friend, 'To-day is the
ninth day, you must pay for the wax taper and novena at the chapel of
St. Anne.' She was alluding to a novena which she had asked to have made
for her intention, and she was afraid lest her friends should forget it.
On the 27th, at two o'clock in the afternoon, she received Extreme
Unction, greatly to the relief both of her soul and body. In the evening
her friend, the excellent curé of H------, prayed at her bedside, which
was an immense comfort to her. She said to him: 'How good and beautiful
all this is!' And again: 'May God be a thousand times praised and
thanked!'

The approach of death did not wholly interrupt the wonderful union of
her life with that of the Church. A

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

friend having visited her on the 1st of February in the evening, had
placed himself behind her bed where she could not see him, and was
listening with the utmost compassion to her low moans and interrupted
breathing, when suddenly all became silent, and he thought that she was
dead. At this moment the evening bell ringing for the matins of the
Purification was heard. It was the opening of this festival which had
caused her soul to be ravished in ecstasy. Although still in a very
alarming state, she let some sweet and loving words concerning the
Blessed Virgin escape her lips during the night and day of the festival.
Towards twelve o'clock in the day, she said in a voice already changed
by the near approach of death, 'It was long since I had felt so well. I
have been ill quite a week, have I not? I feel as though I knew nothing
about this world of darkness! O, what light the Blessed Mother of God
showed me! She took me with her, and how willingly would I have remained
with her!' Here she recollected herself for a moment, and then Said,
placing her finger on her lip: 'But I must not speak of these things.'
From that time she said that the slightest word in her praise greatly
increased her sufferings.

The following days she was worse. On the 7th, in the evening, being
rather more calm, she said: 'Ah, my sweet Lord Jesus, thanks be to thee
again and again for every part of my life. Lord, thy will and not mine
be done.' On the 8th of February, in the evening, a priest was praying
near her bed, when she gratefully kissed his hand, begged him to assist
at her death, and said, 'O Jesus, I live for thee, I die for thee. O
Lord, praise be to thy holy name, I no longer see or hear!' Her friends
wished to change her position, and thus ease her pain a little; but she
said, 'I am on the Cross, it will soon all be over, leave me in peace.'
She had received all the last Sacraments, but she wished to accuse
herself once more in confession of a slight fault which she had already
many times confessed; it was probably of the same nature as a sin which
she had committed in her childhood, of which she often accused herself,
and which consisted in having gone through

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

a hedge into a neighbour's garden, and coveted some apples which had
fallen on the ground. She had only looked at them; for, thank God, she
said, she did not touch them, but she thought that was a sin against the
tenth commandment. The priest gave her a general absolution; after which
she stretched herself out, and those around her thought that she was
dying. A person who had often given her pain now drew near her bed and
asked her pardon. She looked at him in surprise, and said with the most
expressive accent of truth, 'I have nothing to forgive any living
creature.'

During the last days of her life, when her death was momentarily
expected, several of her friends remained constantly in the room
adjoining hers. They were speaking in a low tone, and so that she could
not hear them, of her patience, faith, and other virtues, when all on a
sudden they heard her dying voice saying: 'Ah, for the love of God, do
not praise me--that keeps me here, because I then have to suffer double.
O my God! how many fresh flowers are falling upon me!' She always saw
flowers as the forerunners and figures of sufferings. Then she rejected
all praises, with the most profound conviction of her own unworthiness,
saying: 'God alone is good: everything must be paid, down to the last
farthing. I am poor and loaded with sin, and I can only make up for
having been praised by sufferings united to those of Jesus Christ. Do
not praise me, but let me die in ignominy with Jesus on the cross.'

Boudon, in his life of Father Surin, relates a similar trait of a dying
man, who had been thought to have lost the sense of hearing, but who
energetically rejected a word of praise pronounced by those who were
surrounding his bed.

A few hours before death, for which she was longing, saying, 'O Lord
assist me; come, O Lord Jesus? a word of praise appeared to detain her,
and she most energetically rejected it by making the following act of
humility: 'I cannot die if so many good persons think well of me through
a mistake; I beg of you to tell them all that I am

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

a wretched sinner! Would that I could proclaim so as to be heard by all
men, how great a sinner I am! I am far beneath the good thief who was
crucified by the side of Jesus, for he and all his contemporaries had
not so terrible an account as we shall have to render of all the graces
which have been bestowed upon the Church.' After this declaration, she
appeared to grow calm, and she said to the priest who was comforting
her: 'I feel now as peaceful and as much filled with hope and confidence
as if I had never committed a sin.' Her eyes turned lovingly towards the
cross which was placed at the foot of her bed, her breathing became
accelerated, she often drank some liquid; and when the little crucifix
was held to her, she from humility only kissed the feet. A friend who
was kneeling by her bedside in tears, had the comfort of often holding
her the water with which to moisten her lips. As she had laid her hand,
on which the white sear of the wound was most distinctly visible, on the
counterpane, he took hold of that hand, which was already cold, and as
he inwardly wished for some mark of farewell from her, she slightly
pressed his. Her face was calm and serene, bearing an expression of
heavenly gravity, and which can only be compared to that of a valiant
wrestler who after making unheard-of efforts to gain the victory, sinks
back and dies in the very act of seizing the prize. The priest again
read through the prayers for persons in their last agony, and she then
felt an inward inspiration to pray for a pious young friend whose feast
day it was. Eight o'clock struck; she breathed more freely for the space
of a few minutes, and then cried three times with a deep groan: 'O Lord,
assist me Lord, Lord, come!' The priest rang his bell, and said, 'She is
dying.' Several relations and friends who were in the next room came in
and knelt down to pray. She was then holding in her hand a lighted
taper, which the priest was supporting. She breathed forth several
slight sighs, and then her pure soul escaped her chaste lips, and
hastened, clothed in the nuptial garment, to appear in heavenly hope
before the Divine Bridegroom, and be united for ever to that blessed
company of virgins who

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth. Her lifeless body sank gently
back on the pillows at half-past eight o'clock, P.M., on the 9th
February 1824.

A person who had taken great interest in her during life wrote as
follows: 'After her death, I drew near to her bed. She was supported by
pillows, and lying on her left side. Some crutches, which had been
prepared for her by her friends on one occasion when she had been able
to take a few turns in the room, were hanging over her head, crossed, in
a corner. Near them hung a little oil painting representing the death of
the Blessed Virgin, which had been given her by the Princess of Salm.
The expression of her countenance was perfectly sublime, and bore the
traces of the spirit of self-sacrifice, the patience and resignation of
her whole life; she looked as though she had died for the love of Jesus,
in the very act of performing some work of charity for others. Her right
hand was resting on the counterpane--that hand on which God had bestowed
the unparalleled favour of being able at once to recognise by the touch
anything that was holy, or that had been consecrated by the Church--a
favour which perhaps no one had ever before enjoyed to so great an
extent--a favour by which the interests of religion might be
inconceivably promoted, provided it was made use of with discretion, and
which surely had not been bestowed upon a poor ignorant peasant girl
merely for her own personal gratification. For the last time I took in
mine the band marked with a sign so worthy of our utmost veneration, the
hand which was as a spiritual instrument in the instant recognition of
whatever was holy, that it might be honoured even in a grain of
sand--the charitable industrious hand, which had so often fed the hungry
and clothed the naked--this hand was now cold and lifeless. A great
favour had been withdrawn from earth, God had taken from us the hand of
his spouse, who had rendered testimony to, prayed, and suffered for the
truth. It appeared as though it had not been without meaning, that she
had resignedly laid down upon her bed the hand which was the outward
expression of a particular privilege granted by

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Divine grace.
Fearful of having the strong impression made upon me by the sight of her
countenance diminished by the necessary but disturbing preparations
which were being made around her bed, I thoughtfully left her room. If,
I said to myself--if, like so many holy solitaries, she had died alone
in a grave prepared by her own hands, her friends--the birds--would have
covered her with flowers and leaves; if, like other religious, she had
died among virgins consecrated to God, and that their tender care and
respectful veneration had followed her to the grave, as was the case,
for example, with St. Columba of Rieti, it would have been edifying and
pleasing to those who loved her; but doubtless such honours rendered to
her lifeless remains would not have been conformable to her love for
Jesus, whom she so much desired to resemble in death as in life.'

The same friend later wrote as follows: 'Unfortunately there was no
official post-mortem examination of her body, and none of those
inquiries by which she had been so tormented during life were instituted
after her death. The friends who surrounded her neglected to examine her
body, probably for fear of coming upon some striking phenomenon, the
discovery of which might have caused much annoyance in various ways. On
Wednesday the 11th of February her body was prepared for burial. A pious
female, who would not give up to any one the task of rendering her this
last mark of affection, described to me as follows the condition in
which she found her: "Her feet were crossed like the feet of a crucifix.
The places of the stigmas were more red than usual. When we raised her
head blood flowed from her nose and mouth. All her limbs remained
flexible and with none of the stiffness of death even till the coffin
was closed." On Friday the 13th of February she was taken to the grave,
followed by the entire population of the place. She reposes in the
cemetery, to the left of the cross, on the side nearest the hedge. In
the grave in front of hers there rests a good old peasant of Welde, and
in the grave behind a poor but virtuous female from Dernekamp.

'On the evening of the day when she was buried, a

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

rich man went, not to Pilate, but to the curé of the place. He asked for
the body of Anne Catherine, not to place it in a new sepulchre, but to
buy it at a high price for a Dutch doctor. The proposal was rejected as
it deserved, but it appears that the report spread in the little town
that the body had been taken away, and it is said that the people went
in great numbers to the cemetery to ascertain whether the grave had been
robbed.'

To these details we will add the following extract from an account
printed in December 1824, in the *Journal of Catholic Literature* of
Kerz. This account was written by a person with whom we are
unacquainted, but who appears to have been well informed: 'About six or
seven weeks after the death of Anne Catherine Emmerich, a report having
got about that her body had been stolen away, the grave and coffin were
opened in secret, by order of the authorities, in the presence of seven
witnesses. They found with surprise not unmixed with joy that corruption
had not yet begun its work on the body of the pious maiden. Her features
and countenance were smiling like those of a person who is dreaming
sweetly. She looked as though she had but just been placed in the
coffin, nor did her body exhale any corpse-like smell. *It is good to
keep the secret of the king*, says Jesus the son of Sirach; but it is
also good to reveal to the world the greatness of the mercy of God.'

We have been told that a stone has been placed over her grave. We lay
upon it these pages; may they contribute to immortalise the memory of a
person who has relieved so many pains of soul and body, and that of the
spot where her mortal remains lie awaiting the Day of Resurrection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[27:1](pjc03.htm#fr_4) Under the Government of
Jerome Bonaparte. King of Westphalia. (Abbé Cazalès)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Reader](pjc04)
