[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc04)  [Next](pjc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

# MEDITATION I.

### Preparations for the Pasch.

*Holy Thursday, the 13*th *of Nisan* (29th of March).

YESTERDAY evening it was that the last great public repast of our Lord
and his friends took place in the house of Simon the Leper, at Bethania,
and Mary Magdalen for the last time anointed the feet of Jesus with
precious ointment. Judas was scandalised upon this occasion, and
hastened forthwith to Jerusalem again to conspire with the high-priests
for the betrayal of Jesus into their hands. After the repast, Jesus
returned to the house of Lazarus, and some of the Apostles went to the
inn situated beyond Bethania. During the night Nicodemus again came to
Lazarus' house, had a long conversation with our Lord, and returned
before daylight to Jerusalem, being accompanied part of the way by
Lazarus.

The disciples had already asked Jesus where he would eat the Pasch.
To-day, before dawn, our Lord sent for Peter, James, and John, spoke to
them at some length concerning all they had to prepare and order at
Jerusalem, and told them that when ascending Mount Sion, they would meet
the man carrying a pitcher of water. They were already well acquainted
with this man, for at the last Pasch, at Bethania, it had been him who
prepared the meal for Jesus, and this is why St. Matthew says: *a
certain man*. They were to follow him home, and say to him: *The Master
saith, My time is near at hand, with thee I make the pasch with my
disciples* (Matt. xxvi. 18). They were then to be shown the supper-room,
and make all necessary preparations.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

I saw the two Apostles ascending towards Jerusalem, along a ravine, to
the south of the Temple, and in the direction of the north side of Sion.
On the southern side of the mountain on which the Temple stood, there
were some rows of houses; and they walked opposite these houses,
following the stream of an intervening torrent. When they had reached
the summit of Mount Sion, which is higher than the mountain of the
Temple, they turned their steps towards the south, and, just at the
beginning of a small ascent, met the man who had been named to them;
they followed and spoke to him as Jesus had commanded. He was much
gratified by their words, and answered, that a supper had already been
ordered to be prepared at his house (probably by Nicodemus), but that he
had not been aware for whom, and was delighted to learn that it was for
Jesus. This man's name was Heli, and he was the brother-in-law of
Zachary of Hebron, in whose house Jesus had in the preceding year
announced the death of John the Baptist. He had only one son, who was a
Levite, and a friend of St. Luke, before the latter was called by our
Lord, and five daughters, all of whom were unmarried. He went up every
year with his servants for the festival of the Pasch, hired a room and
prepared the Pasch for persons who had no friend in the town to lodge
with. This year he had hired a supper-room which belonged to Nicodemus
and Joseph of Arimathea. He showed the two Apostles its position and
interior arrangement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meditation II. The Supper-Room](pjc06)
