[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc17)  [Next](pjc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

### Means employed by the enemies of Jesus for carrying out their designs against him.

No sooner was Jesus arrested than Annas and Caiphas were informed, and
instantly began to arrange their plans with regard to the course to be
pursued. Confusion speedily reigned everywhere--the rooms were lighted
up in haste, guards placed at the entrances, and messengers dispatched
to different parts of the town to convoke the members of the Council,
the Scribes, and all who were to take a part in the trial. Many among
them had, however, assembled at the house of Caiphas as soon as the
treacherous compact with Judas was completed, and had remained there to
await the course of events. The different classes of ancients were
likewise assembled, and as the Pharisees, Sadducces, and Herodians were
congregated in Jerusalem from all parts of the country for the
celebration of the festival, and had long been concerting measures with
the Council for the arrest of our Lord, the High Priests now sent for
those whom they knew to be the most bitterly opposed to Jesus, and
desired them to assemble the witnesses, gather together every possible
proof, and bring all before the Council. The proud Sadducces of
Nazareth, of Capharnaum, of Thirza, of Gabara, of Jotapata, and of Silo,
whom Jesus had so often reproved before the people, were actually dying
for revenge. They hastened to all the inns to seek out those persons
whom they knew to be enemies of our Lord, and offered them bribes in
order to secure their appearance. But, with the exception of a few
ridiculous calumnies, which were certain to be disproved as soon as
investigated, nothing tangible could be brought forward against Jesus,
excepting, indeed, those foolish accusations which he had so often
refuted in the synagogue.

The enemies of Jesus hastened, however, to the tribunal of Caiphas,
escorted by the Scribes and Pharisees of Jerusalem, and accompanied by
many of those merchants whom our Lord drove out of the Temple when

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

they were holding market there; m also by the proud doctors whom he had
silenced before all the people, and even by some who could not forgive
the humiliation of being convicted of error when he disputed with them
in the Temple at the age of twelve. There was likewise a large body of
impenitent sinners whom he had refused to cure, relapsed sinners whose
diseases had returned, worldly young men whom he would not receive as
disciples, avaricious persons whom he had enraged by causing the money
which they had been in hopes of possessing to be distributed in alms.
Others there were whose friends he had cured, and who had thus been
disappointed in their expectation of inheriting property; debauchees
whose victims he had converted; and many despicable characters who made
their fortunes by flattering and fostering the vices of the great.

All these emissaries of Satan were overflowing with rage against
everything holy, and consequently with an indescribable hatred of the
Holy of the Holies. They were farther incited by the enemies of our
Lord, and therefore assembled in crowds round the palace of Caiphas, to
bring forward all their false accusations and to endeavour to cover with
infamy that spotless Lamb, who took upon himself the sins of the world,
and accepted the burden in order to reconcile man with God.

Whilst all these wicked beings were busily consulting as to what was
best to be done, anguish and anxiety filled the hearts of the friends of
Jesus, for they were ignorant of the mystery which was about to be
accomplished, and they wandered about, sighing, and listening to every
different opinion. Each word they uttered gave rise to feelings of
suspicion on the part of those whom they addressed, and if they were
silent, their silence was set down as wrong. Many well-meaning but weak
and undecided characters yielded to temptation, were scandalised, and
lost their faith; indeed,. the number of those who persevered was very
small indeed. Things were the same then as they oftentimes are now,
persons were willing to serve God if they met with no opposition from
their fellow

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

creatures, but were ashamed of the Cross if held in contempt by others.
The hearts of some were, however, touched by the patience displayed by
our Lord in the midst of his sufferings, and they walked away silent and
sad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. A Glance at Jerusalem](pjc19)
