[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc13)  [Next](pjc15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

# THE PASSION.

<span class="small">'If thou knowest not how to meditate on high and
heavenly things, rest on the Passion of Christ, and willingly dwell in
his sacred wounds. For, if thou fly devoutly to the wounds and precious
stigmas of Jesus, thou shalt feel great comfort in tribulation.' *Imit.
of Christ*, book ii. chap. 1.</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

ON the evening of the 18th of February, 1823, a friend of Sister
Emmerich went up to the bed, where she was lying apparently asleep; and
being much struck by the beautiful and mournful expression of her
countenance, felt himself inwardly inspired to raise his heart fervently
to God, and offer the Passion of Christ to the Eternal Father, in union
with the sufferings of all those who have carried their cross after him.
While making this short prayer, he chanced to fix his eyes for a moment
upon the stigmatised hands of Sister Emmerich. She immediately hid them
under the counterpane, starting as if some one had given her a blow. He
felt surprised at this, and asked her, 'What has happened to you?' 'Many
things,' she answered, in an expressive tone. Whilst he was considering
what her meaning could be, she appeared to be asleep. At the end of
about a quarter of an hour, she suddenly started up with all the
eagerness of a person having a violent struggle with another, stretched
out both her arms, clenching her hand, as if to repel an enemy standing
on the left side of her bed, and exclaimed in an indignant voice: 'What
do you mean by this contract of Magdalum?' Then

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

she continued to speak with the warmth of a person who is being
questioned during a quarrel--'Yes, it is that accursed spirit--the liar
from the beginning--Satan, who is reproaching him about the Magdalum
contract, and other things of the same nature, and says that he spent
all that money upon himself.' When asked, 'Who has spent money? Who is
being spoken to in that way?' she replied, 'Jesus, my adorable Spouse,
on Mount Olivet.' Then she again turned to the left, with menacing
gestures, and exclaimed, 'What meanest thou, O father of lies, with thy
Magdalum contract? Did he not deliver twenty-seven poor prisoners at
Thirza, with the money derived from the sale of Magdalum? I saw him, and
thou darest to say that he has brought confusion into the whole estate,
driven out its inhabitants, and squandered the money for which it was
sold? But thy time is come, accursed spirit! thou wilt be chained, and
his heel will crush thy head.'

Here she was interrupted by the entrance of another person; her friends
thought that she was in delirium, and pitied her. The following morning
she owned that the previous night she had imagined herself to be
following our Saviour to the Garden of Olives, after the institution of
the Blessed Eucharist, but that just at that moment some one having
looked at the stigmas on her hands with a degree of veneration, she felt
so horrified at this being done in the presence of our Lord, that she
hastily hid them, with a feeling of pain. She then related her vision of
what took place in the Garden of Olives, and as she continued her
narrations the following days, the friend who was listening to her was
enabled to connect the different scenes of the Passion together. But as,
during Lent, she was also celebrating the combats of our Lord with Satan
in the desert, she had to endure in her own person many sufferings and
temptations. Hence there were a few pauses in the history of the
Passion, which were, however, easily filled up by means of some later
communications.

She usually spoke in common German, but when in a state of ecstasy, her
language became much purer, and

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

her narrations partook at once of child-like simplicity and dignified
inspiration. Her friend wrote down all that she had said, directly he
returned to his own apartments; for it was seldom that he could so much
as even take notes in her presence. The Giver of all good gifts bestowed
upon him memory, zeal, and strength to bear much trouble and fatigue, so
that he has been enabled to bring this work to a conclusion. His
conscience tells him that be has done his best, and he humbly begs the
reader, if satisfied with the result of his labours, to bestow upon him
the alms of an occasional prayer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. Jesus in the Garden of Olives](pjc15)
