[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc16)  [Next](pjc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III.

### Jesus is arrested.

JESUS was standing with his three Apostles on the road between
Gethsemani, and the Garden of Olives, when Judas and the band who
accompanied him made their appearance. A warm dispute arose between
Judas and the soldiers, because he wished to approach first and speak to
Jesus quietly as if nothing was the matter, and then for them to come up
and seize our Saviour, thus letting him suppose that he had no
connection with the affair. But the men answered rudely, 'Not so,
friend, thou shalt not escape from our hands until we have the Galilean
safely bound,' and seeing the eight Apostles who hastened to rejoin
Jesus when they heard the dispute which was going on, they
(notwithstanding the opposition of Judas) called up four archers, whom
they had left at a little distance, to assist. When by the light of the
moon Jesus and the three Apostles first saw the band of armed men, Peter
wished to repel them by force of arms, and said: 'Lord, the other eight
are close at hand, let us attack the archers,' but Jesus bade him hold
his peace, and then turned and walked back a few steps. At this moment
four disciples came out of the garden, and asked what was taking place.
Judas was about to reply, but the soldiers interrupted, and would not
let him speak. These four disciples were James the Less, Philip, Thomas,
and Nathaniel; the last named, who was a son of the aged Simeon, had
with a few others joined the eight Apostles at Gethsemani, being perhaps
sent by the friends of Jesus to know what was going on, or possibly
simply incited by curiosity and anxiety. The other disciples were
wandering to and fro, on the look out, and ready to fly at a moment's
notice.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

Jesus walked up to the soldiers and said in a firm and clear voice,
'*Whom seek ye*?' The leaders answered, '*Jesus of Nazareth*.' Jesus
said to them, '*I am he*.' Scarcely had he pronounced these words than
they all fell to the ground as if struck with apoplexy. Judas, who stood
by them, was much alarmed, and as he appeared desirous of approaching,
Jesus held out his hand and said: '*Friend, whereto art thou come*?'
Judas stammered forth something about business which had brought him.
Jesus answered in few words, the sense of which was: '*It were better
for thee that thou hadst never been born*;' however, I cannot remember
the words exactly. In the mean time, the soldiers had risen, and again
approached Jesus, but they waited for the sign of the kiss, with which
Judas had promised to salute his Master that they might recognise him.
Peter and the other disciples surrounded Judas, and reviled him in
unmeasured terms, calling him thief and traitor; he tried to mollify
their wrath by all kinds of lies, but his efforts were vain, for the
soldiers came up and offered to defend him, which proceeding manifested
the truth at once.

Jesus again asked, '*Whom seek ye*?' They replied: '*Jesus of
Nazareth*.' Jesus made answer, '*I have told you that I am he*,' '*if
therefore you seek me, let these go their way*.' At these words the
soldiers fell for the second time to the ground, in convulsions similar
to those of epilepsy, and the Apostles again surrounded Judas and
expressed their indignation at his shameful treachery. Jesus said to the
soldiers, '*Arise*,' and they arose, but at first quite speechless from
terror. They then told Judas to give them the signal agreed upon
instantly, as their orders were to seize upon no one but him whom Judas
kissed. Judas therefore approached Jesus, and gave him a kiss, saying,
'*Hail Rabbi*.' Jesus replied, '*What, Judas, dost thou betray the Son
of Man with a kiss*?' The soldiers immediately surrounded Jesus, and the
archers laid hands upon him. Judas wished to fly, but the Apostles would
not allow it; they rushed at the soldiers and cried out, '*Master, shall
we strike with the sword*?'

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Peter, who was
more impetuous than the rest, seized the sword, and struck Malchus, the
servant of the high priest, who wished to drive away the Apostles, and
cut off his right ear; Malchus fell to the ground, and a great tumult
ensued.

The archers had seized upon Jesus, and wished to bind him; while Malchus
and the rest of the soldiers stood around. When Peter struck the former,
the rest were occupied in repulsing those among the disciples who
approached too near, and in pursuing those who ran away. Four disciples
made their appearance in the distance, and looked fearfully at the scene
before them; but the soldiers were still too much alarmed at their late
fall to trouble themselves much about them, and besides they did not
wish to leave our Saviour without a certain number of men to guard him.
Judas fled as soon as he had given the traitorous kiss, but was met by
some of the disciples, who overwhelmed him with reproaches. Six
Pharisees, however, came to his rescue, and he escaped whilst the
archers were busily occupied in pinioning Jesus.

When Peter struck Malchus, Jesus said to him, '*Put up again thy sword
into its place; for all that take the sword shall perish with the sword.
Thinkest thou that I cannot ask my Father, and he will give me presently
more than twelve legions of angels? How then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that so it must be done*?' Then he said, 'Let me cure this
man;' and approaching Malchus, he touched his ear, prayed, and it was
healed. The soldiers who were standing near, as well as the archers and
the six Pharisees, far from being moved by this miracle, continued to
insult our Lord, and said to the bystanders, 'It is a trick of the
devil, the powers of witchcraft made the ear appear to be cut off, and
now the s a power gives it the appearance of being healed.'

Then Jesus again addressed them, '*You are come out as it were to a
robber, with swords and clubs, to apprehend me. I sat daily with you
teaching in the Temple, and you laid not hands upon me, but this is your
hour and the power of darkness*.' The Pharisees ordered him to be bound
still more

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

strongly, and made answer in a contemptuous tone, 'Ah! thou couldst not
overthrow us by thy witchcraft.' Jesus replied, but I do not remember
his words, and all the disciples fled. The four archers and the six
Pharisees did not fall to the ground at the words of Jesus, because, as
was afterwards revealed to me, they as well as Judas, who likewise did
not fall, were entirely in the power of 'Satan, whereas all those who
fell and rose again were afterwards converted, and became Christians;
they had only surrounded Jesus, and not laid hands upon him. Malchus was
instantly converted by the cure wrought upon him, and during the time of
the Passion his employment was to carry messages backwards and forwards
to Mary and the other friends of our Lord.

The archers, who now proceeded to pinion Jesus with the greatest
brutality, were pagans of the lowest extraction, short, stout, and
active, with sandy complexions, resembling those of Egyptian slaves, and
bare legs, arms, and neck.

They tied his hands as tightly as possible with hard new cords,
fastening the right-hand wrist under the left elbow, and the left-hand
wrist under the right elbow. They encircled his waist with a species of
belt studded with iron points, and bound his hands to it with osier
bands, while on his neck they put a collar covered with iron points, and
to this collar were appended two leathern straps, which were crossed
over his chest like a stole and fastened to the belt. They then fastened
four ropes to different parts of the belt, and by means of these ropes
dragged our Blessed Lord from side to side in the most cruel manner. The
ropes were new; I think they were purchased when the Pharisees first
determined to arrest Jesus. The Pharisees lighted fresh torches, and the
procession started. Ten soldiers walked in front, the archers who held
the ropes and dragged Jesus along, followed, and the Pharisees and ten
other soldiers brought up the rear. The disciples wandered about at a
distance, and wept and moaned as if beside themselves from grief. John
alone followed, and walked at no great distance from the

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

soldiers, until the Pharisees, seeing him, ordered the guards to arrest
him. They endeavoured to obey, but he ran away, leaving in their hands a
cloth with which he was covered, and of which they had taken hold when
they endeavoured to seize him. He had slipped off his coat, that he
might escape more easily from the hands of his enemies, and kept nothing
on but a short under garment without sleeves, and the long band which
the Jews usually wore, and which was wrapped round his neck, head, and
arms. The archers behaved in the most cruel manner to Jesus as they led
him along; this they did to curry favour with the six Pharisees, who
they well knew perfectly hated and detested our Lord. They led him along
the roughest road they could select, over the sharpest stones, and
through the thickest mire; they pulled the cords as tightly as possible;
they struck him with knotted cords, as a butcher would strike the beast
he is about to slaughter; and they accompanied this cruel treatment with
such ignoble and indecent insults that I cannot recount them. The feet
of Jesus were bare; he wore, besides the ordinary dress, a seamless
woollen garment, and a cloak which was thrown over all. I have forgotten
to state that when Jesus was arrested, it was done without any order
being presented or legal ceremony taking place; he was treated as a
person without the pale of the law.

The procession proceeded at a good pace; when they left the road which
runs between the Garden of Olives a, that of Gethsemani, they turned to
the right, and soon reached a bridge which was thrown over the Torrent
of Cedron. When Jesus went to the Garden of Olives with the Apostles, he
did not cross this bridge, but went by a private path which ran through
the Valley of Josaphat, and led to another bridge more to the south. The
bridge over which the soldiers led Jesus was long, being thrown over not
only the torrent, which was very large in this part, but likewise over
the valley, which extends a considerable distance to the right and to
the left, and is much lower than the bed of the river. I saw our Lord
fall twice before he reached the bridge, and these falls were caused

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

entirely by the barbarous manner in which the soldiers dragged him; but
when they were half over the bridge they gave full vent to their brutal
inclinations, and struck Jesus with such violence that they threw him
off the bridge into the water, and scornfully recommended him to quench
his thirst there. If God had not preserved him, he must have been killed
by this fall; he fell first on his knee, and then on his face, but saved
himself a little by stretching out his hands, which, although so tightly
bound before, were loosened, I know not whether by miracle, or whether
the soldiers had out the cords before they threw him into the water. The
marks of his feet, his elbows, and. his fingers were miraculously
impressed on the rock on which he fell, and these impressions were
afterwards shown for the veneration of Christians. These stones were
less hard than the unbelieving hearts of the wicked men who surrounded
Jesus, and bore witness at this terrible moment to the Divine Power
which had touched them.

I had not seen Jesus take anything to quench the thirst which had
consumed him ever since his agony in the garden, but he drank when he
fell into the Cedron, and I heard him repeat these words from the
prophetic Psalm, '*In his thirst he will drink water from the torrent*'
(Psalm cviii.).

The archers still held the ends of the ropes with which Jesus was bound,
but it would have been difficult to draw him out of the water on that
side, on account of a wall which was built on the shore; they turned
back and dragged him quite through the Cedron to the shore, and then
made him cross the bridge a second time, accompanying their every action
with insults, blasphemies, and blows. His long woollen garment, which
was quite soaked through, adhered to his legs, impeded every movement,
and rendered it almost impossible for him to walk, and when he reached
the end of the bridge he fell quite down. They pulled him up again in
the most cruel manner, struck him with cords, and fastened the ends of
his wet garment to the belt, abusing him at the same time in the most
cowardly manner. It was not quite midnight when I saw the four

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

archers inhumanly dragging Jesus over a narrow path, which was choked up
with stones, fragments of rock, thistles, and thorns, on the opposite
shore of the Cedron. The six brutal Pharisees walked as close to our
Lord as they could, struck him constantly with thick pointed sticks, and
seeing that his bare and bleeding feet were torn by the stones and
briars, exclaimed scornfully: 'His precursor, John the Baptist, has
certainly not prepared a good path for him here;' or, 'The words of
Malachy, "*Behold, I send my angel before thy face, to prepare the way
before thee*," do not exactly apply now.' Every jest uttered by these
men incited the archers to greater cruelty.

The enemies of Jesus remarked that several persons made their appearance
in the distance; they were only disciples who had assembled when they
heard that their Master was arrested, and who were anxious to discover
what the end would be; but the sight of them rendered the Pharisees
uneasy, lest any attempt should be made to rescue Jesus, and they
therefore sent for a reinforcement of soldiers. At a very short distance
from an entrance opposite to the south side of the Temple, which leads
through a little village called Ophel. to Mount Sion, where the
residences of Annas and Caiphas were situated, I saw a band of about
fifty soldiers, who carried torches, and appeared ready for anything;
the demeanour of these men was outrageous, and they gave loud shouts,
both to announce their arrival, and to congratulate their comrades upon
the success of the expedition. This caused a slight confusion among the
soldiers who were leading Jesus, and Malchus and a few others took
advantage of it to depart, and fly towards Mount Olivet.

When the fresh band of soldiers left Ophel, I saw those disciples who
had gathered together disperse; some went one way, and some another. The
Blessed Virgin and about nine of the holy women, being filled with
anxiety, directed their stops towards the Valley of Josaphat,
accompanied by Lazarus, John the son of Mark, the son of Veronica, and
the son of Simon. The last-named was at Gethsemani with Nathaniel and
the eight Apostles, and had fled when

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the soldiers appeared. He was giving the Blessed Virgin the account of
all that had been done, when the fresh band of soldiers joined those who
were leading Jesus, and she then heard their tumultuous vociferations,
and saw the light of the torches they carried. This sight quite overcame
her; she became insensible, and John took her into the house of Mary,
the mother of Mark.

The fifty soldiers who were sent to join those who had taken Jesus, were
a detachment from a company of three hundred men posted to guard the
gates and environs of Ophel; for the traitor Judas had reminded the High
Priests that the inhabitants of Ophel (who were principally of the
labouring class, and whose chief employment was to bring water and wood
to the Temple) were the most attached partisans of Jesus, and might
perhaps make some attempts to rescue him. The traitor was aware that
Jesus had both consoled, instructed, assisted, and cured the diseases of
many of these poor workmen, and that Ophel was the place where he halted
during his journey from Bethania to Hebron, when John the Baptist had
just been executed. Judas also knew that Jesus had cured many of the
masons who were injured by the fall of the Tower of Siloe. The greatest
part of the inhabitants of Ophel were converted after the death of our
Lord, and joined the first Christian community that was formed after
Pentecost, and when the Christians separated from the Jews and erected
new dwellings, they placed their huts and tents in the valley which is
situated between Mount Olivet and Ophel, and there St. Stephen lived.
Ophel was on a hill to the south of the Temple, surrounded by walls, and
its inhabitants were very poor. I think it was smaller than
Dulmer. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

The slumbers of the good inhabitants of Ophel were disturbed by the
noise of the soldiers; they came out of their houses and ran to the
entrance of the village to ask the cause of the uproar; but the soldiers
received them roughly, ordered them to return home, and in reply to

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

their numerous questions, said, 'We have just arrested Jesus, your false
prophet--he who has deceived you so grossly; the High Priests are about
to judge him, and he will be crucified.' Cries and lamentations arose on
all sides; the poor women and children ran backwards and forwards,
weeping and wringing their hands; and calling to mind all the benefits
they had received from our Lord, they cast themselves on their knees to
implore the protection of Heaven. But the soldiers pushed them on one
side, struck them, obliged them to return to their houses, and
exclaimed, 'What farther proof is required? Does not the conduct of
these persons show plainly that the Galilæan incites rebellion?'

They were, however, a little cautious in their expressions and demeanour
for fear of causing an insurrection in Ophel, and therefore only
endeavoured to drive the inhabitants away from those parts of the
village which Jesus was obliged to cross.

When the cruel soldiers who led our Lord were near the gates of Ophel he
again fell, and appeared unable to proceed a step farther, upon which
one among them, being moved to compassion, said to another, 'You see the
poor man is perfectly exhausted, he cannot support himself with the
weight of his chains; if we wish to get him to the High Priest alive we
must loosen the cords with which his hands are bound, that he may be
able to save himself a little when he falls.' The band stopped for a
moment, the fetters were loosened, and another kind-hearted soldier
brought some water to Jesus from a neighbouring fountain. Jesus thanked
him, and spoke of the 'fountains of living water,' of which those who
believed in him should drink; but his words enraged the Pharisees still
more, and they overwhelmed him with insults and contumelious language. I
saw the heart of the soldier who had caused Jesus to be unbound, as also
that of the one who brought him water, suddenly illuminated by grace;
they were both converted before the death of Jesus, and immediately
joined his disciples.

The procession started again, and reached the gate of

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ophel. Here Jesus
was again saluted by the cries of grief and sympathy of those who owed
him so much gratitude, and the soldiers had considerable difficulty in
keeping back the men and women who crowded round from all parts. They
clasped their hands, fell on their knees, lamented, and exclaimed,
'Release this man unto us, release him! Who will assist, who will
console us, who will cure our diseases? Release him unto us!' It was
indeed heartrending to look upon Jesus; his face was white, disfigured,
and wounded, his hair dishevelled, his dress wet and soiled, and his
savage and drunken guards were dragging him about and striking him with
sticks like a poor dumb animal led to the slaughter. Thus was he
conducted through the midst of the afflicted inhabitants of Ophel, and
the paralytic whom he had cured, the dumb to whom he had restored
speech, and the blind whose eyes he had opened, united, but in vain, in
offering supplications for his release.

Many persons from among the lowest and most degraded classes had been
sent by Annas, Caiphas, and the other enemies of Jesus, to join the
procession, and assist the soldiers both in ill-treating Jesus, and in
driving away the inhabitants of Ophel. The village of Ophel was seated
upon a hill, and I saw a great deal of timber placed there ready for
building. The procession had to proceed down a hill, and then pass
through a door made in the wall. On one side of this door stood a large
building erected originally by Solomon, and on the other the pool of
Bethsaida. After passing this, they followed a westerly direction down a
steep street called Millo, at the end of which a turn to the south
brought them to the house of Annas. The guards never ceased their cruel
treatment of our Divine Saviour, and excused such conduct by saying that
the crowds who gathered together in front of the procession compelled
them to severity. Jesus fell seven times between Mount Olivet and the
house of Annas.

The inhabitants of Ophel were still in a state of consternation and
grief, when the sight of the Blessed Virgin, who passed through the
village accompanied by the holy

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

women and some other friends on her way from the Valley of Cedron to the
house of Mary the mother of Mark, excited them still more, and they made
the place reëcho with sobs and lamentations, while they surrounded and
almost carried her in their arms. Mary was speechless from grief, and
did not open her lips after she reached the house of Mary the mother of
Mark, until the arrival of John, who related all he had seen since Jesus
left the supper-room; and a little later she was taken to the house of
Martha, which was near that of Lazarus. Peter and John, who had followed
Jesus at a distance, went in haste to some servants of the High Priest
with whom the latter was acquainted, in order to endeavour by their
means to obtain admittance into the tribunal where their Master was to
be tried. These servants acted as messengers, and had just been ordered
to go to the houses of the ancients, and other members of the Council,
to summon them to attend the meeting which was convoked. As they were
anxious to oblige the Apostles, but foresaw much difficulty in obtaining
their admittance into the tribunal, they gave them cloaks similar to
those they themselves wore, and made them assist in carrying messages to
the members in order that afterwards they might enter the tribunal of
Caiphas, and mingle, without being recognised, among the soldiers and
false witnesses, as all other persons were to be expelled. As Nicodemus,
Joseph of Arimathea, and other well-intentioned persons were members of
this Council, the Apostles undertook to let them know what was going to
be done in the Council, thus securing the presence of those friends of
Jesus whom the Pharisees had purposely omitted to invite. In the mean
time Judas wandered up and down the steep and wild precipices at the
south of Jerusalem, despair marked on his every feature, and the devil
pursuing him to and fro, filling his imagination with still darker
visions, and not allowing him a moment's respite.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[134:1](pjc17.htm#fr_9) Dulmen is a small town in
Westphalia, where Sister Emmerich lived at this time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Means employed by the enemies of Jesus for carrying
out their designs against him](pjc18)
