[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc26)  [Next](pjc28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

# CHAPTER XIII.

### The Morning Trial.

CAIPHAS, Annas, the ancients, and the scribes assembled again in the
morning in the great hall of the tribunal, to have a legal trial, as
meetings at night were not lawful, and could only be looked upon in the
light of preparatory audiences. The majority of the members had slept in
the house of Caiphas, where beds had been prepared for them, but some,
and among them Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, had gone home, and
returned at the dawn of day. The meeting was crowded, and the members
commenced their operations in the most hurried manner possible. They
wished to condemn Jesus to death at once, but Nicodemus, Joseph, and
some others opposed their wishes and demanded that the decision should
be deferred until after the festival, for fear of causing an
insurrection among the people, maintaining likewise that no criminal
could be justly condemned upon charges which were not proved, and that
in the case now before them all the witnesses contradicted one another.
The High Priests and their adherents became very angry, and told Joseph
and Nicodemus, in plain terms, that they were not surprised at their
expressing displeasure at what had been done, because they were
themselves partisans of the Galilæan and his doctrines, and were fearful
of being convicted. The High Priest even went so far as to endeavour to
exclude from the Council all those members who were in the slightest
degree favourable to Jesus. These members protested that they washed
their hands of all the future proceedings of the Council, and leaving
the room went to the Temple, and from this day never again took their
seats in the Council. Caiphas then ordered the guards to bring Jesus
once more into his presence, and to prepare everything for taking him to
Pilate's court directly he should have pronounced sentence. The
emissaries of the Council hurried off to the prison, and with their
usual brutality untied the hands of Jesus, dragged off the old mantle

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

which they had thrown over his shoulders, made him plat on his own
soiled garment, and having fastened ropes round his waist, dragged him
out of the prison. The appearance of Jesus, when he passed through the
midst of the crowd who were already assembled in the front of the house,
was that of a victim led to be sacrificed; his countenance was totally
changed and disfigured from ill-usage, and his garments stained and
torn; but the sight of his sufferings, far from exciting a feeling of
compassion in the hard hearted Jews, simply filled them with disgust,
and increased their rage. Pity was, indeed, a feeling unknown in their
cruel breasts.

Caiphas, who did not make the slightest effort to conceal his hatred,
addressed oar Lord haughtily in these words: '*If thou be Christ, tell
us plainly*.' Then Jesus raised his head, and answered with great
dignity and calmness, '*If I shall tell you, you will not believe me;
and if I shall also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go. But
hereafter the Son of Man shall be sitting on the night hand of the power
of God*.' The High Priests looked at one another, and said to Jesus,
with a disdainful laugh, '*Art thou, then, the Son of God*?' And Jesus
answered, with the voice of eternal truth, '*You say that I am*.' At
these words they all exclaimed, '*What need we any further testimony?
For we ourselves have heard it from his own mouth*.'

They all arose instantly and vied with each other as to who should heap
the most abusive epithets upon Jesus, whom they termed a low-born
miscreant, who aspired to being their Messiah, and pretended to be
entitled to sit at the right hand of God. They ordered the archers to
tie his hands again, and to fasten a chain round his neck (this was
usually done to criminals condemned to death), and they then prepared to
conduct him to Pilate's hall, where a messenger had already been
dispatched to beg him to have all in readiness for trying a criminal, as
it was necessary to make no delay on account of the festival day.

The Jewish Priests murmured among themselves at

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

being obliged to apply to the Roman governor for the confirmation of
their sentence, but it was necessary, as they had not the right of
condemning criminals excepting for things which concerned religion and
the Temple alone, and they could not pass a sentence of death. They
wished to prove that Jesus was an enemy to the emperor, and this
accusation concerned those departments which were under Pilate's
jurisdiction. The soldiers were all standing in front of the house,
surrounded by a large body of the enemies of Jesus, and of common
persons attracted by curiosity. The High Priests and a part of the
Council walked at the head of the procession, and Jesus, led by archers,
and guarded by soldiers, followed, while the mob brought up the rear.
They were obliged to descend Mount Sion, and cross a part of the lower
town to reach Pilate's palace, and many priests who had attended the
Council went to the Temple directly afterwards, as it was necessary to
prepare for the festival.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Despair of Judas](pjc28)
