[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc31)  [Next](pjc33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVIII.

### The Origin of the Way of the Cross.

DURING the whole of the scene which we have just described, the Mother
of Jesus, with Magdalen and John, had stood in a recess in the forum:
they were overwhelmed with the most bitter sorrow, which was but
increased by all they heard and saw. When Jesus was taken before Herod,
John led the Blessed Virgin and Magdalen over the parts which had been
sanctified by his footsteps. They again looked at the house of Caiphas,
that of Annas, Ophel, Gethsemani, and the Garden of Olives; they stopped
and contemplated each Spot where he had fallen, or where he had suffered
particularly; and they wept silently at the thought of all he had
undergone. The Blessed Virgin knelt down frequently and kissed the
ground where her Son had fallen, while Magdalen wrung her hands in
bitter grief, and John, although he could not restrain his own

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

tears, endeavoured. to console his companions, supported, and led them
on. Thus was the holy devotion of the 'Way of the Cross' first
practised; thus were the Mysteries of the Passion of Jesus first
honoured, even before that Passion was accomplished, and the Blessed
Virgin, that model of spotless purity, was the first to show forth the
deep veneration felt by the Church for our dear Lord. How sweet and
consoling to follow this Immaculate Mother, passing to and fro, and
bedewing the sacred spots with her tears. But, ah! who can describe the
sharp, sharp sword of grief which then transfixed her tender soul? She
who had once borne the Saviour of the world in her chaste womb, and
suckled him for so long,--she who had truly conceived him who was the
Word of God, in God from all eternity, and truly God,--she beneath whose
heart, full of grace, he had deigned to dwell nine months, who had felt
him living within her before he appeared. among men to impart the
blessing of salvation and teach them his heavenly doctrines; she
suffered with Jesus, sharing with him not only the sufferings of his
bitter Passion, but likewise that ardent desire of redeeming fallen man
by an ignominious death, which consumed him.

In this touching manner did the most pure and holy Virgin lay the
foundation of the devotion called the Way of the Cross; thus at each
station, marked by the sufferings of her Son, did she lay up in her
heart the inexhaustible merits of his Passion, and gather them up as
precious stones or sweet-scented flowers to be presented as a choice
offering to the Eternal Father in behalf of all true believers. The
grief of Magdalen was so intense as to make her almost like an insane
person. The holy and boundless love she felt for our Lord prompted her
to cast herself at his feet, and there pour forth the feeling of her
heart (as she once poured the precious ointment on his head as he sat at
table); but when on the point of following this impulse, a dark gulf
appeared to intervene between herself and him. The repentance she felt
for her faults was immense, and not less intense was

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

her gratitude for their pardon; but when she longed to offer acts of
love and thanksgiving as precious incense at the feet of Jesus, she
beheld him betrayed, suffering, and about to die for the expiation of
her offences which he had taken upon himself, and this sight filled her
with horror, and almost rent her soul asunder with feelings of love,
repentance, and gratitude. The sight of the ingratitude of those for
whom he was about to die increased the bitterness of these feelings
tenfold, and every step, word, or movement demonstrated the agony of her
soul. The heart of John was filled with love, and he suffered intensely,
but he uttered not a word. He supported the Mother of his beloved Master
in this her first pilgrimage through the stations of the Way of the
Cross, and assisted her in giving the example of that devotion which has
since been practised with so much fervour by the members of the
Christian Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Pilate and his Wife](pjc33)
