[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc53)  [Next](pjc55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XL.

### Crucifixion of the Thieves.

DURING the time of the crucifixion of Jesus, the two thieves were left
lying on the ground at some distance off; their arms were fastened to
the crosses on which they were to be executed, and a few soldiers stood
near on guard. The accusation which had been proved against them was
that of having assassinated a Jewish woman who, with her children, was
travelling from Jerusalem to Joppa. They were arrested, under the
disguise of rich merchants, at a castle in which Pilate resided
occasionally, when employed in exercising his troops, and they had been
imprisoned for a long time before being brought to trial. The thief
placed on the left-hand side was much older than the other; a regular
miscreant, who had corrupted the younger. They were commonly called
Dismas and Gesmas, and as I forget their real names I shall distinguish
them by these terms,

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

calling the good one Dismas, and the wicked one Gesmas. Both the one and
the other belonged to a band of robbers who infested the frontiers of
Egypt; and it was in a cave inhabited by these robbers that the Holy
Family took refuge when flying into Egypt, at the time of the massacre
of the Innocents. The poor leprous child, who was instantly cleansed by
being dipped in the water which had been used for washing the infant
Jesus, was no other than this Dismas, and the charity of his mother, in
receiving and granting hospitality to the Holy Family, had been rewarded
by the cure of her child; while this outward purification was an emblem
of the inward purification which was afterwards accomplished in the soul
of Dismas on Mount Calvary, through that Sacred Blood which was then
shed on the cross for our redemption. Dismas knew nothing at all about
Jesus, but as his heart was not hardened, the sight of the extreme
patience of our Lord moved him much. When the executioners had finished
putting up the cross of Jesus, they ordered the thieves to rise without
delay, and they loosened their fetters in order to crucify them at once,
as the sky was becoming very cloudy and bore every appearance of an
approaching storm. After giving them some myrrh and vinegar, they
stripped off their ragged clothing, tied ropes round their arms, and by
the help of small ladders dragged them up to their places on the cross.
The executioners then bound the arms of the thieves to the cross, with
cords made of the bark of trees, and fastened their wrists, elbows,
knees, and feet in like manner, drawing the cords so tight that their
joints cracked, and the blood burst out. They uttered piercing cries,
and the good thief exclaimed as they were drawing him up, 'This torture
is dreadful, but if they had treated us as they treated the poor
Galilæan, we should have been dead long ago.'

The executioners had divided the garments of Jesus, in order to draw
lots for them; his mantle, which was narrow at the top, was very wide at
the bottom, and lined over the chest, thus forming a pocket between the
lining and the material itself; the lining they pulled out, tore into
bands, and divided. They did the same with his

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

long white robe, belt, scapular, and under-garment, which was completely
saturated with his Sacred Blood. Not being able to agree as to who was
to be the possessor of the seamless robe woven by his Mother, which
could not be cut up and divided, they brought out a species of
chessboard marked with figures, and were about to decide the point by
lots, when a messenger, sent by Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea,
informed them that there were persons ready to purchase all the clothes
of Jesus; they therefore gathered them together and sold them in a
bundle. Thus did the Christians get possession of these precious relies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLI. Jesus hanging an the Cross between two
Thieves](pjc55)
