[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc56)  [Next](pjc58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XLIII.

### Eclipse of the Sun.--Second and third Word of Jesus on the Cross.

A LITTLE hail had fallen at about ten o'clock,--when Pilate was passing
sentence,--and after that the weather cleared up, until towards twelve,
when the thick red-looking fog began to obscure the sun. Towards the
sixth

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

hour, according to the manner of counting of the Jews, the sun was
suddenly darkened. I was shown the exact cause of this wonderful
phenomenon; but I have unfortunately partly forgotten it, and what I
have not forgotten I cannot find words to express; but I was lifted up
from the earth, and beheld the stars and the planets moving about out of
their proper spheres. I saw the moon like an immense ball of fire
rolling along as if flying from the earth. I was then suddenly taken
back to Jerusalem, and I beheld the moon reappear behind the Mountain of
Olives, looking pale and full, and advancing rapidly towards the sun,
which was dim and overshrouded by a fog. I saw to the east of the sun a
large dark body which had the appearance of a mountain, and which soon
entirely hid the sun. The centre of this body was dark yellow, and a red
circle like a ring of fire was round it. The sky grew darker and the
stars appeared to cast a red and lurid light. Both men and beasts were
struck with terror; the enemies of Jesus ceased reviling him, while the
Pharisees endeavoured to give philosophical reasons for what was taking
place, but they failed in their attempt, and were reduced to silence.
Many were seized with remorse, struck their breasts, and cried out, 'May
his blood fall upon his murderers!' Numbers of others, whether near the
Cross or at a distance, fell on their knees and entreated forgiveness of
Jesus, who turned his eyes compassionately upon them in the midst of his
sufferings. However, the darkness continued to increase, and every one
excepting Mary and the most faithful among the friends of Jesus left the
Cross. Dismas then raised his head, and in a tone of humility and hope
said to Jesus, '*Lord, remember me when thou shalt come into thy
kingdom*.' And Jesus made answer, '*Amen, I say to thee, This day thou
shalt be with me in Paradise*.' Magdalen, Mary of Cleophas, and John
stood near the Cross of our Lord and looked at him, while the Blessed
Virgin, filled with intense feelings of motherly love, entreated her Son
to permit her to die with him; but he, casting a look of ineffable
tenderness upon her, turned to John and said, '*Woman, behold thy son*;'
then he said to

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> John, 'Behold thy
mother.' John looked at his dying Redeemer, and saluted this beloved
mother (whom he henceforth considered as his own) in the most respectful
manner. The Blessed Virgin was so overcome by grief at these words of
Jesus that she almost fainted, and was carried to a short distance from
the Cross by the holy women.

I do not know whether Jesus really pronounced these words, but I felt
interiorly that he gave Mary to John as a mother, and John to Mary as a
son. In similar visions a person is often conscious of things which are
not written, and words can only express a portion of them, although to
the individual to whom they are shown they are so clear as not to
require explanation. For this reason it did not appear to me in the
least surprising that Jesus should call the Blessed Virgin '*Woman*,'
instead of 'Mother.' I felt that he intended to demonstrate that she was
that woman spoken of in Scripture who was to crush the head of the
serpent, and that then was the moment in which that promise was
accomplished in the death of her Son. I knew that Jesus, by giving her
as a mother to John, gave her also as a mother to all *who believe in
him, who become children of God, and are not born of flesh and blood, or
of the will of man, but of God*. Neither did it appear to me surprising
that the most pure, the most humble, and the most obedient among women,
who, when saluted by the angel as '*full of grace*,' immediately
replied, '*Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it done to me according
to thy word*,' and in whose sacred womb the Word was instantly made
flesh,--that she, when informed by her dying Son that she was to become
the spiritual mother of another son, should repeat the same words with
humble obedience, and immediately adopt as her children all the children
of God, the brothers of Jesus Christ. These things are much easier to
feel by the grace of God than to be expressed in words. I remember my
celestial Spouse once saying to me, 'Everything is imprinted in the
hearts of those children of the Church who believe, hope, and love.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIV. The Fear felt by the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem.--Fourth Word of Jesus on the Cross](pjc58)
