[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc59)  [Next](pjc61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XLVI.

### The Earthquake.--Apparitions of the Dead in Jerusalem.

I SAW the soul of Jesus, at the moment he expired, appear under the form
of a bright orb, and accompanied by angels, among whom I distinguished
the angel Gabriel penetrate the earth at the foot of the Cross. I
likewise saw these angels cast a number of evil spirits into the great
abyss, and I heard Jesus order several of the souls in Limbo to reënter
the bodies in which they once dwelt, in order that the sight might fill
sinners with a salutary terror, and that these souls might render a
solemn testimony to his divinity.

The earthquake which produced the deep chasm at

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Calvary did much
damage in different parts of Palestine, but its effects were even more
fatal in Jerusalem Its inhabitants were just beginning to be a little
reassured by the return of light, when their terror was reawakened with
double force by the shocks of the earthquake, and the terrible noise and
confusion caused by the downfall of houses and walls on all sides, which
panic was still farther increased by the sudden appearance of dead
persons, confronting the trembling miscreants who were flying to hide
themselves, and addressing them in the most severe and reproachful
language.

The High Priests had recommenced the sacrifice of the Paschal lamb
(which had been stopped by the unexpected darkness), and they were
triumphing at the return of light, when suddenly the ground beneath them
trembled, the neighbouring buildings fell down, and the veil of the
Temple was rent in two from the top to the bottom. Excess of terror at
first rendered those on the outside speechless, but after a time they
burst forth into cries and lamentations. The confusion in the interior
of the Temple was not, however, as great as would naturally have been
expected, because the strictest order and decorum were always enforced
there, particularly with regard to the regulations to be followed by
those who entered to make their sacrifice, and those who left after
having offered it. The crowd was great, but the ceremonies were so
solemnly carried out by the priests, that they totally engrossed the
minds of the assistants. First came the immolation of the lamb, then the
sprinkling of its blood, accompanied by the chanting of canticles and
the sounding of trumpets. The priests were endeavouring to continue the
sacrifices, when suddenly an unexpected and most appalling pause ensued;
terror and astonishment were depicted on each countenance; all was
thrown into confusion; not a sound was heard; the sacrifices ceased;
there was a general rush to the gates of the Temple; every one
endeavoured to fly as quickly as possible. And well might they fly, well
might they fear and tremble; for in the midst of the multitude there
suddenly appeared persons who had been dead.

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

and buried for many years! These persons looked at them sternly, and
reproved them most severely for the crime they had committed that day,
in bringing about the death of 'the just man,' and calling down his
blood upon their heads. Even in the midst of this confusion, some
attempts were, however, made by the priests to preserve order; they
prevented those who were in the inner part of the Temple from rushing
forward, pushing their way through the crowds who were in advance of
them, and descending the steps which led out of the Temple: they even
continued the sacrifices in some parts, and endeavoured to calm the
fears of the people.

The appearance of the Temple at this moment can only be described by
comparing it to an ant-hill on which persons have thrown stones, or
which has been disturbed by a stick being driven into its centre. The
ants in those parts on which the stones have fallen, or which the stick
has disturbed, are filled with confusion and terror; they run to and fro
and do nothing; while the ants in those parts which have not been
disturbed continue to labour quietly, and even begin to repair the
damaged parts.

The High Priest Caiphas and his retinue did not lose their presence of
mind, and by the outward tranquillity which their diabolical hardness of
heart enabled them to preserve, they calmed the confusion in a great
degree, and then did their utmost to prevent the people from looking
upon these stupendous events as testimonies of the innocence of Jesus.
The Roman garrison belonging to the fortress of Antonia likewise made
great efforts to maintain order; consequently, the disturbance of the
festival was not followed by an insurrection, although every heart was
fixed with fear and anxiety, which anxiety the Pharisees endeavoured
(and in some instances with success) to calm.

I remember a few other striking incidents: in the first place, the two
columns which were placed at the entrance of their Holy of Holies, and
to which a magnificent curtain was appended, were shaken to the very
foundations; the column on the left side fell down in a

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

southerly, and that on the right side in a northerly direction, thus
rending the veil in two from the top to the bottom with a fearful sound,
and exposing the Holy of Holies uncovered to the public gaze. A large
stone was loosened and fell from the wall at the entrance of the
sanctuary, near where the aged Simeon used to kneel, and the arch was
broken. The ground was heaved up, and many other columns were thrown
down in other parts of the Temple.

An apparition of the High Priest Zacharias, who was slain between the
porch and the altar, was seen in the sanctuary. He uttered fearful
menaces, spoke of the death of the second Zacharias, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) and of that of St. John Baptist, as also
of the violent deaths of the other prophets. The two sons of the High
Priest Simon, surnamed the Just (ancestors of the aged Simeon who
prophesied when Jesus was presented in the Temple), made their
appearance in the part usually occupied by the doctors, of the law; they
also spoke in terrific terms of the deaths of the prophets, of the
sacrifice of the old law which was now about to cease, and they exhorted
all present to be converted, and to embrace the doctrines which had been
preached by him whom they had crucified. The prophet Jeremiah likewise
appeared; he stood near the altar, and proclaimed, in a menacing tone,
that the ancient sacrifice was at an end, and that a new one had
commenced. As these apparitions took place in parts where none but
priests were allowed to enter, Caiphas and a few others were alone
cognisant of them, and they endeavoured, as far as possible, either to
deny their reality, or to conceal them. These prodigies were followed by
others still more extraordinary. The doors of the sanctuary flew open of
themselves, and a voice was heard to utter these words: 'Let us leave
this place;' and I saw all the angels of the Lord instantly leave the
Temple. The thirty-two Pharisees

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

who went to Calvary a short time before our Lord expired were almost all
converted at the foot of the Cross. They returned to the Temple in the
midst of the confusion, and were perfectly thunderstruck at all which
had taken place there. They spoke most sternly, both to Annas and to
Caiphas, and left the Temple. Annas had always been the most bitter of
the enemies of Jesus, and had headed every proceeding against him; but
the supernatural events which had taken place had so completely unnerved
him that he knew not where to hide himself. Caiphas was, in reality,
excessively alarmed, and filled with anxiety, but his pride was so great
that. he concealed his feelings as far as possible, and endeavoured to
reassure Annas. He succeeded for a time; but the sudden appearance of a
person who had been dead many years marred the effect of his words, and
Annas became again a prey to the most fearful terror and remorse.

Whilst these things wore going on in the Temple, the confusion and panic
were not less in Jerusalem. Dead persons were walking about, and many
walls and buildings had been shaken by the earthquake, and parts of them
fallen down. The superstition of Pilate rendered him even more
accessible to fear; he was perfectly paralysed and speechless with
terror; his palace was shaken to the very foundation, and the earth
quaked beneath his feet. He ran wildly from room to room, and the dead
constantly stood before him, reproaching him with the unjust sentence he
had passed upon Jesus. He thought that they were the gods of the
Galilæan, and took refuge in an inner room, where he offered incense,
and made vows to his idols to invoke their assistance in his distress.
Herod was equally alarmed; but he shut himself up in his palace, out of
the sight of every one.

More than a hundred persons who had died at different epochs reëntered
the bodies they had occupied when on earth, made their appearance in
different parts of Jerusalem, and filled the inhabitants with
inexpressible consternation. Those souls which had been released by
Jesus from Limbo uncovered their faces and wandered to and

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

fro in the streets, and although their bodies were, the same as those
which they had animated when on earth, yet these bodies did not appear
to touch the ground as they walked. They entered the houses of their
descendants, proclaimed the innocence of Jesus, and reproved those who
had taken part in his death most severely. I saw them passing through
the principal streets; they were generally in couples, and appeared to
me to glide through the air without moving their feet. The countenances
of some were pale; others of a yellow tint; their beards were long, and
their voices sounded strange and sepulchral. Their grave-clothes were
such as it was customary to use at the period of their decease. When
they reached the place where sentence of death was proclaimed on Jesus
before the procession started for Calvary they paused for a moment, and
exclaimed in a loud voice: 'Glory be to Jesus for ever and ever, and
destruction to his enemies!' Towards four o'clock all the dead returned
to their graves. The sacrifices in the Temple had been so interrupted,
and the confusion caused by the different prodigies was so great that
very few persons ate the Paschal lamb on that evening.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[277:1](pjc60.htm#fr_13) The Zacharias here
referred to was the father of John the Baptist, who was tortured and
afterwards put to death by Herod, because he would not betray John into
the hands of the tyrant, He was buried by his friends within the
precincts of the Temple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII. The Request of Joseph of Arimathea to be allowed
to have the Body of Jesus](pjc61)
