[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc65)  [Next](pjc67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

# CHAPTER LII.

### The Body of our Lord placed in the Sepulchre.

THE men placed the sacred body on a species of leathern hand-barrow,
which they covered with a brown-coloured cloth, and to which they
fastened two long stakes. This forcibly reminded me of the Ark of the
Covenant. Nicodemus and Joseph bore on their shoulders the front shafts,
while Abenadar and John supported those behind. After them came the
Blessed Virgin, Mary of Heli, her eldest sister, Magdalen and Mary of
Cleophas, and then the group of women who had been sitting at some
distance--Veronica, Johanna Chusa, Mary the mother of Mark, Salome the
wife of Zebedee, Mary Salome, Salome of Jerusalem, Susanna, and Anne the
niece of St. Joseph. Cassius and the soldiers closed the procession. The
other women, such as Marone of Naïm, Dina the Samaritaness, and Mara the
Suphanitess, were at Bethania, with Martha and Lazarus. Two soldiers,
bearing torches in their hands, walked on first, that there might be
some light in the grotto of the sepulchre; and the procession continued
to advance in this order for about seven minutes, the holy men and women
singing psalms in sweet but melancholy tones. I saw James the Greater,
the brother of John, standing upon a hill the other side of the valley,
to look at them as they passed, and he returned immediately afterwards,
to tell the other disciples what he had seen.

The procession stopped at the entrance of Joseph's garden, which was
opened by the removal of some stakes, afterwards used as levers to roll
the stone to the door of the sepulchre. When opposite the rock, they
placed the Sacred Body on a long board covered with a sheet. The grotto,
which had been newly excavated, had been lately cleaned by the servants
of Nicodemus, so that the interior was neat and pleasing to the eye. The
holy women sat down in front of the grotto, while the four men carried
in the body of our Lord, partially filled the hollow couch destined for
its reception with aromatic spices, and spread

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

over them a cloth, upon which they reverently deposited the sacred body.
After having once more given expression to their love by tears and fond
embraces, they left the grotto. Then the Blessed Virgin entered, seated
herself close to the head of her dear Son, and bent over his body with
many tears. When she left the grotto, Magdalen hastily and eagerly came
forward, and flung on the body some flowers and branches which she had
gathered in the garden. Then she clasped her hands together, and with
sobs kissed the feet of Jesus; but the men having informed her that they
must close the sepulchre, she returned to the other women. They covered
the sacred body with the extremities of the sheet on which it was lying,
placed on the top of all the brown coverlet, and closed the
folding-doors, which were made of a bronze-coloured metal, and had on
their front two sticks, one straight down and the other across, so as to
form a perfect cross.

The large stone with which they intended to close the sepulchre, and
which was still lying in front of the grotto, was in shape very like a
chest <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) or tomb; its length was such
that a man might have laid himself down upon it, and it was so heavy
that it was only by means of levers that the men could roll it before
the door of the sepulchre. The entrance of the grotto was closed by a
gate made of branches twined together. Everything that was done within
the grotto had to be accomplished by torchlight, for daylight never
penetrated there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[301:1](pjc66.htm#fr_20) Apparently Sister
Emmerich here spoke of the ancient eases in which her poor countrymen
keep their clothes. The lower part of these cases is smaller than the
upper, and this gives them some likeness to a tomb. She had one of these
cases, which she called her chest. She often described the stone by this
comparison, but her descriptions have not, nevertheless, given us a very
clear idea of its shape.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LIII. The Return from the Sepulchre.--Joseph of Arimathea
is put in Prison](pjc67)
