[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc70)  [Next](pjc72) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER LVII.

### Guards are placed around the Tomb of Jesus.

LATE on Friday night, I saw Caiphas and some of the chief men among the
Jews holding a consultation concerning the best course to pursue with
regard to the prodigies which had taken place, and the effect they had
had upon the people. They continued their deliberations quite into the
morning, and then hurried to Pilate's house, to tell him that, *as that
seducer said, while he was yet alive*, '*After three days I will rise
again*,' it would be right to command the sepulchre to be guarded until
the third day, as otherwise his disciples might come and steal him away,
and say to the people, '*He is risen from the dead*,' *and the last
error* would *be worse than the first*. Pilate was determined to have
nothing more to do with the business, and he only answered: '*You have,
a guard; go, guard it as you know*.' However, he appointed Cassius to
keep a watch over all that took place, and give him an exact account of
every circumstance. I saw these men, twelve in number, leave the town
before sunrise, accompanied by some soldiers who did not wear the Roman
uniform, being attached to the Temple. They carried lanterns fastened to
the end of long poles, in order that they might be able to see every
surrounding object, in spite of the darkness

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

of the night, and also that they might have some light in the dark cave
of the sepulchre.

No sooner had they reached the sepulchre than, having first seen with
their own eyes that the body of Jesus was really there, they fastened
one rope across the door of the tomb, and a second across the great
stone which was placed in front, sealing the whole with a seal of
half-circular shape. They then returned to the city, and the guards
stationed themselves opposite the outer door. They were five or six in
number, and watched three and three alternately. Cassius never left his
post, and usually remained sitting or standing in front of the entrance
to the cave, so as to see that side of the tomb where the feet of our
Lord rested. He had received many interior graces, and been given to
understand many mysteries. Being wholly unaccustomed to this state of
spiritual enlightenment, he was perfectly transported out of himself,
and remained nearly all the time unconscious of the presence of exterior
things. He was entirely changed, had become a new man, and spent the
whole day in penance, in making fervent acts of gratitude, and in humbly
adoring God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVIII. A Glance at the Disciples of Jesus on Holy
Saturday](pjc72)
