[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc78)  [Next](pjc80) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

# CHAPTER LXV.

### The Relation which was given by the Sentinels who were placed around the Sepulchre.

CASSIUS hastened to the house of Pilate about an hour after the
Resurrection, in order to give him an account of the stupendous events
which had taken place. He was not yet risen, but Cassius was allowed to
enter his bedroom. He related all that had happened, and expressed his
feelings in the most forcible language. He described how the rock had
been rent, and how an angel had descended from Heaven and pushed aside
the stone; he also spoke of the empty winding-sheet, and added that most
certainly Jesus was the Messiah, the Son of God, and that he was truly
risen. Pilate listened to this account; he trembled and quivered with
terror, but concealed his agitation to the best of his power, and
answered Cassius in these words: 'Thou art exceedingly superstitious; it
was very foolish to go to the Galilæan's tomb; his gods took advantage
of thy weakness, and displayed all these ridiculous visions to alarm
thee. I recommend thee to keep silence, and not recount such silly tales
to the priests, for thou wouldst got the worst of it from them.' He
pretended to believe that the body of Jesus had been carried away by his
disciples, and that the sentinels, who had been bribed, and had fallen
asleep, or perhaps been deceived by witchcraft, had fabricated these
accounts in order to justify their conduct. When Pilate had said all he
could on the subject, Cassius left him, and he went to offer sacrifice
to his gods.

The four soldiers who had guarded the tomb arrived shortly after at
Pilate's palace, and began to tell him all that he had already heard
from Cassius; but he would listen to nothing more, and sent them to
Caiphas. The rest of the guards were assembled in a large court near the
Temple which was filled with aged Jews, who, after

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

some previous consultation, took the soldiers on one side, and by dint
of bribes and threats endeavoured to persuade them to say that they fell
asleep, and that while they were asleep the disciples came and carried
away the body of our Lord. The soldiers, however, demurred, because the
statement which their comrades were gone to make to Pilate would
contradict any account which they could now fabricate, but the Pharisees
promised to arrange everything with the governor. Whilst they were still
disputing, the four guards returned from their interview with Pilate,
and the Pharisees endeavoured to persuade them to conceal the truth; but
this they refused to do, and declared firmly that they would not vary
their first statement in the smallest degree. The miraculous deliverance
of Joseph of Arimathea from prison was become public, and when the
Pharisees accused the soldiers of having allowed the Apostles to carry
off the body of Jesus, and threatened them with the infliction of the
most severe punishment if they did not produce the body, they replied,
that it would be as utterly impossible for them to produce the body of
Jesus, as it was for the soldiers who had charge of Joseph of Arimathea
to bring him back into his prison again. They spoke with the greatest
firmness and courage promises and menaces were equally ineffectual. They
declared that they would speak the truth and nothing but the truth; that
the sentence of death which had been passed upon Jesus was both unjust
and iniquitous; and that the crime which was perpetrated in putting him
to death was the sole cause of the interruption in the Paschal
solemnity. The Pharisees, being perfectly furious, caused the four
soldiers to be arrested and thrown into prison, and the others, who had
accepted the bribes they offered, then affirmed that the body of Jesus
had been carried off by the disciples while they slept; and the
Pharisees, Sadducees, and Herodians endeavoured to disseminate this lie
to the utmost of their power, not only in the synagogue but also among
the people; and they accompanied this false statement by the most
slanderous lies concerning Jesus.

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

All these precautions, however, availed but little, for, after the
Resurrection, many persons who had been long dead arose from their
graves, and appeared to those among their descendants who were not
sufficiently hardened to be impervious to grace, and exhorted them to be
converted. These dead persons were likewise seen by many of the
disciples, who, overcome with terror, and shaken in faith, had fled into
the country. They both exhorted and encouraged them to return, and
restored their drooping courage. The resurrection of these dead persons
did not in the slightest degree resemble the Resurrection of Jesus. He
arose with a glorified body, which was no longer susceptible of either
corruption or death, and ascended into heaven with this glorified body
in the sight of all his disciples; but the dead bodies of which we spoke
above were motionless corpses, and the souls which once inhabited them
were only allowed to enter and reanimate them for a time, and after
performing the mission given them, the souls again quitted these bodies,
which returned to their original state in the bowels of the earth, where
they will remain until the resurrection at the day of judgment. Neither
could their return to life be compared to the raising of Lazarus from
the dead; for he really returned to a new life, and died a second time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI. The End of the Lenten Meditations](pjc80)
