[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc76)  [Next](pjc78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

# CHAPTER LXIII.

### The Resurrection of our Lord.

I BEHELD the soul of our Lord between two angels, who were in the attire
of warriors: it was bright, luminous, and resplendent as the sun at
mid-day; it penetrated the rock, touched the sacred body, passed into
it, and the two were instantaneously united, and became as one. I then
saw the limbs move, and the body of our Lord, being reunited to his soul
and to his divinity, rise and shake off the winding-sheet: the whole of
the cave was illuminated and lightsome.

At the same moment I saw a frightful monster burst from the earth
underneath the sepulchre. It had the tail of a serpent, and it raised
its dragon head proudly as if desirous of attacking Jesus; and had
likewise, if I remember correctly, a human head. But our Lord held in
his hand a white staff, to which was appended a large banner; and he
placed his foot on the head of the dragon, and struck its tail three
times with his staff, after which the monster disappeared. I had had
this same vision many times before the Resurrection, and I saw just such
a monster, appearing to endeavour to hide itself, at the time of the
conception of our Lord: it greatly resembled the serpent which tempted
our first parents in Paradise, only it was more horrible. I thought that
this vision had reference to the prophetic words, that '*by the seed of
the woman the head of the serpent should be crushed*,' and that the
whole was intended to demonstrate the victory of our Lord over death,
for at the same moment that I saw him crush the head of the monster, the
tomb likewise vanished from my sight.

I then saw the glorified body of our Lord rise up, and it passed through
the hard rock as easily as if the latter had been formed of some ductile
substance. The earth shook, and an angel in the garb of a warrior
descended from Heaven with the speed of lightning, entered the tomb,
lifted the stone, placed it on the right side, and

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

seated himself upon it. At this tremendous sight the soldiers fell to
the ground, and remained there apparently lifeless. When Cassius saw the
bright light which illuminated, the tomb, he approached the place where
the sacred body had been placed, looked at and touched the linen clothes
in which it had been wrapped, and left the sepulchre, intending to go
and inform Pilate of all that had happened. However, he tarried a short
time to watch the progress of events; for although he had felt the
earthquake, seen the angel move the stone, and looked at the empty tomb,
yet he had not seen Jesus.

At the very moment in which the angel entered the sepulchre and the
earth quaked, I saw our Lord appear to his holy Mother on Calvary. His
body was beautiful and lightsome, and its beauty was that of a celestial
being. He was clothed in a large mantle, which at one moment looked
dazzlingly white, as it floated through the air, waving to and fro with
every breath of wind, and the next reflected a thousand brilliant
colours as the sunbeams passed over it. His large open wounds shone
brightly, and could be seen from a great distance: the wounds in his
hands were so large that a finger might be put into them without
difficulty; and rays of light proceeded from them, diverging in the
direction of his fingers. The souls of the patriarchs bowed down before
the Mother of our Saviour, and Jesus spoke to her concerning his
Resurrection, telling her many things which I have forgotten. He showed
her his wounds; and Mary prostrated to kiss his sacred feet; but he took
her hand, raised her, and disappeared.

When I was at some distance from the sepulchre I saw fresh lights
burning there, and I likewise beheld a large luminous spot in the sky
immediately over Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIV. The holy Women at the Sepulchre](pjc78)
