[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc74)  [Next](pjc76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER LXI.

### Joseph of Arimathea miraculously set at large.

A SHORT time after the return of the Blessed Virgin to the holy women, I
was shown the interior of the prison in which the enemies of Joseph of
Arimathea had confined

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

him. He was praying fervently, when suddenly a brilliant light
illuminated the whole place, and I heard a voice calling him by name,
while at the same moment the roof opened, and a bright form appeared,
holding out a sheet resembling that in which he had wrapped the body of
Jesus. Joseph grasped it with both hands, and was drawn up to the
opening, which closed again as soon as he had passed through; and the
apparition disappeared the instant he was in safety at the top of the
tower. I know not whether it was our Lord himself or an angel who thus
set Joseph free.

He walked on the summit of the wall until be reached the neighbourhood
of the Cenaculum, which was near to the South wall of Sion, and then
climbed down and knocked at the door of that edifice, as the doors were
fastened. The disciples assembled there had been much grieved when they
first missed Joseph, who they thought had been thrown into a sink, a
report to that effect having become current. Great, therefore, was their
joy when they opened the door and found that it was he himself; indeed,
they were almost as much delighted as when Peter was miraculously
delivered from prison some years after. When Joseph had related what had
taken place, they were filled with astonishment and delight; and after
thanking God fervently gave him some refreshment, which he greatly
needed. He left Jerusalem that same night, and fled to Arimathea, his
native place, where he remained until he thought he could return safely
to Jerusalem.

I likewise saw Caiphas towards the close of the Sabbath-day, at the
house of Nicodemus. He was conversing with him and asking many questions
with pretended kindness. Nicodemus answered firmly, and continued to
affirm the innocence of Jesus. They did not remain long together.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXII. The Night of Resurrection](pjc76)
