[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc77)  [Next](pjc79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

# CHAPTER LXIV.

### The holy Women at the Sepulchre.

THE holy women were very near the door of Nicodemus's house at the
moment of our Lord's Resurrection; but they did not see anything of the
prodigies which were taking place at the sepulchre. They were not aware
that guards had been placed around the tomb, for they had not visited it
on the previous day, on account of its being the Sabbath. They
questioned one another anxiously concerning what would have to be done
about the large stone at the door, as to who would be the best person to
ask about removing it, for they had been so engrossed by grief that they
had not thought about it before. Their intention was to pour precious
ointments upon the body of Jesus, and then to strew over it flowers of
the most rare and aromatic kinds, thus rendering all the honour possible
to their Divine Master in his sepulchre. Salome, who had brought more
things than any one else, was a rich lady, who lived in Jerusalem, a
relation of St. Joseph, but not the mother of John. The holy women came
to the determination of putting down their spices on the stone which
closed the door of the monument, and waiting until some one came to roll
it back.

The guards were still lying on the ground, and the strong convulsions
which even then shook them clearly demonstrated how great had been their
terror, and the large stone was cast on one side, so that the door could
be opened without difficulty. I could see the linen cloth in which the
body of Jesus had been wrapped scattered about in the tomb, and the
large winding-sheet lying in the same place as when they left it, but
doubled together in such a manner that you saw at once that it no longer
contained anything but the spices which had been placed round the body,
and the bandages were on the outside of the tomb. The linen cloth in
which Mary had enveloped the sacred head of her Son was still there.

I saw the holy women coming into the garden; but

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

when they perceived the light given by the lamps of the sentinels, and
the prostrate forms of the soldiers round the tomb, they for the most
part became much alarmed, and retreated towards Golgotha. Mary Magdalen
was, however., more courageous, and, followed by Salome, entered the
garden, while the other women remained timidly on the outside.

Magdalen started, and appeared for a moment terrified when she drew near
the sentinels. She retreated a few steps and rejoined Salome, but both
quickly recovered their presence of mind, and walked on together through
the midst of the prostrate guards, and entered into the cave which
contained the sepulchre. They immediately perceived that the stone was
removed, but the doors were closed, which had been clone in all
probability by Cassius Magdalen opened them quickly, looked anxiously
into the sepulchre, and was much surprised at seeing that the cloths in
which they had enveloped our Lord were lying on one side, and that the
place where they had deposited the sacred remains was empty. A celestial
light filled the cave, and an angel was seated on the right side.
Magdalen became almost beside herself from disappointment and alarm. I
do not know whether she heard the words which the angel addressed to
her, but she left the garden as quickly as possible, and ran to the town
to inform the Apostles who were assembled there of what had taken place.
I do not know whether the angel spoke to Mary Salome, as she did not
enter the sepulchre; but I saw her leaving the garden directly after
Magdalen, in order to relate all that had happened to the rest of the
holy women, who were both frightened and delighted at the news, but
could not make up their minds as to whether they would go to the garden
or not.

In the mean time Cassius had remained near the sepulchre in hopes of
seeing Jesus, as he thought he would be certain to appear to the holy
women; but seeing nothing, he directed his steps towards Pilate's palace
to relate to him all that had happened, stopping, however, first at the
place where the rest of the holy women were assembled,

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

to tell them what he had seen, and to exhort them to go immediately to
the garden. They followed his advice, and went there at once. No sooner
had they reached the door of the sepulchre than they beheld two angels
clothed in sacerdotal vestments of the most dazzling white. The women
were very much alarmed, covered their faces with their hands, and
prostrated almost to the ground; but one of the angels addressed them,
bade them not fear, and told them that they must not seek for their
crucified Lord there, for that he was alive, had risen, and was no
longer an inhabitant of the tomb. He pointed out to them at the same
moment the empty sepulchre, and ordered them to go and relate to the
disciples all that they had seen and heard. He likewise told them that
Jesus would go before them into Galilee, and recalled to their minds the
words which our Saviour had addressed to them on a former occasion:
'*The Son of Man will be delivered into the hands of sinners, he will be
crucified, and the third day rise again*.' The angels then disappeared,
and left the holy women filled with joy, although of course greatly
agitated; they wept, looked at the empty tomb and linen clothes, and
immediately started to return to the town. But they were so much
overcome by the many astounding events which had taken place, that they
walked very slowly, and stopped and looked back often, in hopes of
seeing our Lord, or at least Magdalen.

In the mean time. Magdalen reached the Cenaculum. She was so excited as
to appear like a person beside herself, and knocked hastily at the door.
Some of the disciples, were still sleeping, and those who were risen
were conversing together. Peter and John opened the door, but she only
exclaimed, without entering the house, '*They have taken away the body
of my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him*,' and immediately
returned to the garden. Peter and John went back into the house, and
after saying a few words to the other disciples followed her as speedily
as possible, but John far outstripped Peter. I then saw Magdalen reënter
the garden, and direct her steps towards the sepulchre; she appeared
greatly agitated,

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

partly from grief, and partly from having walked so fast. Her garments
were quite moist with dew, and her veil hanging on one side, while the
luxuriant hair in which she had formerly taken so much pride fell in
dishevelled masses over her shoulders, forming a species of mantle.
Being alone, she was afraid of entering the cave, but stopped for a
moment on the outside, and knelt down in order to see better into the
tomb. She was endeavouring to push back her long hair, which fell over
her face and obscured her vision, when she perceived the two angels who
were seated in the tomb, and I heard one of them address her thus:
'*Woman, why weepest thou*?' She replied, in a voice choked with tears
(for she was perfectly overwhelmed with grief at finding that the body
of Jesus was really gone), '*Because they have taken away my Lord, and I
know not where they have laid him*.' She said no more, but seeing the
empty winding-sheet, went out of the sepulchre and began to look about
in other parts. She felt a secret presentiment that not only should she
find Jesus, but that he was even then near to her; and the presence of
the angels seemed not to disturb her in the least; she did not appear
even to be aware that they were angels., every faculty was engrossed
with the one thought, 'Jesus is not there! where is Jesus?' I watched
her wandering about like an insane person, with her hair floating
loosely in the wind: her hair appeared to annoy her much, for she again
endeavoured to push it from off her face, and having divided it into two
parts, threw it over her shoulders.

She then raised her head, looked around, and perceived a tall figure,
clothed in white, standing at about ten paces from the sepulchre on the
east side of the garden, where there was a Plight rise in the direction
of the town; the figure was partly hidden from her sight by a palm-tree,
but she was somewhat startled when it addressed her in these words:
'*Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seekest thou*?' She thought it was the
gardener; and, in fact, he had a spade in his hand, and a large hat
(apparently made of the bark of trees) on his head. His dress was
similar to that worn by the gardener described in the parable which
Jesus

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

had related to the holy' women at Bethania a short time before his
Passion. His body was not luminous, his whole appearance was rather that
of a man dressed in white and seen by twilight. At the words, '*Whom
seekest thou*? she looked at him, and answered quickly, '*Sir, if thou
hast taken him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him; and I will take
him away*.' And she looked anxiously Around. Jesus said to her,
'*Mary*.' She then instantly recognised his beloved voice, and turning
quickly, replied, '*Rabboni* (*Master*)!' She threw herself on her knees
before him, and stretched out her hands to touch his feet; but he
motioned her to be still, and said, '*Do not touch me, for I am not yet
ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them: I ascend
to my Father and to your Father, to my God and your God*.' He then
disappeared.

The reason of the words of Jesus, '*Do not touch me*,' was afterwards
explained to me, but I have only an indistinct remembrance of that
explanation. I think be made use of those words because of the
impetuosity of Magdalen's feelings, which made her in a certain degree
forget the stupendous mystery which had been accomplished, and feel as
if what she then beheld was still mortal instead of a glorified body. As
for the words of Jesus, '*I am not yet ascended to my Father*,' I was
told that their meaning was that he had not presented himself to his
Father since his Resurrection, to return him thanks for his victory over
death, and for the work of the redemption which he had accomplished. He
wished her to infer from these words, that the first-fruits of joy
belong to God, and that she ought to reflect and return thanks to him
for the accomplishment of the glorious mystery of the redemption, and
for the victory which he had gained over death; and if she had kissed
his feet as she used before the Passion, she would have thought of
nothing but her Divine Master, and in her raptures of love have totally
forgotten the wonderful events which were causing such astonishment and
joy in Heaven. I saw Magdalen arise quickly, as soon as our Lord
disappeared, and run to look again in the sepulchre,

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

as if she believed herself under the influence of a dream. She saw the
two angels still seated there, and they spoke to her concerning the
resurrection of our Lord in the same words as they had addressed the two
other women. She likewise saw the empty winding-sheet, and then, feeling
certain that she was not in a state of delusion, but that the apparition
of our Lord was real, she walked quickly back towards Golgotha to seek
her companions, who were wandering about to and fro, anxiously looking
out for her return, and indulging a kind of vague hope that they should
see or hear something of Jesus.

The whole of this scene occupied a little more than two or three
minutes. It was about half-past three when our Lord appeared to
Magdalen, and John and Peter entered the garden just as she was leaving
it. John, who was a little in advance of Peter, stopped at the entrance
of the cave and looked in. He saw the linen clothes lying on one side,
and waited until Peter came up, when they entered the sepulchre
together, and saw the winding-sheet empty as has been before described.
John instantly believed in the Resurrection, and they both understood
clearly the words addressed to them by Jesus before his Passion, as well
as the different passages in Scripture relating to that event, which had
until then been incomprehensible to them. Peter put the linen clothes
under his cloak, and they returned hastily into the town through the
small entrance belonging to Nicodemus.

The appearance of the holy sepulchre was the same when the two apostles
entered as when Magdalen first saw it. The two adoring angels were
seated, one at the head, and the other at the extremity of the tomb, in
precisely the same attitude as when his adorable body was lying there. I
do not think Peter was conscious of their presence. I afterwards heard
John tell the disciples of Emmaus, that when he looked into the
sepulchre he saw an angel. Perhaps he was startled by this sight, and
therefore drew back and let Peter enter the sepulchre first; but it is
likewise very possible that the reason of his not mentioning the
circumstance in his gospel was because

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

humility made him anxious to conceal the fact of his having been more
highly favoured than Peter.

The guards at this moment began to revive, and rising, gathered up their
lances, and took down the lamps, which were on the door, from whence
they cast a glimmering weak light on surrounding objects. I then saw
them walk hastily out of the garden in evident fear and trepidation, in
the direction of the town.

In the mean time Magdalen had rejoined the holy women, and given them
the account of her seeing the Lord in the garden, and of the words of
the angels afterwards, whereupon they immediately related what had been
seen by themselves, and Magdalen wended her way quickly to Jerusalem,
while the women returned to that side of the garden where they expected
to find the two apostles. Just before they reached it, Jesus appeared to
them. He was clothed in a long white robe, which concealed even his
hands, and said to them, '*All hail*.' They started with astonishment,
and cast themselves at his feet; he spoke a few words, held forth his
hand as if to point out something to them, and disappeared. The holy
women went instantly to the Cenaculum, and told the disciples who were
assembled there that they had seen the Lord; the disciples were
incredulous, and would not give credence either to their account or to
that of Magdalen. They treated both the one and the other as the effects
of their excited imaginations; but when Peter and John entered the room
and related what they likewise had seen, they knew not what to answer,
and were filled with astonishment.

Peter and John soon left the Cenaculum, as the wonderful events which
had taken place rendered them extremely silent and thoughtful, and
before long they met James the Less and Thaddeus, who had wished to
accompany them to the sepulchre. Both James and Thaddeus were greatly
overcome, for the Lord had appeared to them a short time before they met
Peter and John. I also saw Jesus pass quite close to Peter and John. I
think the former recognised him, for he started suddenly, but I do not
think the latter saw him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXV. The Relation which was given by the Sentinels who
were placed around the Sepulchre](pjc79)
