[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pjc69)  [Next](pjc71) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WEK0/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Dolorous Passion of Our Lord Jesus Christ*, by Anne Catherine
Emmerich, \[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER LVI.

### Apparitions on Occasion of the Death of Jesus.

AMONG the dead who rose from their graves, and who were certainly a
hundred in number, at Jerusalem, there were no relations, of Jesus. I
saw in various parts of the Holy Land others of the dead appear and bear
testimony to the Divinity of Jesus. Thus I saw Sadoch, a most pious man,
who had given all his property to the poor and to the Temple, appear to
many persons in the neighbourhood of Hebron. This Sadoch had lived a
century before Jesus, and was the founder of a community of Essenians:
he had ardently sighed for the coming of the Messias, and had had
several revelations upon the subject. I saw some others of the dead
appear to the hidden disciples of our Lord, and give them different
warnings.

Terror and desolation reigned even in the most distant parts of
Palestine, and it was not in Jerusalem only that frightful prodigies
took place. At Thirza, the towers of

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

the prison in which the captive's delivered by Jesus had been confined
fell down. In Galileo, where Jesus had travelled so much, I saw many
buildings, and in particular the houses of those Pharisees who had been
the foremost in persecuting our Saviour, and who were then all at the
festival, shaken to the ground, crushing their wives and children.
Numerous accidents happened in the neighbourhood of the Lake of
Genazareth. Many buildings fell down at Capharnaum; and the wall of
rocks which was in front of the beautiful garden of the centurion
Zorobabel cracked across. The lake overflowed into the valley, and its
waters descended as far as Capharnaum, which was a mile and a half
distant. Peter's house, and the dwelling of the Blessed Virgin in front
of the town, remained standing. The lake was strongly convulsed; its
shores crumbled in several places, and its shape was very much altered,
and became more like what it is at the present day. Great changes took
place, particularly at the south-eastern extremity, near Tarichea,
because in this part there was a long causeway made of stones, between
the lake and a sort of marsh, which gave a constant direction to the
course of the Jordan when it left the lake. The whole of this causeway
was destroyed by the earthquake. Many accidents happened on the eastern
side of the lake, on the spot where the swine belonging to the
inhabitants of Gergesa cast themselves in, and also at Gergesa, Gerasa,
and in the entire district of Chorazin. The mountain where the second
multiplication of the loaves took place was shaken, and the stone upon
which the miracle had been worked split in two. In Decapolis, whole
towns crumbled to the earth; and in Asia, in several localities, the
earthquake was severely felt, particularly to the cast and north-east of
Paneas. In Upper Galilee, many Pharisees found their houses in ruins
when they returned from keeping the feast. A number of them, while yet
at Jerusalem, received the news of what had happened, and it was on that
account that the enemies of Jesus made such very slight efforts against
the Christian community at Pentecost.

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

A part of the Temple of Garizim crumbled down. An idol stood there above
a fountain, in a small temple, the roof of which fell into the fountain
with the idol. Half of the synagogue of Nazareth, out of which Jesus had
been driven, fell down, as well as that part of the mountain from which
his enemies had endeavoured to precipitate him. The bed of the Jordan
was much changed by all these shocks, and its course altered in many
places. At Macherus, and at the other towns belonging to Herod,
everything remained quiet, for that country was out of the sphere of
repentance and of threats, like those men who did not fall to the ground
in the Garden of Olives, and, consequently, did not rise again.

In many other parts where there were evil spirits, I saw the latter
disappear in large bodies amid the falling mountains and buildings. The
earthquakes reminded me of the convulsions of the possessed, when the
enemy feels that he must take to flight. At Gergesa, a part of the
mountain from which the devils had cast themselves with the swine into a
marsh, fell into this same marsh; and I then saw a band of evil spirits
cast themselves into the abyss, like a dark cloud.

It was at Nice, unless I am mistaken, that I saw a singular occurrence,
of which I have only an imperfect remembrance. There was a port there
with many vessels in it; and near this port stood a house with a high
tower, in which I saw a pagan whose office was to watch these vessels.
He had often to ascend this tower, and see what was going on at sea.
Having heard a great noise over the vessels in the port, he hurriedly
ascended the tower to discover what was taking place, and he saw several
dark figures hovering over the port, and who exclaimed to him in
plaintive accents: 'If thou desirest to preserve the vessels, cause them
to be sailed out of this port, for we must return to the abyss: the
great Pan is dead.' They told him several other things; laid injunctions
upon him to make known what they were then telling him upon his return
from a certain voyage which he was soon to make, and to give a good
reception to the messengers who would

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

come to announce the doctrine of him who had just died. The evil spirits
were forced in this manner by the power of God to inform this good man
of their defeat, and announce it to the world. He had the vessels put in
safety, and then an awful storm arose: the devils cast themselves
howling into the sea, and half the city fell down. His house remained
standing. Soon afterwards he went on a great journey, and announced the
death of the great Pan, if that is the name by which our Saviour had
been called. Later he came to Rome, where much amazement was caused by
what he related. His name was something like Thamus or Thramus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LVII. Guards are placed around the Tomb of Jesus](pjc71)
