[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ct05)  [Next](ct07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Cosmas Indicopleustes, Christian Topography (1897) pp. 129-137.  Book
4**

# <span id="img_cosmas4-1"></span> ![](img/cosmas4-1.jpg)

# BOOK IV.

*A summary recapitulation and description of the figures of the world;
also the refutation of the sphere.*

<span id="img_cosmas4-2"></span> ![](img/cosmas4-2.jpg)T is written: *In
the beginning God made the heaven and the
earth*.<sup>[<sup>1</sup>](#1)</sup> We therefore first depict along
with the earth, the heaven which is vaulted and which has its
extremities bound together with the extremities of the earth. To the
best of our ability we have endeavoured to delineate it on its western
side and its eastern; for these two sides are walls, extending from
below to the vault above. There is also the firmament which, in the
middle, is bound together with the first heaven, and which, on its upper
side, has the waters according to divine scripture itself. The position
and figure are such as here sketched.<sup>[<sup>2</sup>](#2)</sup> To
the extremities on the four sides of the earth the heaven is fastened at
its own four extremities, making the figure of a cube, that is to say, a
quadrangular figure, while up above it curves round in the form of an
oblong vault and becomes as it were a vast canopy. And in the middle the
firmament is made fast to it, and thus two places are formed.

From the earth to the firmament is the first place, this world, namely,
in which are the angels and men and all the <span id="p130">\|130</span>
present state of existence. From the firmament again to the vault above
is the second place----the Kingdom of Heaven, into which Christ, first
of all, entered, after his ascension, having prepared for us a new and
living way.

On the western side and the eastern the outline presented is
short,[<sup>3</sup>](#3) as in the case of an oblong[<sup>4</sup>](#4)
vault, but on its north and south sides it shows its length. Its figure
is therefore something such as this.[<sup>5</sup>](#5)

*Note.*

This is the first heaven, shaped like a vaulted chamber, which was
created on the first day along with the earth, and of it Isaiah speaks
thus: *He that hath established the heaven as a vaulted
chamber.*[<sup>5</sup>](#5) But the heaven, which is bound to the first
at the middle, is that which was created on the second day, to which
\[187\] Isaiah refers when he says: *And having stretched it out as a
tent to dwell in.*[<sup>6</sup>](#6) David also says concerning it:
*Stretching out the heaven as a curtain,*[<sup>7</sup>](#7) and
indicating it still more clearly he says: *Who layeth the beams of his
chambers in the waters*.[<sup>6</sup>](#6) Now, when Scripture speaks of
the extremities of heaven and earth, this cannot be understood as
applicable to a sphere. Isaiah again says: *Thus saith the Lord, he that
made the heaven and pitched it*;<sup>[<sup>8</sup>](#8)</sup> and the
Apostle in like manner says: *Of the true Tabernacle which the Lord
pitched and not man.*[<sup>9</sup>](#9) They both speak of the heaven as
standing on and fixed on the earth, and not as revolving round it. Nay
more, the extremities of the heaven are bound together with the
extremities of the earth, and on both sides, and concerning this it is
written in Job: *And he inclined heaven to earth, and the earth is
poured out as dust, and I have fastened it as a square block to a
stone*.<sup>[<sup>10</sup>](#10)</sup> And with regard to the earth it
is again written in Job: *He that hangeth the earth upon
nothing;*<sup>[<sup>11</sup>](#11)</sup> meaning, that it had nothing
underneath it. And David in harmony with this, when he could discover
nothing on <span id="p131">\|131</span> which it was founded, says: *He
that hath founded the earth upon its own
stability,*<sup>[<sup>12</sup>](#12)</sup> as if he said, it hath been
founded by thee upon itself, and not upon anything else.

To the best of our ability we have endeavoured to depict heaven having
the firmament within it and the mountain peaks in the middle of the
earth which we now inhabit, and the ocean surrounding it, and the four
navigable gulfs which run into it----the Roman, the Arabian, the Persian
and the Caspian or Hyrcanian. The ocean again we have depicted as
surrounded by the land on its farther side, where also Paradise lies in
the east. Then again we depict the breadth of the earth and of the
ocean, and of the gulfs, and of the earth beyond, and Paradise, leaving
out for the present the peaks, in order that a comprehensive view may be
more readily gained by those who examine the delineation. Now the figure
of the whole earth, with respect to this surface and to the breadth, is
such as has been indicated.

With that earth which is situated beyond the ocean, the first heaven,
which is like a vaulted chamber, is bound together at its extremities on
all sides, and at its west and at its east side a wall is found rising
straight upward, but at the south and at the north side there is a wall
equal at the base until it takes what has evidently the form of a
vaulted chamber, while at the top it rolls itself into a very lofty
arch, like the spacious roof over a bath, with an arena-like floor
below,<sup>[<sup>13</sup>](#13)</sup> so that the wall itself forms a
vaulted roof. Then, as we have just stated over and over again, the
firmament which is spread out in the middle is at a certain height bound
together with the heaven itself in order that two places may be
formed----an upper place and a lower.<sup>[<sup>14</sup>](#14)</sup> Now
one of these places, namely, the lower, comprising the earth and the
water and the other elements and the heavenly bodies, is this world
which extends from the earth to the firmament, having the earth for its
floor, the walls reaching down from the first heaven for its sides, and
the firmament for its roof. The <span id="p132">\|132</span>  other
place again which extends from the firmament to the vault of the first
heaven is, to wit, the Kingdom of Heaven into which the Lord Christ,
after he had risen from the dead, ascended, and into which the righteous
shall also afterwards ascend, and has for its floor the firmament or
second heaven, and the first heaven itself for its walls and its vaulted
roof. We further again depict the altitude and figure of this earth
which we men dwell in, and which is encircled by the ocean, and contains
the four navigable gulfs. Its eastern and its southern parts are low and
depressed, while its northern and western are of very great elevation,
but slope so gradually that the inequality is not perceived. The earth
has therefore in its northern and western parts an elevation equivalent
to its breadth. We therefore thus depict its figure according to the
best of our ability.<sup>[<sup>15</sup>](#15)</sup>

*Note.*

The earth taken as a whole is quadrangular according to the delineation
already given. We have also indicated the altitude of its most central
part and the heights in its northern and western parts. Hence we have
delineated it as placed in the centre surrounded by the ocean and also
by the earth on the opposite side of the ocean, with the heavenly bodies
circling round it, so that the conical mountain[<sup>16</sup>](#16) can
project a shadow according even to the pagans, while in accordance with
this figure eclipses can occur, as well as the vicissitudes of night and
day. Divine scripture confirms the truth of this, saying: *The sun
riseth and the sun goeth down, and draweth to his own place. On his
rising he goeth then to the south and wheeleth his circles, and turneth
round the air upon his circles;*<sup>[<sup>17</sup>](#17)</sup> meaning
that in circling through the air he comes back again to his own place.

*Text.*

In this view the inhabited parts of the earth are thus represented. In
accordance therewith the sun rising in the east, and running through the
south in the course of <span id="p133">\|133</span> his *revolutions,*
always, when giving light to the summit of the earth, or even to the
earth itself, makes night to the ocean and the earth beyond it. Then
again, when he is in the west and the north beyond the summit of the
earth, he leaves us here in darkness, until in making his circuit he
again appears in the east where the earth is depressed, and mounting the
sky in the south again illumines all this side. The eclipses of the moon
therefore, even according to this delineation, if at any rate what the
pagans say is true, can occur when either the sun or the moon is hidden
by the summit of the earth; for they say that a solar eclipse is not
produced by the shadow of the earth, but because in a perpendicular line
the moon is directly below the sun, so \[189\] that she is illuminated
on that side which the sun sees, but not on that which he does not
see----yea, rather, she prevents him from being visible by running under
him, at the occurrence at all events of the lunar new month, when the
moon is not enlightened on that side which is visible to us. The opinion
therefore which we hold is in no wise adverse to such views, except only
with respect to the motion and revolution of the heaven----a theory
subversive alike of all divine scripture both of the Old and the New
Testament, and of Christian doctrine. But to enquire further into these
matters we have no leisure; for such knowledge is unprofitable to us who
have access to a more profitable knowledge, which imparts to our soul a
good and beneficent hope which God hath promised he will give to those
who believe in him, while those who act unjustly he has doomed to
perdition. But with God's help we shall delineate the figure of the
earth on the reverse side in its northern portion, that we may be able
again in turn to delineate the circuit of the heavenly bodies----and it
is thus.[<sup>18</sup>](#18)

When therefore the setting sun runs from here by the <span
id="p134">\|134</span> ministration of the invisible powers, according
to the views of divine scripture, he makes night in the other
part----that namely which is inhabited; but when he runs hither he makes
darkness there. But we shall now concisely, according to our ability,
delineate the heaven and the earth, and we do so
thus:----<sup>[<sup>19</sup>](#19)</sup>

*Note* 1.

This part of the earth situated beyond the north, where the luminaries
pursue their course from the west through the north towards the east is
uninhabited, and this stands upright like a wall, and when the sun comes
to it, he leaves in darkness the other part which is inhabited. The
earth therefore is found to have in this part, from the ocean beneath up
to its summit, an altitude according with the measure of the breadth of
its inhabited parts. Hence as it intercepts midway the light of the
heavenly bodies, the nights and all the rest follow.

*Note* 2.

It is necessary for those who wish to be considered Christians to
enquire into which of these eight or nine heavens Christ has ascended,
and into which they themselves hope to ascend, and what is the use of
the other seven or eight heavens. For having already delineated the
world in accordance with the scriptural view, we assert that two places
were created, one adapted to the present state of existence, and the
other to that which is to come, since we have such a hope, one that is
better than the \[190\] life here. And you, if as Christians you hold
such a hope, will of necessity be asked what is the use of the seven or
eight other heavens. For the pagans who hold the theory of the sphere,
if consistent with themselves, neither entertain such a hope, nor allow
that there are waters above the heaven, nor are found to acknowledge
that the heavenly bodies and the world will come to an end; but expect
that the world in the state of corruption will continue for ever. If the
sphere which has motion forces the others to revolve along with it from
east to west, whence is <span id="p135">\|135</span> produced the
motion, in the contrary direction, of the seven planets? Is it the
spheres that have the contrary motion, or the stars themselves? If the
spheres, how can they at one and the same time move both westward and
eastward? And if the stars, how do the planets cut their way through the
heavenly bodies? Is it not evident that a heavenly body cannot be cut
asunder? For unless it were corruptible, it could not be cut through.
How then do ye make such suppositions?

Since beyond this sphere neither place, nor body, nor element nor any of
their parts anywhere exists, how do ye say it is moved? Tell us,
begrudge us not an answer. For, except in some place or in space at
large, it cannot possibly be moved. Show us therefore by what
instrument----naming any one you please-----it can be moved without
place or body, or element or space. And do not, because you are adepts
in the science of nature, jauntily treat us to nothing but empty
phrases. But since some insist that the sphere rotates like a lathe by
the shaft,[<sup>20</sup>](#20) or like a waggon or a machine by the
axle, let these show on what support the shaft and the axle rest, and
then again on what this support rests, and so on to infinity. How then
do you reason with respect to the natural world? and how does an axis
not also pass through the earth, which is in the middle, and turn it
round? And again tell me, ye who follow these men and yet wish to be
Christians, into what place of the eight spheres, or of the ninth which
is called by some the starless, hath Christ entered, or shall we
ourselves enter? Or how can waters be contained on a rotating sphere? or
how when the stars fall at the final consummation can such spheres as
yours be preserved? or what can be the use of them? Is it not evident
that you argue against the hope held out by the Christian doctrine? For
these views cannot be consistently held except by Pagans, who have no
hope of another and better state, and who consequently suppose that the
world is eternal, in order that the rich abundance of the spheres in
which the planets will accomplish their courses may be preserved for
them----while in another sphere are the fixed stars----and their error
has some show of reason in its favour. But ye advance arguments
altogether incredible, and will have it that there is a multitude of
spheres, and that there is no final consummation of the world since ye
are <span id="p136">\|136</span>  unable to tell what is the necessity
of these things. And in like manner ye will have it that the waters
above the spheres rotate----\[191\] a most ridiculous idea and
altogether idiotic, and ye advance arguments which are
self-contradictory and opposed to the nature of things. And though ye
allow that the universe was created in six days, yet ye find no mention
of the making of a third heaven, and far less of the eight or nine which
ye venture to affirm. How great is your knowledge! how great your
wisdom! how great your intelligence! how great your inconsistency! *No
man can serve two masters,*<sup>[<sup>21</sup>](#21)</sup> as has well
been said by the Lord, but if one will serve God, let him serve him, or
if Mammon, then Mammon. And again he says, through Paul: *Ye cannot be
partakers of the table of the Lord, and of the table of
devils.*<sup>[<sup>22</sup>](#22)</sup> And again: *Be ye not unequally
yoked together with unbelievers; for what fellowship hath righteousness
with lawlessness, and what communion hath light with darkness? and what
concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath he that believeth
with an infidel? and what agreement hath the temple of God with
idols?*<sup>[<sup>23</sup>](#23)</sup>

And how again was it possible for the earth, which according to you is
placed in the very middle of the universe, to have been submerged by the
deluge in the time of Noah? or how can it be believed that on the first
and the second day it was covered by the waters, and on the third, when
the waters were gathered together, that it made its appearance, as is
recorded in Genesis? But with even greater wisdom ye suppose that there
are men walking all the earth over with their feet opposite the feet of
other men. We therefore depict according to your view the earth and the
Antipodes,<sup>[<sup>24</sup>](#24)</sup> and let each one of you who
has sound vision and the power of reasoning justly turn the earth round
whatever way he pleases, and let him say whether the Antipodes can be
all standing upright in the same sense of the expression. But this they
will not show even should they speak unrestrained by shame. Such then is
our reply to your fictitious and false theories and to the conclusions
of your reasonings which are capricious, self-contradictory,
inconsistent, doomed to be utterly confounded, and  <span
id="p137">\|137</span> to be whirled round and round even more than that
unstable and revolving mythical sphere of yours. Wherefore, O
Christ-loving Father, since I have thus brought to an end the fourth
book with a delineation of the Antipodes, I shall begin the fifth book,
as I promised at thy pious desire, and it will contain a description of
the Tabernacle prepared by Moses in the wilderness, if God will, who is
the Saviour of us all.

<span id="img_cosmas4-3"></span> ![](img/cosmas4-3.jpg)

\[Footnotes moved to the end and renumbered\]

<span id="#1"></span>1. <sup>1</sup> Gen. i, 1.

<span id="#2"></span>2. <sup>2</sup> Gr. ἡ θέσις καὶ τὸ σχη̃μα*.* For the
sketch, see Plates 2 and 7 in the Appendix.

<span id="#3"></span>3. <sup>1</sup> The MS. has μακρὸν, which
Montfaucon gives in his text, but in a note corrects into μικρόν*.*

<span id="#4"></span>4. <sup>2</sup> Gr. ὡς ἐπὶ θόλου μεγάλης.

<span id="#5"></span>5. <sup>3</sup> See Pl. 7 in the Appendix.

<span id="#6"></span>6. <sup>4</sup> Isai. xl, *22.*

<span id="#7"></span>7. <sup>5</sup> Psalm civ, 2, 3.

<span id="#8"></span>8. <sup>6</sup> Isai. xlii, 5.

<span id="#9"></span>9. <sup>7</sup> Heb. viii, 2.

<span id="#10"></span>10. <sup>8</sup> Job xxxviii, 38.

<span id="#11"></span>11. <sup>9</sup> Job xxv, 7.

<span id="#12"></span>12. <sup>1</sup> Psalm civ, 5.

<span id="#13"></span>13. <sup>2</sup> Gr. πέχμα, which Montfaucon
translates by *lacunar,* a "ceiling", but no lexicon gives this as a
meaning of the word. Sophocles gives "the area of a circus or of a
theatre", as the meaning in Byzantine writers.

<span id="#14"></span>14. <sup>3</sup> Gr. ἀνάγαιον καὶ κατάγαιον*.*

<span id="#15"></span>15. <sup>1</sup> See Pl. 4 in the Appendix. 

<span id="#16"></span>16. <sup>2</sup> See Pl. 8 in the Appendix.

<span id="#17"></span>17. <sup>3</sup> Eccl. i, 6, 7.

<span id="#18"></span>18. <sup>1</sup> See Pl. 5 in the Appendix.

<span id="#19"></span>19. <sup>1</sup> See Pl. 6 in the Appendix.

<span id="#20"></span>20. <sup>1</sup> Gr. ὑπὸ κλώτακος*.*

<span id="#21"></span>21. <sup>1</sup> Matt, vi, 24.

<span id="#22"></span>22. <sup>2</sup> I Cor. x, 21.

<span id="#23"></span>23. <sup>3</sup> II Cor. vi, 14, 16.

<span id="#24"></span>24. <sup>4</sup> See Pl. 10 in Appendix.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 5](ct07)
