[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ct10)  [Next](ct12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Cosmas Indicopleustes, Christian Topography (1897) pp. 321-330.  Book
9**

<span id="img_cosmas9-1"></span> ![](img/cosmas9-1.jpg)  

# BOOK IX.

*Concerning the course of the heavenly bodies.*

<span id="img_cosmas9-2"></span> ![](img/cosmas9-2.jpg) HE circle of the
twelve months is the uppermost, that of the sun is lower, and that of
the moon is lower still.[<sup>1</sup>](#1) Divine scripture signifies
this by the structure of the candlestick, whereby the circular branches
spring out from its shaft three on the one side and three on the other
in such wise that one branch precedes another branch,[<sup>2</sup>](#2)
and each day the circle of the twelve months outruns the sun one degree,
so that the sun is found in thirty days running through one month, and
thus in twelve months completing the year, falling short, as has been
said, one degree each day.[<sup>3</sup>](#3) The circle again of the sun
outruns the circle of the moon [<sup>4</sup>](#4) twelve degrees each
day,[<sup>5</sup>](#5) so that it is found that the moon in thirty
<sup>[<sup>6</sup>](#6)</sup> days falls short of accomplishing the
whole of the circle, that is, one month. But if any <span
id="p322">\|322</span> \[310\] should choose to consider the matter in
the reverse way,<sup>[<sup>7</sup>](#7)</sup> then the circle of the
moon falls short of that of the sun every day twelve degrees and some
minutes, and the circle of the sun falls short of the uppermost circle
of all, that is, of the twelve months, every day one degree. But these
bodies are moved by the invisible Powers in an orderly and rational
manner according to the will of God, these Powers having received this
as a law, according to what is written in David: *Bless the Lord, all ye
his angels, ye mighty in strength, that fulfil his word, hearkening unto
the voice of his word. Bless the Lord all ye his hosts, ye ministers of
his that do his pleasure.*<sup>[<sup>8</sup>](#8)</sup> To Him be glory
for ever and ever, Amen!

And these courses of the twelve mansions of the twelve stars and of the
two great luminaries, according to the length of their three circles, we
have explained to the best of our power in terms consistent with
Christian doctrine, being moved by divine assistance, and at the same
time drawing our conclusions from optical appearances. But as to the
course of the two great luminaries in respect of latitude, and as to
their transitions, their ascensions and declinations, conjunctions and
seasons of full moon, nodes and elongations of their
courses,<sup>[<sup>9</sup>](#9)</sup> parallaxes and phases, regular and
irregular motions, and their northern and southern limits, and other
terms which the pagans are pleased to employ, whereby they calculate the
eclipses of the same luminaries, we resign the calculation to those who
know and investigate such subjects with a view to calculate and foretell
eclipses, since by this our withers are unwrung, and we are <span
id="p323">\|323</span> even more confirmed in our views. For if terms of
this kind, namely, transitions, ascensions, declinations, etc., hold
\[as they do\] a place in our scheme, contention is futile. Now we have
not cared to show anything else by this treatise of ours than that these
eclipses of the two luminaries do occur, and are in harmony with our
scheme, although the heaven should not be moved at all from east to
west, or from west to east, and whether it be spherical or consist of
many spheres; while at the same time the stars and luminaries in the
air, by the agency of the rational powers, complete their course in
observance of their order, and the figure of the two heavens and of the
earth is preserved in accordance with divine scripture----a figure in
which from the beginning God prepared two states ----the present and the
future, namely those circles which we have described, and not heavens
that are spherical, continuous, solid of body and
transparent-----according to the nonsensical babble of the pagans.

We remember to have stated in the second book that the angels move the
luminaries and the stars and all else, as having been ordained for the
service of men, and there also we have delineated the scheme as far as
it is possible \[311\] to exhibit it graphically. For we have
testimonies from divine scripture showing that this is so. For that
these bodies have a circular motion David shows when he says: *Thou
shalt bless the crown of the year with thy
goodness;*<sup>[<sup>10</sup>](#10)</sup> here with wonderful propriety
styling the circle of the twelve months a crown, as crowning the face of
the earth with beauty, whence he added: *And the fields shall be filled
with thy fatness.*<sup>1</sup> For by the circular motion and the
succession of returns from the tropics, the fruits of the earth grow and
reach maturity. Yea, even Moses placed upon that which was typical of
the earth, namely, upon <span id="p324">\|324</span> the table all
round, the twelve loaves of shew-bread, three at each corner, signifying
by the corners the four tropics, each distant from each three months,
and by the circle the twelve months, and by the loaves the fruits of the
earth, thus mystically representing the months by a circle crowning the
earth above. In like manner also he arranged the twelve tribes in a
circle around the Tabernacle, three on the east, three on the south,
three on the west, and three on the north, beginning from the east,
going up to south, descending again to the west and then lastly running
through the north in accordance with the motion of the stars and the
position of the earth.

This circle the pagans call the Zodiac which we have ourselves
delineated in accordance with their theory.[<sup>11</sup>](#11) But the
other seven stars, which they call planets, Moses obscurely represented
by placing seven lamps in the candlestick, which he placed in the south,
so that it cast its light upon the table towards the north, while by the
lamps he signified a week of seven days, signifying by all these the
days, the weeks, the months, the tropics, and the year. By the daily
loaves which were each day laid down new upon the table, he indicated
the days, and by the seven lamps the week, and by the number of the
loaves the twelve months, and by the four corners the tropics, and by
the circle the year, concerning which things the divine Apostle speaks
in the Epistle to the Hebrews:<sup>[<sup>12</sup>](#12)</sup> *Now if he
were on earth he would not be a priest at all, seeing there are those
who offer the gifts according to the law; who serve that which is a copy
and shadow of the heavenly things, even as Moses is warned of God when
he is about to make the Tabernacle: For, see, saith he, that thou make
all things according to the pattern which was shown thee in thc Mount.*
And Solomon says: *The sun ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth
to* <span id="p325">\|325</span> *his place. Arising he goeth there
towards the south and wheeleth round in his circuit, and the wind goeth
on its circuits.*<sup>[<sup>13</sup>](#13)</sup> He also, in what he
says, agrees with Moses and David, namely, that the sun proceeding from
the east ascends to the south, and by making a circuit through the
.north, causes the tropics, and completes the great circle of the year
in his passage through the air; for this is what the expression *the
wind goeth on* means, as if he said, *in the* \[312\] *air.* And that
the heavenly bodies are moved by the invisible Powers, divine scripture
intimates this also, when it says: *For the creation was made subject to
vanity not of its own will, but by reason of him who subjected it in
hope that the creation itself shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of
God;*<sup>[<sup>14</sup>](#14)</sup> meaning by this, that at the final
consummation, the angels shall be delivered from this bondage, and from
the ministrations which they render on account of men, for men, having
then become immortal and immutable, will no longer be in need of such
ministrations, as the Lord also in the Gospels speaks thus concerning
the consummation: *For the powers of heaven shall be
shaken,*[<sup>15</sup>](#15) thus calling the angels the powers of
heavens, and by the expression *they shall be shaken,* He means they
shall be set free from their former office. As the angels, therefore,
who move the stars themselves and other things, are certainly set free
from this office and ministry, He declares that the stars fall to the
earth.

The language of the Apostle also: *Are they not all ministering spirits
senf forth to minister for the sake of them that shall inherit
salvation?*<sup>[<sup>16</sup>](#16)</sup> very clearly shows that they
all for the sake of man are occupied night and day in their
ministrations and services, and in doing everything else <span
id="p326">\|326</span> towards giving men relaxation from their toils
and towards supplying their wants. For, when we shall no longer need
them, they shall be set free from this bondage and service, and shall
cast down the stars upon the earth. As Paul endured many toils and
afflictions and persecutions for the Church, and at last, from the
multitude of his impending dangers, was driven to despondency, the
divine grace consoled him by means of frequent visions, encouraging him
not to despair, but to persevere, and to minister to the growth and
propagation of the Church. He therefore sets forth from these things for
us two causes \[of the visions\], one pointing to labour, and the other
to reward. For what does he say? *I* *know a man in Christ fourteen
years ago* (*whether in the body I know not, or whether out of the body
I know not, God knoweth*)*, how that he was caught up into the third
heaven;*<sup>[<sup>17</sup>](#17)</sup> and again he says: *And I know
such a man that he was caught up into the third heaven and heard
unspeakable words which it is not lawful for a man to
utter;*[<sup>18</sup>](#18) here manifestly setting forth things
concerning himself in the person of another. I know, he says, O
Corinthians, if I needs must myself come to visions and revelations of
the Lord, that I was, in a wondrous manner beyond all conception, caught
up to a vast height, that of the distance from the earth to the
firmament, two-third parts, so that only one third of the whole height
of heaven remained to me to be ascended.<sup>[<sup>19</sup>](#19)</sup>
And what was the cause of his being thus caught up I will with God's
help explain. Since the invisible powers in this height \[313\] up to
which Paul was caught, in obedience to the divine ordinance, for the
sake of man move the heavenly bodies unceasingly and unhesitatingly by
night and by day, He <span id="p327">\|327</span> therefore caught up
Paul, and conducted him thither, to show him the incessant service which
they perform for the sake of men----to show him in what a rational,
orderly, rhythmical and intelligent a manner, and with what toil and
assiduity and solicitude, they render their service, and fulfil their
work, that he might thus in a measure comfort Paul, so that in labouring
for the Church, he might not give way to despondency, but persevere in
his ministry, as he saw the angels were doing in theirs. Paul therefore
had the boldness to reveal how they ranked in dignity, naming
Principalities, and Powers, and Virtues, and Thrones, and Dominations.
For some of them perform the work while others superintend the workers,
and others exercise power as commanders of squadrons; and to say all in
a word, all of them alike, groaning and travailing in pain together,
perform their labour with great anxiety and solicitude, and in rational
order, all of them being together desirous to gain their freedom from
that bondage under which they serve for the sake of men.

I shall here speak again, God helping me, concerning the being caught up
into Paradise. Since, after their departure from the body, the souls of
the righteous, who are thought worthy to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, are consigned to Paradise (as we learn from the case of the
thief who was crucified along with the Lord), until the resurrection,
being there kept as in a choice and honoured place by the invisible
Powers, who entertain them with hymns and every mark of honour; God
caught up Paul thither, and by way of comforting him, showed him, but in
part only, the crowns which were the prizes of his toils and struggles;
whence he was unable to give a perfect description of the things there;
yea, he rather declared them to be unspeakable and incomprehensible, but
he had the boldness to write, that for him, as one who had finished his
course of service, and had kept the faith, there was <span
id="p328">\|328</span> laid up a crown of righteousness by the Lord, and
not for him only, but also for all who are like him. And so much we have
said with regard to the visions.

But here it is to be noted that all the heavenly bodies are under the
firmament, and are moved and wheeled in their orbits below the
two-thirds of the height of heaven,<sup>[<sup>20</sup>](#20)</sup> by
the ministry and the arrangement of the invisible Powers. And from this
we learn that an angel does not ascend beyond the heavenly bodies. For
if *they are all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for the sake
of them that shall inherit salvation,*<sup>[<sup>21</sup>](#21)</sup>
let any one who is opposed to this opinion declare in what service the
angel, who goes above the firmament, is engaged; and if he is at a loss
to point this out, let him submit, I do not say to us, but to divine
scripture. For it is impossible for any of us, while still mortal or
corruptible or mutable, to go beyond the stars, unless we receive from
God incorruption and \[314\] immortality and immutability by the
resurrection from the dead; unless the angels also are, in like manner,
along with us, delivered from bondage, and casting down the stars to the
earth, likewise obtain immutability and freedom, we do not go beyond the
stars and cleave the firmament to enter into the kingdom of heaven. For
this the Apostle shows when he says: *Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God;*<sup>[<sup>20</sup>](#20) </sup> here by the word
*flesh* meaning mortality, and by *blood* mutability. He declared
therefore that it is impossible for one who is mortal or mutable to
inherit the kingdom of heaven. He subjoins immediately: *Neither doth
corruption inherit incorruption* <sup>[<sup>22</sup>](#22)</sup>----and
he repeated this, by way of showing that nothing that is corrupt can go
up and enter there, for harm rather than any advantage would <span
id="p329">\|329</span> result. For just as we, who are far away from the
sun, have not the power, should we direct our eyes to his disc, to
continue doing so, but would be injured and blinded rather than
profited, so would it fare with any one if, while still mortal or
mutable or corruptible, he should seek to overstep the boundaries, and
approach the way which leads to the kingdom of heaven, while still far
off therefrom. So then, just as the Lord Christ when He had risen from
the dead, having become incorruptible in the body and immortal, and in
soul immutable, then passed beyond the heavenly Powers, and when He had
approached the firmament, having become, as it is written, better than
the angels, He pierced it and entered into the kingdom of heaven; as
Paul also declares when he says that he ascended far above all
principality, etc., so we also and the angels, having obtained these
attributes, enter therein. Again, the two trees in the middle of
Paradise mystically presignify the present state and the future, and the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil is a type of this world which is
mortal and mutable, having pleasures and pains, and being a school of
discipline,<sup>[<sup>23</sup>](#23)</sup> just as Adam was taught by
this tree both good and evil. Now the tree of life is a type of the
future heavenly world, in which life and blessedness reign, for the
saying: *Lest he stretch forth his hand and take of the tree of
life,*<sup>[<sup>24</sup>](#24)</sup> signified the vast height of the
tree and thereby signified the mansions above. As therefore He commanded
the Cherubim with the flaming sword which turned every way, to guard the
way to the tree of life, so He commanded the angels and the luminaries
which revolve round the height of the firmament, to guard the way which
is there that leads into the kingdom of heaven; <span
id="p330">\|330</span> intending to signify that the mansions above are
meanwhile inaccessible to men. At His Passion therefore the Lord Christ
\[315\] carried with Him the soul of the thief into Paradise, having
suspended the guardianship of the Cherubim and of the flaming sword,
which turned every way. But after His resurrection, when He came to his
ascension, He opened a passage through the host of the invisible Powers,
and the luminaries and the firmament itself, and entered into the
kingdom where immortality, and immutability, and blessedness reign. At
the final consummation therefore, when the angels cease to make the
luminaries revolve and when the stars fall, then the Cherubim and the
flaming sword waving both ways no longer prevent men from entering into
the true life, but the righteous, raised on high and traversing the new
way and piercing the firmament with the Lord Christ, shall inherit the
kingdom of life. Do Thou, who hast compassion and great pity, deem us
also, along with Thy righteous, worthy of this life and inheritance.

<span id="img_cosmas9-3"></span> ![](img/cosmas9-3.jpg)

\[Footnotes moved to the end and renumbered\]

<span id="#1"></span>1. <sup>1</sup> See Pl. 9 in the Appendix,
depicting the *celestial sphere* of Ptolemy.

<span id="#2"></span>2. <sup>2</sup> See Pl. 15 in the Appendix.

<span id="#3"></span>3. <sup>3</sup> More exactly 59' 8 1/3".

<span id="#4"></span>4. <sup>4</sup> Gr. Τὸν δὲ κύκλον τη̃ς σελήνης, ἡ
του̃ ἡλίου προτρέχει*.* As προτρέχει governs the genitive, the reading
should be του̃ δὲ κύκλου, and ἡ should be ὁ. 

<span id="#5"></span>5. <sup>5</sup> More exactly 12° 11' 26 2/3". 

<span id="#6"></span>6. <sup>6</sup> 29 1/2 + days.

<span id="#7"></span>7. <sup>1</sup> Gr. ̕Ει δέ τις ἐξ ἀντιστρόφου
βουλειθείη νοει̃ν*.* Montfaucon translates this wrongly: Quod si quis
*facta comparatione* rem considerare voluerit.

<span id="#8"></span>8. <sup>2</sup> Psalm ciii, 21, 22.

<span id="#9"></span>9. <sup>3</sup> Gr. ἐκδιαμέτρων δρόμων*.*
Montfaucon renders: de diametralibus cursibus.

<span id="#10"></span>10. <sup>1</sup> Psalm lxv, 11.

<span id="#11"></span>11. <sup>1</sup> See Plates 9 and 22 in the
Appendix.

<span id="#12"></span>12. <sup>2</sup> Heb. viii, 4, 5.

<span id="#13"></span>13. <sup>1</sup> Eccl. i, 5, 6.

<span id="#14"></span>14. <sup>2</sup> Rom. viii, 20.

<span id="#15"></span>15. <sup>3</sup> Matt, xxiv, 19.

<span id="#16"></span>16. <sup>4</sup> Heb. i, 14.

<span id="#17"></span>17. <sup>1</sup> II Cor. xii, 2.

<span id="#18"></span>18. <sup>2</sup> *Ibid.,* 3.

<span id="#19"></span>19. <sup>3</sup> From this it would appear that
Cosmas took the distance from the earth to the firmament to be double
the distance from the firmament to the summit of heaven. But see note 3,
p. 116, and its text.

<span id="#20"></span>20. <sup>1</sup> That is two-thirds of the height
of heaven above the earth. See note 3, p. 116, and note 3, p. 326,

<span id="#21"></span>21. <sup>2</sup> Heb. i, 14.

<span id="#22"></span>22. <sup>3</sup> 1 Cor xv, 50.

<span id="#23"></span>23. <sup>1</sup> According to the Greek text there
should be a full stop after discipline; but it seems better to place it
after the clause which follows.

<span id="#24"></span>24. <sup>2</sup> Gen. iii, 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book 10](ct12)
