[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140080)  [Next](1140082.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxviii"></span> <span id="iv.lxxviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXVI.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>
<span class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p2.2"></span>[John xiv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031.md)<span id="iv.lxxviii-p2.3"></span>;
xv. 1</span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p3"></span> *“Arise, let us go hence. I am the true
Vine, (ye are the branches,*  <span id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171.md)
*) and My Father is the Husbandman.”*

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p5"></span> \[1.\] ‘ <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p5.1"></span>Ignorance’</span> makes the soul timid and
unmanly, just as instruction in heavenly doctrines makes it great and
sublime. For when it has enjoyed no care, it is in a manner timid, not
by nature but by will.  <span id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172.md) For
when I see the man who once was brave,  <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173.md) now become a coward, I say that
this latter feeling no longer belongs to nature, for what is natural is
immutable. Again, when I see those who but now were cowards all at once
become daring, I pass the same judgment, and refer all to will. Since
even the disciples were very fearful, before they had learned what they
ought, and had been deemed worthy of the gift of the Spirit; yet
afterwards they became bolder than lions. So Peter, who could not bear
the threat of a damsel, was hung with his head downwards, and was
scourged, and though he endured ten thousand dangers, would not be
silent, but enduring what he endured as though it were a dream, in such
a situation spake boldly; but not so before the Crucifixion. Wherefore
Christ said, “Arise, let us go hence.” “But why, tell me? Did he not
know the hour at which Judas would come upon Him? Or perhaps He feared
lest he should come and seize them, and lest the plotters should be upon
him before he had furnished his most excellent teaching.” Away with the
thought! these things are far from His dignity. “If then He did not
fear, why did He remove them, and then after finish <span
id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span id="iv.lxxviii-Page_277"></span> ing
His discourse lead them into a garden known to Judas? And even had Judas
come, could He not have blinded their eyes, as He also did when the
traitor was not present?  <span id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174.md) Why
did He remove them?” He alloweth the disciples a little breathing time.
For it was likely that they, as being in a conspicuous place, would
tremble and fear, both on the account of the time and the place, (for it
was the depth of night,) and would not give  <span
id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175.md) heed to His words, but would be
continually turning about, and imagining that they heard those who were
to set upon them; and that more especially when their Master’s speech
made them expect evil. For, “yet a little while,” He saith, “and I am
not with you,” and, “the ruler of this world cometh.” Since now when
they heard these and the like words they were troubled, as though they
should certainly be taken immediately, He leadeth them to another place,
in order that thinking themselves in safety, they might listen to Him
without fear. For they were about to hear lofty doctrines. Therefore He
saith, “Arise, let us go hence.” Then He addeth, and saith,  <span
id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176.md) “I am the Vine, ye are the
branches.” What willeth He to imply by the comparison? That the man who
gives no heed to His words can have no life, and that the miracles about
to take place, would be wrought by the power of Christ. “My Father is
the Husbandman.” “How then? Doth the Son need a power  <span
id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177.md) working within?” Away with the
thought! this example does not signify this. Observe with what exactness
He goeth through the comparison. He saith not that the “root” enjoys the
care of the Husbandman, but, “the branches.” And the foot is brought in
in this place for no other purpose, but that they may learn that they
can work nothing without His power, and that they ought to be united
with Him by faith as the branch with the vine.

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p12"></span> [John
15.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p12.1"></span> . “Every branch in Me that beareth not
fruit the Father  <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178.md) taketh
away.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p14"></span>Here He alludeth to the manner of life,
showing that without works it is not possible to be in Him.

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p15"></span> “And every branch that beareth fruit,
He purgeth it.”  <span id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179.md)

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p17"></span>That is, “causeth it to enjoy great
care.” Yet the root requires care rather than the branches, in being dug
about, and cleared, yet about this He saith nothing here, but all about
the branches. Showing that He is sufficient to Himself, and that the
disciples need much help from the Husbandman, although they be very
excellent. Wherefore He saith, “that which beareth fruit, He purgeth
it.” The one branch, because it is fruitless, cannot even remain in the
Vine, but for the other, because it beareth fruit, He rendereth it more
fruitful. This, some one might assert, was said with relation also to
the persecutions then coming upon them. For the “purgeth it,” is
“pruneth,” which makes the branch bear better. Whence it is shown, that
persecutions rather make men stronger. Then, lest they should ask
concerning whom He said these things, and lest He should throw them back
into anxiety, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p18"></span> [John
15.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#003.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p18.1"></span> . “Now ye are clean through the word which
I have spoken unto you.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p19"></span> Seest thou how He introduceth Himself
as tending the branches? “I have cleansed you,” He saith; yet above He
declareth that the Father doth this. But there is no separation  <span
id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180.md) between the Father and the Son.
“And now your part also must be performed.” Then to show that He did not
this as needing their ministry,  <span
id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181.md) but for their advancement, He
addeth,

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p22"></span> [John
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p22.1"></span> .  <span
id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182.md) “As the branch cannot bear fruit of
itself except it abide in the vine, so neither can he who abideth not in
Me.”  <span id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183.md)

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p25"></span>For that they might not be separated
from Him by timidity, He fasteneth and glueth to Himself their souls
slackened through fear, and holdeth out to them good hopes for the
future. For the root remains, but to be taken away, or to be left,
belongs to the branches. Then having urged them on in both ways, by
things pleasant and things painful, He requireth first what is to be
done on our side.

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p26"></span> [John
15.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p26.1"></span> . “He that abideth in Me, and I in him.”
 <span id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184.md)

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p28"></span> Seest thou that the Son contributeth
not less than the Father towards the care of the disciples? The Father
purgeth, but He keepeth them in Himself. The abiding in the root is that
which maketh the branches to be fruit-bearing. For that which is not
purged, if it remain on the root, bears fruit, though perhaps not so
much as it ought; but that which remains not, bears none at all. But
still the “purging” also hath been shown to belong to the Son, and the
“abiding in the root,” to the Father, who also begat the Root. Seest
thou how all is common,  <span id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185.md) both
the “purging,” and the enjoying the virtue which is from the root?

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p30"></span>\[2.\] Now it were a great penalty, the
being able to do nothing, but He stayeth not the punishment at this
point, but carrieth on His discourse farther.

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p31"></span> <span id="page_278">p. 278</span>
<span id="iv.lxxviii-Page_278"></span>[John
15.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p31.1"></span> . “He is cast forth,”  <span
id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186.md) He saith.

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p33"></span>No longer enjoying the benefit of the
husbandman’s hand. “And is withered.” That is, if he had aught of the
root, he loses it; if any grace, he is stripped of this, and is bereft
of the help and life which proceed from it. And what the end? “He is
cast into the fire.” Not such he who abideth with Him. Then He showeth
what it is to “abide,” and saith,

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p34"></span> [John
15.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p34.1"></span> . “If My words abide in you.”  <span
id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187.md)

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p36"></span>Seest thou that with reason I said
above, that He seeketh the proof by works? For when He had said,
“Whatsoever ye shall ask I will do it” ( [John
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.lxxviii-p36.1"></span>
), He added, “If ye love Me, ye will keep  <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188.md) My commandments.” And here, “If ye
abide in Me, and My words abide in you.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p38"></span>“Ye shall ask what ye will, and it
shall be done unto you.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p39"></span>This He said to show that they who
plotted against Him should be burnt up, but that “they” should bear
fruit. Then transferring the fear from them to the others, and showing
that they should be invincible, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p40"></span> [John
15.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p40.1"></span> . “Herein is My Father glorified, that ye
be My disciples, and bear much fruit.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p41"></span>Hence He maketh His discourse credible,
for if the bearing fruit pertains to the glory of the Father, He will
not neglect His own glory. “And ye shall be My disciples.” Seest thou
how he that beareth fruit, he is the disciple? But what is, “In this is
the Father glorified”? “He rejoiceth when ye abide in Me, when ye bear
fruit.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p42"></span> [John
15.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p42.1"></span> . “As the Father hath loved Me, so have I
loved you.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p43"></span> Here at length He speaketh in a more
human manner, for this, as spoken to men,  <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189.md) has its peculiar force. Since what
a measure of love did He manifest, who chose to die, who counted worthy
of such honor those who were His slaves, His haters, His open enemies,
and led them up to the heavens! “If then I love you, be bold; if it be
the glory of My Father that ye bear fruit, imagine nothing ill.” Then
that He may not make them supine, observe how He braceth them again,

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p45"></span>“Continue ye in My love.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p46"></span>“For this ye have the power to do.” And
how shall this be?

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p47"></span> [John
15.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p47.1"></span> . “If ye keep My commandments, even as I
have kept my Father’s commandments.”  <span
id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190.md)

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p49"></span> Again, His discourse proceedeth in a
human way; for certainly the Lawgiver would not be subject to
commandments. Seest thou that here also, as I am always saying, this is
declared because of the infirmity of the hearers? For He chiefly
speaketh to their suspicions, and by every means showeth them that they
are in safety, and that their enemies are being lost, and that all,
whatever they have, they have from the Son, and that, if they show forth
a pure life, none shall ever have the mastery over them. And observe
that He discourseth with them in a very authoritative manner, for He
said not, “abide in the love of My Father,” but, “in Mine”; then, lest
they should say, “when Thou hast set us at war with all men, Thou
leavest us, and departest,” He showeth that He doth not leave them, but
is so joined to them if they will, as the branch in the vine. Then, lest
from confidence they should become supine, He saith not that the
blessing cannot be removed if they are slack-minded. And in order not to
refer the action to Himself, and so make them more apt to fall, He
saith, “Herein is My Father glorified.” For everywhere He manifesteth
His own and His Father’s love towards them. Not the things of the Jews,
then, were “glory,” but those which they  <span
id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191.md) were about to receive. And that
they might not say, “we have been driven from the possessions of our
fathers, we have been deserted, we have become naked, and destitute of
all things,” “Look,” He saith, “on Me. I am loved by the Father, yet
still I suffer these things appointed. And so I am not now leaving you
because I love you not. For if I am slain, and take not this for a proof
of not being loved by the Father, neither ought ye to be troubled. For,
if ye continue in My love, these dangers shall not be able to do you any
mischief on the score of love.”

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p51"></span>\[3.\] Since then love is a thing
mighty and irresistible, not a bare word, let us manifest it by our
actions. He reconciled us when we were His enemies, let us, now that we
have become His friends, remain so. He led the way, let us at least
follow; He loveth us not for His own advantage, (for He needeth
nothing,) let us at least love Him for our profit; He loved us being His
enemies, let us at least love Him being our friend. At present we do the
contrary; for every day God is blasphemed through us, through our
plunderings, through our covetousness. And perhaps one of you will say,
“Every day thy discourse is about covetousness.” Would that I could
speak about it every night too; would that I could do so, following you
about in the market-place, and at your table; would that both wives, and
friends, and children, and domestics, and tillers of the soil, and
neighbors, and the very pavement and walls, could ever <span
id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span id="iv.lxxviii-Page_279"></span> shout
forth this word, that so we might perchance have relaxed a little. For
this malady hath seized upon all the world, and occupies the souls of
all, and great is the tyranny of Mammon. We have been ransomed by
Christ, and are the slaves of gold. We proclaim the sovereignty of the
one, and obey the other. Whatever “he” commands we readily obey, and we
have refused to know family, or friendship, or nature, or laws, or
anything, for him. No one looks up to Heaven, no one thinks about things
to come. But there will be a time, when there will be no profit even in
 <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192.md) these words. “In the grave,”
it saith, “who shall confess to Thee?” Gold is a desirable thing, and
procures us much luxury, and makes us to be honored, but not in like
manner as doth Heaven. For from the wealthy man many even turn aside,
and hate him, but him who lives virtuously they respect and honor. “But”
saith some one “the poor man is derided, even though he be virtuous.”
Not among men, but brutes.  <span id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193.md)
Wherefore he ought not so much as to notice them. For if asses were to
bray and daws chatter at us, while all wise men commended us, we should
not, losing sight of this latter audience, have regard to clamors of the
brutes; for like to daws, and worse than asses, are they who admire
present things. Moreover, if an earthly king approve thee, thou makest
no account of the many, though they all deride thee; but if the Lord of
the universe praise thee, seekest thou the good words of beetles and
gnats? For this is what these men are, compared with God, or rather not
even this, but something viler, if there be aught such. How long do we
wallow in the mire? How long do we set sluggards and belly-gods for our
judges? They can prove dicers well, drunkards, those who live for the
belly, but as for virtue and vice, they cannot imagine so much as a
dream. If any one taunt thee because thou hast not skill to draw the
channels of the watercourses,  <span
id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194.md) thou wilt not think it any terrible
thing, but wilt even laugh at him who objects to thee ignorance of this
kind; and dost thou, when thou desirest to practice virtue, appoint as
judges those who know nothing of it? On this account we never reach that
art. We commit our case not to the practiced, but to the unlearned, and
they judge not according to the rules of art, but according to their own
ignorance. Wherefore, I exhort you, let us despise the many; or rather
let us desire neither praises, nor possessions, nor wealth, nor deem
poverty any evil. For poverty is to us a teacher of prudence, and
endurance, and all true wisdom. Thus Lazarus lived in poverty, and
received a crown; Jacob desired to get bread only; and Joseph was in the
extreme of poverty, being not merely a slave, but also a prisoner; and
on this account we admire him the more, and we do not so much praise him
when he distributed the corn, as when he dwelt in the dungeon: not when
he wore the diadem, but when the chain; not when he sat upon the throne,
but when he was plotted against and sold.  <span
id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195.md) Considering then all these things,
and the crowns twined for us after the conflicts, let us admire not
wealth, and honor, and luxury, and power, but poverty, and the chain,
and bonds, and endurance in the cause of virtue. For the end of those
things is full of troubles and confusion, and their lot is bound up with
this present life; but the fruit of these, heaven, and the good things
in the heavens, which neither eye hath seen, nor ear heard; which may we
all obtain, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[276:2172](1140081.htm#fr_2171.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>from</span> [John
14.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p4.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p4.3"></span></span>

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[276:2173](1140081.htm#fr_2172.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p6.1"></span>προαίρεσιν</span>

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[276:2174](1140081.htm#fr_2173.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p7.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p7.2"></span>a brave darer.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[277:2175](1140081.htm#fr_2174.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p8.2"></span>to persons present.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[277:2176](1140081.htm#fr_2175.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p9.2"></span>and it was not even possible to give.</span>
”

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[277:2177](1140081.htm#fr_2176.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p10.2"></span>having led them away, He saith.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[277:2178](1140081.htm#fr_2177.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p11.2"></span>νεργείας</span>

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[277:2179](1140081.htm#fr_2178.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p13"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p13.1"></span>He,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p13.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[277:2180](1140081.htm#fr_2179.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p16"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p16.1"></span>that it may bring forth more fruit,</span>
” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p16.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[277:2181](1140081.htm#fr_2180.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p20.1"></span>μέσον</span>

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[277:2182](1140081.htm#fr_2181.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p21.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p21.2"></span>teaching.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[277:2183](1140081.htm#fr_2182.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p23"></span> [John
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p23.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p23.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p23.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p23.4"></span>Abide in Me, and I in you. As,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p23.5"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[277:2184](1140081.htm#fr_2183.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p23.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p24"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p24.1"></span>so neither can ye, except ye abide in
Me.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p24.2"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[277:2185](1140081.htm#fr_2184.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p27"></span> [John
15.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p27.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p27.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p27.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p27.4"></span>I am the Vine, ye are the branches. He that
abideth in Me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for
without Me ye can do nothing.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p27.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[277:2186](1140081.htm#fr_2185.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p29.1"></span>i.e. to the Father and the Son.</span>

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[278:2187](1140081.htm#fr_2186.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p32"></span> [John
15.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p32.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p32.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p32.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p32.4"></span>If a man abide not in Me, he is cast forth
as a branch and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the
fire, and they are burned.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p32.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[278:2188](1140081.htm#fr_2187.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p35"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p35.1"></span>If ye abide in Me, and My words,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p35.2"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[278:2189](1140081.htm#fr_2188.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p37"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p37.1"></span>If ye love me, keep,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p37.2"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[278:2190](1140081.htm#fr_2189.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p44.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p44.2"></span>suitably to a man.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[278:2191](1140081.htm#fr_2190.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p48"></span> [John
15.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.lxxviii-p48.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p48.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p48.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p48.4"></span>If ye keep,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p48.5"></span>&c.,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p48.6"></span>ye shall abide in My
love; even as,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p48.7"></span>&c.,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p48.8"></span>and abide in His love.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p48.9"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[278:2192](1140081.htm#fr_2191.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p50.1"></span>i.e. the disciples.</span>

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[279:2193](1140081.htm#fr_2192.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p52.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p52.2"></span>no time for.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[279:2194](1140081.htm#fr_2193.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p53.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p53.2"></span>λόγοις</span>

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[279:2195](1140081.htm#fr_2194.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p54.1"></span>Τοὺς ὀχετοὺς τῶν ἀμαρῶν ἕλκειν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p54.2"></span>. An instance of
employment requiring skill and practice. v. *Iliad* xxi. 257.</span>

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[279:2196](1140081.htm#fr_2195.md) <span
id="iv.lxxviii-p54.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxviii-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p55.1"></span>̓</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p55.2"></span>Επωλεῖτο</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p55.3"></span>. So Morel. Ben. and <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.lxxviii-p55.4"></span>mss.</span> Sav.
reads</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p55.5"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p55.6"></span>πολεμεῖτο</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p55.7"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxviii-p55.8"></span>was warred against.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 15.11,12](1140082.md)
