[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140043)  [Next](1140045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xli"></span> <span id="iv.xli-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span id="iv.xli-Page_136"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xli-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXIX.</span>

<span id="iv.xli-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xli-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xli-p2.2"></span>[John
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xli-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p3"></span>“For My Father judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment to the Son; that all men should honor the Son,
even as they honor the Father.”

<span id="iv.xli-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xli-p4.1"></span>Beloved</span> , we need great diligence in all
things, for we shall render account of and undergo a strict enquiry both
of words and works. Our interests stop not with what now is, but a
certain other condition of life shall receive us after this, and we
shall be brought before a fearful tribunal. “For we must appear before
the Judgment-seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in his body, according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad.”
( [2 Cor. v. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010) <span
id="iv.xli-p4.2"></span> .) Let us ever bear in mind this tribunal, that
we may thus be enabled at all times to continue in virtue; for as he who
has cast out from his soul that day, rushes like a horse that has burst
his bridle to precipices, (for “his ways are always defiled”  <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1035](#fn_1034) — [Ps. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005) <span id="iv.xli-p5.2"></span> ,)
and then assigning the reason the Psalmist hath added, “He putteth Thy
judgments far away out of his sight”;) so he that always retains this
fear will walk soberly. “Remember,” saith one, “thy last things, and
thou shalt never do amiss.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
7.40](../../../bib/apo/sir007.htm#040)<span id="iv.xli-p5.3"></span> .)
For He who now hath remitted our sins, will then sin in judgment; He who
hath died for our sake will then appear again to judge all mankind.
 <span id="fr_1035"></span>[1036](#fn_1035) “Unto them that look for
Him,” saith the Apostle, “shall He appear the second time without sin
unto salvation.” ( [Heb. ix. 28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028) <span
id="iv.xli-p6.2"></span> .) Wherefore in this place also He saith, “My
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son;
that all men should honor the Son; even as they honor the Father.”

<span id="iv.xli-p7"></span> “Shall we then,” saith some one, “also call
Him Father?” Away with the thought. He useth the word “Son” that we may
honor Him still remaining a Son, as we honor the Father; but he who
calleth Him “Father” doth not honor the Son as the Father, but has
confounded the whole. Moreover as men are not so much brought to by
being benefited as by being punished, on this account He hath spoken
thus terribly,  <span id="fr_1036"></span>[1037](#fn_1036) that even
fear may draw them to honor Him. And when He saith “all,” His meaning is
this, that He hath power to punish and to honor, and doeth either as He
will.  <span id="fr_1037"></span>[1038](#fn_1037) The expression “hath
given,” is used that thou mayest not suppose Him not to have been
Begotten, and so think that there are two Fathers. For all that the
Father is, this the Son is also,  <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1039](#fn_1038) Begotten, and remaining a Son. And
that thou mayest learn that “hath given” is the same as “hath begotten,”
hear this very thing declared by another place. “As,” saith Christ, “the
Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in
Himself.” ( [John 5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span
id="iv.xli-p10.3"></span> .) “What then? Did he first beget and then
give Him life? For he who giveth, giveth to something which is. Was He
then begotten without life?” Not even the devils could imagine this, for
it is very foolish as well as impious. As then “hath given life” is
“hath begotten Him who is Life,” so, “hath given judgment” is “hath
begotten Him who shall be Judge.”

<span id="iv.xli-p11"></span> That thou mayest not when thou hearest
that He hath the Father for His cause imagine any difference  <span
id="fr_1039"></span>[1040](#fn_1039) of essence or inferiority of honor,
He cometh to judge thee, by this proving His Equality.  <span
id="fr_1040"></span>[1041](#fn_1040) For He who hath authority to punish
and to honor whom He will, hath the same Power with the Father. Since,
if this be not the case, if having been begotten He afterwards received
the honor, how came it that He was afterwards \[thus\] honored, by what
mode of advancement reached He so far as to receive and be appointed to
this dignity? Are ye not ashamed thus impudently to apply to that Pure
 <span id="fr_1041"></span>[1042](#fn_1041) Nature which admitteth of no
addition these carnal and mean imaginations?

<span id="iv.xli-p15"></span>“Why then,” saith some one, “doth Christ so
speak?” That His words may be readily received, and to clear the way for
sublime sayings; therefore He mixeth these with those, and those with
these. And observe how (He doth it); for it is good to see this from the
beginning. He said, “My Father worketh, and I work” ( [John
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="iv.xli-p15.1"></span> ,
&c.): declaring by this their Equality and Equal honor. But they “sought
to kill Him.” What doth He then? He lowereth His form of speech indeed,
and putteth the same meaning when He saith, “The Son can do nothing of
Himself.” Then again He raiseth His discourse to high matters, saying,
“What things soever the Father doeth, these also doeth the Son
likewise.” Then He returneth to what is lower, “For the Father loveth
the Son, and showeth Him all things that Himself doeth; <span
id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span id="iv.xli-Page_137"></span> and He
will show Him greater things than these.” Then He riseth higher, “For as
the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will.” After this again He joineth the high and the
low together, “For neither doth the Father judge any one, but hath given
all judgment to the Son”; then riseth again, “That all men should honor
the Son, even as they honor the Father.” Seest thou how He varieth the
discourse, weaving it both of high and low words and expressions, in
order that it might be acceptable to the men of that time, and that
those who should come after might receive no injury, gaining from the
higher part a right opinion of the rest? For if this be not the case, if
these sayings were not uttered through condescension, wherefore were the
high expressions added? Because one who is entitled to utter great words
concerning himself, hath, when he saith anything mean and low, this
reasonable excuse, that he doth it for some prudential purpose;  <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042) but if one who ought to speak
meanly of himself saith anything great, on what account doth he utter
words which surpass his nature? This is not for any purpose at all, but
an act of extreme impiety.  <span id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043)

<span id="iv.xli-p18"></span>\[2.\] We are therefore able to assign a
reason for the lowly expressions, a reason sufficient, and becoming to
God, namely, His condescension, His teaching us to be moderate, and the
salvation which is thus wrought for us. To declare which He said Himself
in another place, “These things I say that ye might be saved.” For when
He left His own witness, and betook Himself to that of John, (a thing
unworthy of His greatness,) He putteth the reason of such lowliness of
language, and saith, “These things I say that ye might be saved.” And ye
who assert that He hath not the same authority and power with Him who
begat Him, what can ye say when ye hear Him utter words by which He
declareth His Authority and Power and Glory equal in respect of the
Father? Wherefore, if He be as ye assert very inferior, doth He claim
the same honor? Nor doth He stop even here, but goeth on to say,

<span id="iv.xli-p19"></span>“He that honoreth not the Son honoreth not
the Father which hath sent Him.” Seest thou how the honor of the Son is
connected with that of the Father? “What of that?” saith one. “We see
the same in the case of the Apostles; ‘He,’ saith Christ, ‘who receiveth
you receiveth Me.’” ( [Matt. x. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040)
<span id="iv.xli-p19.1"></span> .) But in that place He speaketh so,
because He maketh the concerns of His servants His own; here, because
the Essence and the Glory is One (with that of the Father). Therefore
 <span id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044) it is not said of the
Apostles “that they may honor,” but rightly He saith, “He that honoreth
not the Son honoreth not the Father.” For where there are two kings, if
one is insulted the other is insulted also, and especially when he that
is insulted is a son. He is insulted even when one of his soldiers is
maltreated; not in the same way as in this case, but as it were in the
person of another,  <span id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045) while
here it is as it were in his own. Wherefore He beforehand said, “That
they should honor the Son even as they honor the Father,” in order that
when He should say, “He that honoreth not the Son honoreth not the
Father,” thou mightest understand that the honor is the same. For He
saith not merely, “he that honoreth not the Son,” but “he that honoreth
Him not so as I have said” “honoreth not the Father.”

<span id="iv.xli-p22"></span> “And how,” saith one, “can he that sendeth
and he that is sent be of the same essence?” Again, thou bringest down
the argument to carnal things, and perceivest not that all this has been
said for no other purpose, but that we might know Him to be The Cause,
 <span id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046) and not fall into the error
 <span id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047) of Sabellius, and that in
this manner the infirmity of the Jews might be healed, so that He might
not be deemed an enemy of God;  <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048) for they said, “This man is not of
God” ( [John 9.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xli-p25.2"></span> ), “This man hath not come from God.” Now to
remove this suspicion, high sayings did not contribute so much as the
lowly, and therefore continually and everywhere He said that He had been
“sent”; not that thou mightest suppose that expression to be  <span
id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049) any lessening of His greatness, but
in order to stop their mouths. And for this cause also He constantly
betaketh Himself to the Father, interposing moreover mention of His own
high Parentage.  <span id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050) For had He
said all in proportion to His dignity, the Jews would not have received
His words, since because of a few such expressions, they persecuted and
oftentimes stoned Him; and if looking wholly to them He had used none
but low expressions, many in after times might have been harmed.
Wherefore He mingleth and blendeth  <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051) His teaching, both by these lowly
sayings stopping, as I said, the mouths of the Jews, and also by
expressions suited to His dignity banishing  <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052) from men of sense any mean notion
of what He had said, and proving that such a notion did not in any wise
apply to Him at all.

<span id="iv.xli-p30"></span>The expression “having been sent” denoteth
change of place—but God is everywhere present. Wherefore then saith He
that He was <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="iv.xli-Page_138"></span> “sent”? He speaketh in an earthly  <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053) way,  <span
id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054) declaring His unanimity with the
Father. At least He shapeth His succeeding words with a desire to effect
this.

<span id="iv.xli-p33"></span> [John
5.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span id="iv.xli-p33.1"></span> .
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth My word, and believeth
on Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life.”

<span id="iv.xli-p34"></span> Seest thou how continually He putteth the
same thing to cure that feeling of suspicion, both in this place and in
what follows by fear and by promises of blessings removing their
jealousy of Him, and then again condescending greatly in words? For He
said not, “he that heareth My words, and believeth on Me,” since they
would have certainly deemed that to be pride, and a superfluous pomp of
words; because, if after a very long time, and ten thousand miracles,
they suspected this when He spake after this manner, much more would
they have done so then. It was on this account that at that later period
 <span id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055) they said to Him, “Abraham
is dead, and the prophets are dead, how sayest Thou,  <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056) If a man keep My saying, he shall
never taste of death?” ( [c. viii. 52](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#052)
<span id="iv.xli-p36.3"></span> .) In order therefore that they may not
here also become furious, see what He saith, “He that heareth My word,
and believeth on Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life.” This had no
small effect in making His discourse acceptable, when they learned that
those who hear Him believe in the Father also; for after having received
this with readiness, they would more easily receive the rest. So that
the very speaking in a humble manner contributed and led the way to
higher things; for after saying, “hath everlasting life,” He addeth,

<span id="iv.xli-p37"></span>“And cometh not into judgment, but is
passed from death unto life.”

<span id="iv.xli-p38"></span>By these two things He maketh His discourse
acceptable; first, because it is the Father who is believed on, and
then, because the believer enjoyeth many blessings. And the “cometh not
into judgment” meaneth, “is not punished,” for He speaketh not of death
“here,” but of death eternal, as also of the other “life” which is
deathless.

<span id="iv.xli-p39"></span> [John
5.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span id="iv.xli-p39.1"></span> .
“Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour cometh, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that have heard
shall live.”

<span id="iv.xli-p40"></span> Having said the words, He speaketh also of
the proof by deeds.  <span id="fr_1057"></span>[1058](#fn_1057) For when
He had said, “As the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them,
even so the Son quickeneth whom He will,” that the thing may not seem to
be mere boasting and pride, He affordeth proof  <span
id="fr_1058"></span>[1059](#fn_1058) by works, saying, “The hour
cometh”; then, that thou mayest not deem that the time is long, He
addeth, “and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
God, and they that have heard shall live.” Seest thou here His absolute
and unutterable authority? For as it shall be in the Resurrection, even
so, He saith, it shall be “now.” Then too when we hear His voice
commanding us we are raised; for, saith the Apostle, “at the command of
God the dead shall arise.”  <span id="fr_1059"></span>[1060](#fn_1059)
“And whence,” perhaps some one will ask, “is it clear that the words are
*not* mere boast?” From what He hath added, “and now is”; because had
His promises referred only to some future time, His discourse would have
been suspected by them, but now He supplieth them with a proof: “While
I,” saith He, “am tarrying among you, this thing shall come to pass”;
and He would not, had He not possessed the power, have promised for that
time, lest through the promise He should incur the greater ridicule.
Then too He addeth an argument demonstrative of His assertions, saying,

<span id="iv.xli-p44"></span> [John
5.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026)<span id="iv.xli-p44.1"></span> .
“For as the Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to
have life in Himself.”

<span id="iv.xli-p45"></span> \[3.\] Seest thou that this declareth a
perfect likeness save in one  <span id="fr_1060"></span>[1061](#fn_1060)
point, which is the One being a Father, and the Other a Son? for the
expression “hath given,” merely introduceth this distinction, but
declareth that all the rest is equal and exactly alike. Whence it is
clear that the Son doeth all things with as much authority and power as
the Father, and that He is not empowered from some other source, for He
“hath life” so as the Father hath. And on this account, what comes after
is straightway added, that from this we may understand the other also.
What is this then? It is,

<span id="iv.xli-p47"></span> [John
5.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#027)<span id="iv.xli-p47.1"></span> .
“Hath given Him authority to execute judgment also.”

<span id="iv.xli-p48"></span> And wherefore doth He continually  <span
id="fr_1061"></span>[1062](#fn_1061) dwell upon “resurrection” and
“judgment”? For He saith, “As the Father raiseth up the dead and
quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom He will”: and again,
“the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son”:
and again, “As the Father hath life in Himself so hath He given to the
Son to have life in Himself”; and again, “They that have heard \[the
Voice of the Son of God\] shall live”; and here again, “Hath given to
Him authority to execute judgment.” Wherefore doth He dwell on these
things continually? I mean, on “judgment,” and “life,” and
“resurrection”? It is because these subjects are able most of any to
attract even the obstinate hearer.  <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>
<span id="iv.xli-Page_139"></span> For the man who is persuaded that he
shall both rise again and shall give account to Christ  <span
id="fr_1062"></span>[1063](#fn_1062) of his transgressions, even though
he have seen no other sign, yet having admitted this, will surely run to
Him to propitiate his Judge.

<span id="iv.xli-p51"></span>“That He is the Son of Man ( [John
5.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028)<span id="iv.xli-p51.1"></span> ),
marvel not at this.”

<span id="iv.xli-p52"></span> Paul of Samosata rendereth it not so; but
how? “Hath given Him authority to execute judgment, ‘because’ He is the
Son of Man.”  <span id="fr_1063"></span>[1064](#fn_1063) Now the passage
thus read is inconsequent, for He did not receive judgment “because” He
was man, (since then what hindered all men from being judges,) but
because He is the Son of that Ineffable Essence, therefore is He Judge.
So we must read, “That He is the Son of Man, marvel not at this.” For
when what He said seemed to the hearers inconsistent, and they deemed
Him nothing more than mere man, while His words were greater than suited
man, yea, or even angel, and were proper to God only, to solve this
objection He addeth,

<span id="iv.xli-p54"></span> [John
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="iv.xli-p54.1"></span> .
“Marvel not \[that He is the Son of Man,  <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[1065](#fn_1064) \] for the hour is coming in the
which they  <span id="fr_1065"></span>[1066](#fn_1065) that are in the
tombs shall hear His voice and shall go forth, they that have done good
to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the
resurrection of judgment.”

<span id="iv.xli-p57"></span> And wherefore said He not, “Marvel not
that He is the Son of Man, for He is also the Son of God,” but rather
mentioned the “resurrection”? He did indeed put this above, by saying,
“shall hear the Voice of the Son of God.” And if here He is silent on
the matter, wonder not; for after mentioning a work which was proper to
God, He then permitteth His hearers to collect from it that He was God,
and the Son of God. For had this been continually asserted by Himself,
it would at that time have offended them, but when proved by the
argument of miracles, it rendered His doctrine less burdensome. So they
who put together syllogisms, when having laid down their premises  <span
id="fr_1066"></span>[1067](#fn_1066) they have fairly  <span
id="fr_1067"></span>[1068](#fn_1067) proved the point in question,
frequently do not draw the conclusion themselves, but to render their
hearers more fairly disposed, and to make their victory more evident,
cause the opponent himself to give the verdict, so that the by-standers
may the rather agree with them when their opponents decide in their
favor. When therefore He mentioned the resurrection of Lazarus, He spake
not of the Judgment (for it was not for this that Lazarus arose); but
when He spake generally He also added, that “they that have done good
shall go forth unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil unto the resurrection of judgment.” Thus also John led on his
hearers by speaking of the Judgment, and that “he that believeth not on
the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him” (
[John 3.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span
id="iv.xli-p59.2"></span> ): so too Himself led on Nicodemus: “He that
believeth on the Son,” He said to him, “is not judged, but he that
believeth not is judged already” ( [John
3.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018)<span id="iv.xli-p59.3"></span> );
and so here He mentioneth the Judgment-seat  <span
id="fr_1068"></span>[1069](#fn_1068) and the punishment which shall
follow upon evil deeds. For because He had said above, “He that heareth
My words and believeth on Him that sent Me,” “is not judged,” lest any
one should imagine that this alone is sufficient for salvation, He
addeth also the result of man’s life,  <span
id="fr_1069"></span>[1070](#fn_1069) declaring that “they which have
done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of life, and they that
have done evil unto the resurrection of judgment.” Since then He had
said that all the world should render account to Him, and that all at
His Voice should rise again, a thing new and strange and even now
disbelieved by many who seem to have believed, not to say by the Jews at
that time, hear how He goeth to prove it, again condescending to the
infirmity of His hearers.

<span id="iv.xli-p62"></span> [John
5.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#030)<span id="iv.xli-p62.1"></span> .
“I can of Mine own self do nothing; as I hear I judge, and My judgment
is just, because I seek not Mine own will, but the will of Him  <span
id="fr_1070"></span>[1071](#fn_1070) which sent Me.”

<span id="iv.xli-p64"></span> Although He had but lately given no
trifling proof of the Resurrection by bracing  <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[1072](#fn_1071) the paralytic; on which account
also He had not spoken of the Resurrection before He had done what fell
little short of resurrection. And the Judgment He hinted at after He had
braced the body, by saying, “Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee”; yet still He proclaimed beforehand
the resurrection of Lazarus and of the world. And when He had spoken of
these two, that of Lazarus which should come to pass almost immediately,
and that of the inhabited world which should be long after, He
confirmeth the first by the paralytic and by the nearness of the time,
saying, “The hour cometh and now is”; the other by the raising of
Lazarus, by what had already come to pass bringing before their sight
what had not yet done so. And this we may observe Him do everywhere,
putting (forth) two or three predictions, and always confirming the
future by the past.

<span id="iv.xli-p66"></span> \[4.\] Yet after saying and doing so much,
since they still were very weak  <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[1073](#fn_1072) He is not content, but by other
expressions calms their disputatious temper,  <span
id="fr_1073"></span>[1074](#fn_1073) saying, “I can of Myself do
nothing; as I hear I judge, and My judgment is just, because I seek not
Mine own will, but the will of Him which sent Me.” For since He <span
id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span id="iv.xli-Page_140"></span> appeared
to make some assertions strange and varying from those of the Prophets,
(for they said that it is God who judgeth all the earth, that is, the
human race; and this truth David everywhere loudly proclaimed, “He shall
judge the people in righteousness,” and, “God is a righteous Judge,
strong and patient” ( [Ps. 96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010), [Ps.
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#011)<span id="iv.xli-p68.3"></span> ,
LXX.); as did all the Prophets and Moses; but Christ said, “The Father
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the Son”:  <span
id="fr_1074"></span>[1075](#fn_1074) an expression which was sufficient
to perplex a Jew who heard it, and to make him in turn suspect Christ of
being an enemy of God,) He here greatly condescendeth in His speech, and
as far as their infirmity requireth, in order to pluck up by the roots
this pernicious opinion, and saith, “I can of Myself do nothing”; that
is, “nothing strange, or unlike,  <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[1076](#fn_1075) or what the Father desireth not
will ye see done or hear said by Me.” And having before declared that He
was “the Son of Man,” and because they  <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[1077](#fn_1076) supposed Him to be a man at that
time, so also He putteth \[His expressions\] here. As then when He said
above, “We speak that we have heard, and testify that we have seen”; and
when John said, “What He hath seen He testifieth, and no man receiveth
His testimony” ( [John 3.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#032)<span
id="iv.xli-p71.5"></span> ); both expressions are used respecting exact
knowledge, not concerning hearing and seeing merely; so in this place
when He speaketh of “hearing,” He declareth nothing else than that it is
impossible for Him to desire anything, save what the Father desireth.
Still He said not so plainly, (for they would not as yet have at once
received it on hearing it thus asserted;) and how? in a manner very
condescending and befitting a mere man, “As I hear I judge.” Again He
useth these words in this place, not with reference to “instruction,”
(for He said not, “as I am taught,” but “as I hear”;) nor as though He
needed to listen, (for not only did He not require to be taught, but He
needed not even to listen;) but it was to declare the Unanimity and
Identity of \[His and the Father’s\] decision, as though He had said,
“So I judge, as if it were the Father Himself that judged.” Then He
addeth, “and I know that My judgment is just, because I seek not Mine
own will, but the will of Him that sent Me.” What sayest Thou? Hast Thou
a will different from that of the Father? Yet in another place He saith,
“As I and Thou are One,” (speaking of will and unanimity,) “grant to
these also that they may be one in Us” ( [John
17.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021)<span id="iv.xli-p71.6"></span> ;
not verbally quoted); that is, “in faith concerning Us.” Seest thou that
the words which seem most humble are those which conceal a high meaning?
For what He implieth is of this kind: not that the will of the Father is
one, and His own another; but that, “as one will in one mind, so is Mine
own will and My Father’s.”

<span id="iv.xli-p72"></span> And marvel not that He hath asserted so
close a conjunction; for with reference to the Spirit also Paul hath
used this illustration: “What man knoweth the things of a man, save the
spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man,
but the Spirit of God.” Thus Christ’s meaning is no other than this: “I
have not a will different and apart from that of the Father,  <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[1078](#fn_1077) but if He desireth anything, then I
also; if I, then He also. As therefore none could object to the Father
judging, so neither may any to Me, for the sentence of Each  <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078) is given from the same Mind.” And
if He uttereth these words rather as a man, marvel not, seeing that they
still deemed Him to be mere man. Therefore in passages like these it is
necessary not merely to enquire into the meaning of the words, but also
to take into account the suspicion of the hearers, and listen to what is
said as being addressed to that suspicion. Otherwise many difficulties
will follow. Consider for instance, He saith, “I seek not Mine own
will”: according to this then His will is different (from that of the
Father), is imperfect, nay, not merely imperfect, but even unprofitable.
“For if it be saving, if it agree with that of the Father, wherefore
dost Thou not seek it?” Mortals might with reason say so because they
have many wills contrary to what seemeth good to the Father, but Thou,
wherefore sayest Thou this, who art in all things like the Father? for
this none would say is the language even of a “man” made perfect and
crucified. For if Paul so blended himself  <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[1080](#fn_1079) with the will of God as to say, “I
live, yet no longer I, but Christ liveth in me” ( [Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020) <span id="iv.xli-p75.3"></span> ),
how saith the Lord of all, “I seek not Mine own will, but the will of
Him that sent Me,” as though that will were different? What then is His
meaning? He applieth  <span id="fr_1080"></span>[1081](#fn_1080) His
discourse as if the case were that of a mere man, and suiteth His
language to the suspicion of His hearers. For when He had, by what had
gone before, given proof of His sayings, speaking partly as God, partly
as a mere man, He again as a man endeavoreth to establish  <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[1082](#fn_1081) the same, and saith, “My judgment
is just.” And whence is this seen? “Because I seek not Mine own will,
but the will of Him that sent Me.” “For as in the case of men, he that
is free from selfishness cannot be justly charged with having given an
unfair decision, so neither will ye now be able to accuse Me. He that
desireth to establish his own, may perhaps by <span id="page_141">p.
141</span> <span id="iv.xli-Page_141"></span> many be suspected of
corrupting justice with this intent; but he that looketh not to his own,
what reason can he have for not deciding justly? Apply now this
reasoning to My case. Had I said that I was not sent by the Father, had
I not referred to Him the glory of what was done, some of you might
perhaps have suspected that desiring to gain honor for Myself, I said
the thing that is not; but if I impute and refer what is done to
another, wherefore and whence can ye have cause to suspect My words?”
Seest thou how He confirmed His discourse, and asserted that “His
judgment was just” by an argument which any common man might have used
in defending himself? Seest thou how what I have often said is clearly
visible? What is that? It is that the exceeding humility of the
expressions most persuadeth men of sense not to receive the words off
hand  <span id="fr_1082"></span>[1083](#fn_1082) and then fall down
\[into low thoughts\], but rather to take pains that they reach to the
height of their meaning; this humility too with much ease then raiseth
up those who were once groveling on the ground.

<span id="iv.xli-p79"></span>Now bearing all this in mind, let us not, I
exhort you, carelessly pass by Christ’s words, but enquire closely into
them all, everywhere considering the reason of what has been said; and
let us not deem that ignorance and simplicity will be sufficient to
excuse us, for He hath bidden us not merely to be “harmless,” but
“wise.” ( [Matt. x. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016) <span
id="iv.xli-p79.1"></span> .) Let us therefore practice wisdom with
simplicity, both as to doctrines and the right actions  <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[1084](#fn_1083) of our lives; let us judge
ourselves here, that we be not condemned with the world hereafter;
 <span id="fr_1084"></span>[1085](#fn_1084) let us act towards our
fellow-servants as we desire our Master to act towards us: for (we say),
“Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.” ( [Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012) <span id="iv.xli-p81.2"></span> .)
I know that the smitten soul endureth not meekly, but if we consider
that by so doing we do a kindness not to him who hath grieved us but to
ourselves, we shall soon let go the venom of our wrath; for he who
forgave not the hundred pence to him who had transgressed against him,
wronged not his fellow-servant but himself, by rendering himself liable
for the ten thousand talents of which he had before received
forgiveness. ( [Matt. xviii. 30-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#030)
<span id="iv.xli-p81.3"></span> .) When therefore we forgive not others,
we forgive not ourselves. And so let us not merely say to God, “remember
not our offenses”; but let each also say to himself, “let us not
remember the offenses of our fellow-servants done against us.” For thou
first givest judgment on thine own sins, and God judgeth after;  <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[1086](#fn_1085) thou proposest the law concerning
remission and punishment, thou declarest thy decision on these matters,
and therefore whether God shall or shall not remember, rests with thee.
For which cause Paul biddeth us “forgive, if any One hath cause of
complaint against any” ( [Col. iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#013)
<span id="iv.xli-p82.3"></span> ), and not simply forgive, but so that
not even any remnants be left behind. Since Christ not only did not
publish our transgressions, but did not put us the transgressors in mind
of them, nor say, “in such and such things hast thou offended,” but
remitted and blotted out the handwriting, not reckoning our offenses, as
Paul hath also declared. ( [Col. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014) <span id="iv.xli-p82.4"></span> .)
Let us too do this; let us wipe away all \[trespasses against us\] from
our minds; and if any good thing hath been done to us by him that hath
grieved us, let us only reckon that; but if anything grievous and hard
to bear, let us cast it forth and blot it out, so that not even a
vestige of it remain. And if no good has been done us by him, so much
the greater recompense and higher credit will be ours if we forgive.
Others by watching, by making the earth their bed, by ten thousand
hardships, wipe away their sins, but thou by an easier way, I mean by
not remembering wrongs, mayest cause all thy trespasses to disappear.
Why then thrustest thou the sword against thyself, as do mad and frantic
men, and banishest thyself from the life which is to come, when thou
oughtest to use every means to attain unto it? For if this present life
be so desirable, what can one say of that other from which pain, and
grief, and mourning, have fled away? There it needs not to fear death,
nor imagine any end to those good things. Blessed, thrice blessed, yea,
and this many times over, are they who enjoy that blessed rest, while
they are miserable, thrice miserable, yea, ten thousand times miserable,
who have cast themselves forth from that blessedness.  “And what,” saith
some one, “is it that maketh us to enjoy that life?” Hear the Judge
Himself conversing with a certain young man on this matter. When the
young man said, “What shall I do to inherit eternal life?” ( [Matt. xix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016) <span id="iv.xli-p82.5"></span> )
Christ, after repeating to him the other commandments, ended with the
love of his neighbor. Perhaps like that rich man some of my hearers will
say, “that we also have kept these, for we neither have robbed, nor
killed, nor committed adultery”; yet assuredly thou wilt not be able to
say this, that thou hast loved thy neighbor as thou oughtest to have
loved him. For if a man hath envied or spoken evil of another, if he
hath not helped him when injured, or not imparted to him of his
substance, then neither hath he loved him. Now Christ hath commanded not
only this, but something besides. What then is this? “Sell,” he saith,
“that thou hast, and give to the poor; and come, follow Me” ( [Matt.
xix. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021) <span
id="iv.xli-p82.6"></span> ): terming the imitating Him in our actions
“following” Him. What learn we hence? First, that <span id="page_142">p.
142</span> <span id="iv.xli-Page_142"></span> he who hath not all these
things cannot attain unto the chief places in “that” rest. For after the
young man had said, “All these things have I done,” Christ, as though
some great thing were wanting to his being perfectly approved, replied,
“If thou wilt be perfect, sell that thou hast, and give to the poor: and
come, follow Me.” First then we may learn this; secondly, that Christ
rebuked the man for his vain boast; for one who lived in such
superfluity, and regarded not others living in poverty, how could he
love his neighbor? So that neither in this matter did he speak truly.
But let us do both the one and the other of these things; let us be
eager to empty out our substance, and to purchase heaven. Since if for
worldly honor men have often expended their whole possessions, an honor
which was to stay here below, and even here not to stay by us long, (for
many even much before their deaths have been stripped of their
supremacy, and others because of it have often lost their lives, and
yet, although aware of this, they expend all for its sake;) if now they
do so much for this kind of honor, what can be more wretched than we if
for the sake of that honor which abideth and which cannot be taken from
us we will not give up even a little, nor supply to others those things
which in a short time while yet here we shall leave? What madness must
it be, when it is in our power voluntarily to give to others, and so to
take with us those things of which we shall even against our will be
deprived, to refuse to do so? Yet if a man were being led to death, and
it were proposed to him to give up all his goods and so go free, we
should think a favor was conferred upon him; and shall we, who are being
led on the way to the pit, shall we, when it is allowed us to give up
half and be free, prefer to be punished, and uselessly to retain what is
not ours even to the losing what is so? What excuse shall we have, what
claim for pardon, who, when so easy a road has been cut for us unto
life, rush down precipices, and travel along an unprofitable path,
depriving ourselves of all things both here and hereafter, when we might
enjoy both in security? If then we did not so before, let us at least
stop now; and coming to ourselves, let us rightly dispose of things
present, that we may easily receive those which are to come, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[136:1035](1140044.htm#fr_1034) <span
id="iv.xli-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p5.1"></span>βεβηλοῦνται</span>

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[136:1036](1140044.htm#fr_1035) <span
id="iv.xli-p5.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p6.1"></span>τὴν φύσιν ἄπασαν</span>

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[136:1037](1140044.htm#fr_1036) <span
id="iv.xli-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p8.2"></span>since men being benefited are not so sensible of
it, He saith</span> ‘ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p8.3"></span>hath given all judgment to</span> ’ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p8.4"></span>Him, in order that,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p8.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[136:1038](1140044.htm#fr_1037) <span
id="iv.xli-p8.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p9.2"></span>to punish and honor all whomsoever He
will.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[136:1039](1140044.htm#fr_1038) <span
id="iv.xli-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p10.2"></span>all things which belong to the Father, belong
also to the Son.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[136:1040](1140044.htm#fr_1039) <span
id="iv.xli-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p12.1"></span>παραλλαγήν</span>

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[136:1041](1140044.htm#fr_1040) <span
id="iv.xli-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p13.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p13.2"></span>high Birth.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[136:1042](1140044.htm#fr_1041) <span
id="iv.xli-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p14.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p14.2"></span>κηράτῳ</span>

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[137:1043](1140044.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="iv.xli-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p16.1"></span>οἰκονομίας τινὸς</span>

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[137:1044](1140044.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="iv.xli-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p17.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p17.2"></span>folly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[137:1045](1140044.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="iv.xli-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p20.2"></span>Besides.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[137:1046](1140044.htm#fr_1045) <span
id="iv.xli-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p21.1"></span>διὰ μεσίτου</span>

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[137:1047](1140044.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="iv.xli-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p23.1"></span>τὸν αἴτιον</span>

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[137:1048](1140044.htm#fr_1047) <span
id="iv.xli-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p24.1"></span>νόσον</span>

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[137:1049](1140044.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="iv.xli-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p25.1"></span>For from their extreme senselessness He was
counted among them an enemy of God. Morel.</span>

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[137:1050](1140044.htm#fr_1049) <span
id="iv.xli-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p26.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p26.2"></span>not that He might by this show any
lessening,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p26.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[137:1051](1140044.htm#fr_1050) <span
id="iv.xli-p26.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p27.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p27.2"></span>absolute power.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[137:1052](1140044.htm#fr_1051) <span
id="iv.xli-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p28.1"></span>κιρνᾶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p28.2"></span>, generally of mixing wine with water.</span>

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[137:1053](1140044.htm#fr_1052) <span
id="iv.xli-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p29.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p29.2"></span>correcting.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[138:1054](1140044.htm#fr_1053) <span
id="iv.xli-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p31.1"></span>παχύτερα</span>

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[138:1055](1140044.htm#fr_1054) <span
id="iv.xli-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p32.1"></span>Morel. reads: </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p32.2"></span>for this reason He doth not
decline to use a more earthly expression, declaring,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p32.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[138:1056](1140044.htm#fr_1055) <span
id="iv.xli-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p35.1"></span>τότε</span>

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[138:1057](1140044.htm#fr_1056) <span
id="iv.xli-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p36.1"></span>σὺ λέγεις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p36.2"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[138:1058](1140044.htm#fr_1057) <span
id="iv.xli-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p41.1"></span>Morel. reads: </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p41.2"></span>He spake those great things
in words, afterwards He desireth to prove them by works also.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1058"></span>[138:1059](1140044.htm#fr_1058) <span
id="iv.xli-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p42.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p42.2"></span>truth.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1059"></span>[138:1060](1140044.htm#fr_1059) <span
id="iv.xli-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p43"></span> <span id="iv.xli-p43.1"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p43.2"></span>[1 Thess. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xli-p43.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p43.4"></span>\[not verbally quoted\].</span>

<span id="fn_1060"></span>[138:1061](1140044.htm#fr_1060) <span
id="iv.xli-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p46.1"></span>τὸ ἀπαράλλακτον καὶ ἑνὶ μόνῳ τὴν διαφορὰν
ἐμφαῖνον</span>

<span id="fn_1061"></span>[138:1062](1140044.htm#fr_1061) <span
id="iv.xli-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p49.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p49.2"></span>νω καὶ κάτω</span>

<span id="fn_1062"></span>[139:1063](1140044.htm#fr_1062) <span
id="iv.xli-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p50.1"></span>τούτῳ</span>

<span id="fn_1063"></span>[139:1064](1140044.htm#fr_1063) <span
id="iv.xli-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p53.1"></span>As in our Auth. Version.</span>

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[139:1065](1140044.htm#fr_1064) <span
id="iv.xli-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p55.1"></span>τοῦτο</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p55.2"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[139:1066](1140044.htm#fr_1065) <span
id="iv.xli-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p56.1"></span>πάντες</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p56.2"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[139:1067](1140044.htm#fr_1066) <span
id="iv.xli-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p58.1"></span>τὰ μέρη</span>

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[139:1068](1140044.htm#fr_1067) <span
id="iv.xli-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p59.1"></span>γενναίως</span>

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[139:1069](1140044.htm#fr_1068) <span
id="iv.xli-p59.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p60.1"></span>δικαστήριον</span>

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[139:1070](1140044.htm#fr_1069) <span
id="iv.xli-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p61"></span> <span id="iv.xli-p61.1"></span>τὰ ἐκ τοῦ
βίου

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[139:1071](1140044.htm#fr_1070) <span
id="iv.xli-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p63.1"></span>τοὺ Πατρὸς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p63.2"></span>, G. T.</span>

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[139:1072](1140044.htm#fr_1071) <span
id="iv.xli-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p65.1"></span>σφίγξας</span>

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[139:1073](1140044.htm#fr_1072) <span
id="iv.xli-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p67.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p67.2"></span>even thus too gross.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[139:1074](1140044.htm#fr_1073) <span
id="iv.xli-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p68.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p68.2"></span>shamelessness.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[140:1075](1140044.htm#fr_1074) <span
id="iv.xli-p68.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p69.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p69.2"></span>I am \[He\] who judge.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[140:1076](1140044.htm#fr_1075) <span
id="iv.xli-p69.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p70.1"></span>παρηλλαγμένον</span>

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[140:1077](1140044.htm#fr_1076) <span
id="iv.xli-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p71.1"></span>So Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xli-p71.2"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. Savile reads,</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p71.3"></span>having shown that
they,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p71.4"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[140:1078](1140044.htm#fr_1077) <span
id="iv.xli-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p73.1"></span>According to Savile’s conjectural
reading,</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p73.2"></span>παρὰ
τὸ τοῦ Π</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p73.3"></span>. in
place of</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p73.4"></span>παρὰ
τοῦ Π</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xli-p73.5"></span>. for
which there is also <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xli-p73.6"></span>ms.</span> authority.</span>

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[140:1079](1140044.htm#fr_1078) <span
id="iv.xli-p73.7"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p74"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p74.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p74.2"></span>each sentence.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[140:1080](1140044.htm#fr_1079) <span
id="iv.xli-p74.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p75.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p75.2"></span>κέρασε</span>

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[140:1081](1140044.htm#fr_1080) <span
id="iv.xli-p75.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p76.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p76.2"></span>brings forward.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[140:1082](1140044.htm#fr_1081) <span
id="iv.xli-p76.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p77"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p77.1"></span>κατασκευάζει</span>

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[141:1083](1140044.htm#fr_1082) <span
id="iv.xli-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p78.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p78.2"></span>κ προχείρου</span>

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[141:1084](1140044.htm#fr_1083) <span
id="iv.xli-p79.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p80.1"></span>κατορθωμάτων</span>

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[141:1085](1140044.htm#fr_1084) <span
id="iv.xli-p80.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p81.1"></span>τότε</span>

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[141:1086](1140044.htm#fr_1085) <span
id="iv.xli-p81.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xli-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p82.1"></span>ἕ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xli-p82.2"></span>πεται</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 5.31,32](1140045)
