[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140016)  [Next](1140018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xiv"></span> <span id="iv.xiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Homily XII.</span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xiv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xiv-p2.2"></span>[John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.xiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p3"></span>“And we beheld His glory, the glory as of
the Only-Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>Perhaps</span> we seemed to you the other day
 <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) needlessly hard upon you and
burdensome, using too sharp language, and extending too far our
reproaches against the sluggishness of the many. Now if we had done this
merely from a desire to vex you, each of you would with cause have been
angry; but if, looking to your advantage, we neglected in our speech
what might gratify you, if ye will not give us credit for our
forethought, you should at least pardon us on account of such tender
love.  <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) For in truth we greatly
fear, lest, if we are taking pains,  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) and you are not willing to manifest
the same diligence in listening your future reckoning may be the more
severe. Wherefore we are compelled continually to arouse and waken you,
that nothing of what is said may escape  <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) you. For so you will be enabled to
live for the present with much confidence, and to exhibit it at that Day
before the judgment-seat of Christ. Since then we have lately
sufficiently touched you, let us to-day at the outset enter on the
expressions themselves.

<span id="iv.xiv-p9"></span>“We beheld,” he says, “His glory, the glory
as of the Only-Begotten of the Father.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p10"></span> Having declared that we were made “sons of
God,” and having shown in what manner,  <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) namely, by the “Word” having been
“made Flesh,” he again mentions another advantage which we gain from
this same circumstance. What is it? “We beheld His glory, the glory as
of the Only-Begotten of the Father”; which we could not have beheld, had
it not been shown to us, by means of a body like to our own.  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) For if the men of old time could not
even bear to look upon the glorified countenance of Moses, who partook
of the same nature with us, if that just man needed a veil which might
shade over the purity  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) of his
glory, and show to them the face of their prophet mild and gentle;
 <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) how could we creatures of clay
and earth have endured the unveiled Godhead, which is unapproachable
even by the powers above? Wherefore He tabernacled  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) among us, that we might be able with
much fearlessness to approach Him, speak to, and converse with Him.

<span id="iv.xiv-p16"></span>But what means “the glory as of the
Only-Begotten of the Father”? Since many of the Prophets too were
glorified, as this Moses himself, Elijah, and Elisha, the one encircled
by the fiery chariot ( [2 Kings vi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017)
<span id="iv.xiv-p16.1"></span> ), the other taken up by it; and after
them, Daniel and the Three Children, and the many others who showed
forth wonders  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) ; and angels who
have appeared among men, and partly disclosed  <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) to beholders the flashing light of
their proper nature; and since not angels only, but even the Cherubim
were seen by the Prophet in great glory, and the Seraphim also: the
Evangelist leading us away from all these, and removing our thoughts
from created things, and from the brightness of our fellow-servants,
sets us at the very summit of good. For, “not of prophet,” says  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) he, “nor angel, nor archangel, nor of
the higher power, nor of any other created nature,” if other there <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="iv.xiv-Page_40"></span> be, but of
the Master Himself, the King Himself, the true Only-Begotten Son
Himself, of the Very Lord  <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) of
all, did we “behold the glory.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p21"></span> For the expression “as,” does not in this
place belong to similarity or comparison, but to confirmation and
unquestionable definition; as though he said, “We beheld glory, such as
it was becoming, and likely that He should possess, who is the
Only-Begotten and true Son of God, the King of all.” The habit (of so
speaking) is general, for I shall not refuse to strengthen my argument
even from common custom, since it is not now my object to speak with any
reference to beauty of words, or elegance of composition, but only for
your advantage; and therefore there is nothing to prevent my
establishing my argument by the instance of a common practice. What then
is the habit of most persons? Often when any have seen a king richly
decked, and glittering on all sides with precious stones, and are
afterwards describing to others the beauty, the ornaments, the splendor,
they enumerate as much as they can, the glowing tint of the purple robe,
the size of the jewels, the whiteness of the mules, the gold about the
yoke, the soft and shining couch. But when after enumerating these
things, and other things besides these, they cannot, say what they will,
give a full idea of  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) the
splendor, they immediately bring in: “But why say much about it; once
for all, he was like a king;” not desiring by the expression “like,” to
show that he, of whom they say this, resembles a king, but that he is a
real king. Just so now the Evangelist has put the word <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.xiv-p22.2"></span>as</span> , desiring to
represent the transcendent nature and incomparable excellence of His
glory.

<span id="iv.xiv-p23"></span>For indeed all others, both angels and
archangels and prophets, did everything as under command; but He with
the authority which becomes a King and Master; at which even the
multitudes wondered, that He taught as “one having authority.” ( [Matt.
vii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029) <span
id="iv.xiv-p23.1"></span> .) Even angels, as I said, have appeared with
great glory upon the earth; as in the case of Daniel, of David, of
Moses, but they did all as servants who have a Master. But He as Lord
and Ruler of all, and this when He appeared in poor and humble form; but
even so creation recognized her Lord. Now the star from heaven which
called the wise men to worship Him, the vast throng pouring everywhere
of angels attending the Lord,  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290)
and hymning His praise, and besides them, many other heralds sprang up
on a sudden, and all, as they met,  <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) declared to one another the glad
tidings of this ineffable mystery; the angels to the shepherds; the
shepherds to those of the city; Gabriel to Mary and Elisabeth; Anna and
Simeon to those who came to the Temple. Nor were men and women only
lifted up  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) with pleasure, but
the very infant who had not yet come forth to light, I mean the citizen
of the wilderness, the namesake of this Evangelist, leaped while yet in
his mother’s womb, and all were soaring  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) with hopes for the future. This too
immediately after the Birth. But when He had manifested Himself still
farther, other wonders, yet greater than the first, were seen. For it
was no more star, or sky, no more angels, or archangels, not Gabriel, or
Michael, but the Father Himself from heaven above, who proclaimed Him,
and with the Father the Comforter, flying down at the uttering of the
Voice and resting on Him. Truly therefore did he say, “We beheld His
glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the Father.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p28"></span> \[2.\] Yet he says it not only on account
of these things, but also on account of what followed them; for no
longer do shepherds only, and widow women, and aged men, declare to us
the good tidings, but the very voice  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) of the things themselves, sounding
clearer than any trumpet, and so loudly, that the sound was straightway
heard even in this land. “For,” says one, “his fame went into  <span
id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295) all Syria” ( [Matt. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024) <span id="iv.xiv-p30.1"></span> );
and He revealed Himself to all, and all things everywhere exclaimed,
that the King of Heaven was come. Evil spirits everywhere fled and
started away from Him, Satan covered his face  <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296) and retired, death  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) at that time retreated before Him, and
afterwards disappeared altogether; every kind of infirmity was loosed,
the graves let free the dead, the devils those whom they had maddened,
 <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298) and diseases the sick. And one
might see things strange and wonderful, such as with good cause the
prophets desired to see, and saw not. One might see eyes fashioned (
[John 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007)<span id="iv.xiv-p33.2"></span> ),
(might see) Him showing to all in short space and on the more noble
portion of the body, that admirable thing which all would have desired
to see, how God formed Adam from the earth; palsied and distorted limbs
fastened and adapted to each other, dead hands moving, palsied feet
leaping amain, ears that were stopped re-opened, and the tongue sounding
aloud which before was tied by speechlessness. For having taken in hand
the common nature of men, as some excellent workman might take a house
decayed by time, He filled up what was broken off, banded together its
crevices and shaken portions, and raised up again what was entirely
fallen down.

<span id="iv.xiv-p34"></span>And what should one say of the fashioning
of <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="iv.xiv-Page_41"></span> the
soul, so much more admirable than that of the body? The health of our
bodies is a great thing, but that of our souls is as much greater as the
soul is better than the body. And not on this account only, but because
our bodily nature follows withersoever the Creator will lead it, and
there is nothing to resist, but the soul being its own mistress, and
possessing power over its acts, does not in all things obey God, unless
it will to do so. For God will not make it beautiful and excellent, if
it be reluctant and in a manner constrained by force, for this is not
virtue at all; but He must persuade it to become so of its own will and
choice. And so this cure is more difficult than the other; yet even this
succeeded, and every kind of wickedness was banished. And as He
re-ordered the bodies which He cured, not to health only, but to the
highest vigor, so did He not merely deliver the souls from extremist
wickedness, but brought them to the very summit of excellence. A
publican became an Apostle, and a persecutor, blasphemer, and injurious,
appeared as herald to the world, and the Magi became teachers of the
Jews, and a thief was declared a citizen of Paradise, and a harlot shone
forth by the greatness of her faith, and of the two women, of Canaan and
Samaria, the latter who was another harlot, undertook to preach the
Gospel to her countrymen, and having enclosed a whole city in her net,
 <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) so brought them  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) to Christ; while the former by faith
and perseverance, procured the expulsion of an evil spirit from her
daughter’s soul; and many others much worse than these were straightway
numbered in the rank of disciples, and at once all the infirmities
 <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) of their bodies and diseases of
their souls were transformed, and they were fashioned anew to health and
exactest virtue. And of these, not two or three men, not five, or ten,
or twenty, or an hundred only, but entire cities and nations, were very
easily remodeled. Why should one speak of the wisdom of the commands,
the excellency of the heavenly laws, the good ordering of the angelic
polity? For such a life hath He proposed to us, such laws appointed for
us, such a polity established, that those who put these things into
practice, immediately become angels and like to God, as far as is in our
power, even though they  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) may
have been worse than all men.

<span id="iv.xiv-p39"></span> \[3.\] The Evangelist therefore having
brought together all these things, the marvels in our bodies, in our
souls, in the elements  <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) (of our
faith), the commandments, those gifts ineffable and higher than the
heavens, the laws, the polity, the persuasion, the future promises, His
sufferings, uttered that voice so wonderful and full of exalted
doctrine, saying, “We beheld His glory, the glory as of the
Only-Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.” For we admire Him
not only on account of the miracles, but also by reason of the
sufferings; as that He was nailed upon the Cross, that He was scourged,
that He was buffeted, that He was spit upon, that He received blows on
the cheek from those to whom He had done good. For even of those very
things which seem to be shameful, it is proper to repeat the same
expression, since He Himself called that action  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) “glory.” For what then took place was
(proof) not only of kindness and love, but also of unspeakable power. At
that time death was abolished, the curse was loosed, devils were shamed
and led in triumph and made a show of, and the handwriting of our sins
was nailed to the Cross. And then, since these wonders were doing
invisibly, others took place visibly, showing that He was of a truth the
Only-Begotten Son of God, the Lord of all creation. For while yet that
blessed Body hung upon the tree, the sun turned away his rays, the whole
earth was troubled and became dark, the graves were opened, the ground
quaked, and an innumerable multitude of dead leaped forth, and went into
the city. And while the stones of His tomb were fastened upon the vault,
and the seals yet upon them, the Dead arose, the Crucified, the
nail-pierced One, and  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) having
filled His eleven disciples with His mighty  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) power, He sent them to men throughout
all the world, to be the common healers of all their kind,  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) to correct their way of living, to
spread through every part of the earth the knowledge of their heavenly
doctrines, to break down the tyranny of devils, to teach those great and
ineffable blessings, to bring to us the glad tidings of the soul’s
immortality, and the eternal life of the body, and rewards which are
beyond conception, and shall never have an end. These things then, and
yet more than these, the blessed Evangelist having in mind, things which
though he knew, he was not able to write, because the world could not
have contained them (for if all things “should be written every one, I
suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that
should be written”— [John 21.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)<span
id="iv.xiv-p44.1"></span> ), reflecting therefore on all these, he cries
out, “We beheld His glory, the glory as of the Only-Begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth.”

<span id="iv.xiv-p45"></span>It behooves therefore those who have been
deemed worthy to see and to hear such things, and who have enjoyed so
great a gift, to display also a life worthy of the doctrines, that they
may enjoy also the good things which are (laid up) there. For our Lord
Jesus Christ came, not <span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="iv.xiv-Page_42"></span> only that we might behold His glory here,
but also that which shall be. For therefore He saith, “I will that these
 <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) also be with Me where I am,
that they may behold My glory.” ( [c. xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024) <span id="iv.xiv-p46.2"></span> .)
Now if the glory here was so bright and splendid, what can one say of
that (which shall be)? for it shall appear not on this corruptible
earth, nor while we are in perishable bodies, but in a creation which is
imperishable, and waxes not old, and with such brightness as it is not
possible even to represent in words. O  <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) blessed, thrice blessed, yea many
times so, they who are deemed worthy to be beholders of that glory! It
is concerning this that the prophet says, “Let the unrighteous be taken
away, that he behold not the glory of the Lord.” ( [Isa. xxvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#010) <span id="iv.xiv-p47.1"></span> ,
LXX.) God grant that not one of us be taken away nor excluded ever from
beholding it. For if we shall not hereafter enjoy it, then it is time to
say of ourselves, “Good were it for” us, “if” we “had never been born.”
For why do we live and breathe? What are we, if we fail of that
spectacle, if no one grant us then to behold our Lord? If those who see
not the light of the sun endure a life more bitter than any death, what
is it likely that they who are deprived of that light must suffer? For
in the one case the loss is confined to this one privation; but in the
other it does not rest here, (though if this were the only thing to be
dreaded, even then the degrees of punishment would not be equal, but one
would be as much severer than the other, as that sun is incomparably
superior to this,) but now we must look also for other vengeance; for he
who beholds not that light must not only be led into darkness, but must
be burned continually, and waste away, and gnash his teeth, and suffer
ten thousand other dreadful things. Let us then not permit ourselves by
making this brief time a time of carelessness and remissness, to fall
into everlasting punishment, but let us watch and be sober, let us do
all things, and make it all our business to attain to that felicity, and
to keep far from that river of fire, which rushes with a loud roaring
before the terrible judgment seat. For he who has once been cast in
there, must remain for ever; there is no one to deliver him from his
punishment, not father, not mother, not brother. And this the prophets
themselves declared aloud; one saying, “Brother delivers not brother.
Shall man deliver?” ( [Ps. xlix. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007)
<span id="iv.xiv-p47.2"></span> , LXX.) And Ezekiel has declared
somewhat more than this, saying, “Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in
it, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters.” ( [Ezek. xiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016) <span id="iv.xiv-p47.3"></span> .)
For one defense  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) only, that
through works,  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) is there, and he
who is deprived of that cannot be saved by any other means. Revolving
these things, then, and reflecting upon them continually, let us cleanse
our life and make it lustrous, that we may see the Lord with boldness,
and obtain the promised good things; through the grace and
lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the
Father and the Holy Spirit, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[39:277](1140017.htm#fr_276) <span
id="iv.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>πρώην</span>

<span id="fn_277"></span>[39:278](1140017.htm#fr_277) <span
id="iv.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>φιλοστοργίας</span> .

<span id="fn_278"></span>[39:279](1140017.htm#fr_278) <span
id="iv.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p7"></span> al. “speaking.”

<span id="fn_279"></span>[39:280](1140017.htm#fr_279) <span
id="iv.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>παραρρυῆναι</span> .

<span id="fn_280"></span>[39:281](1140017.htm#fr_280) <span
id="iv.xiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p11"></span> al. “that it was not otherwise than by.”

<span id="fn_281"></span>[39:282](1140017.htm#fr_281) <span
id="iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p12.1"></span>συντρόφου</span> .

<span id="fn_282"></span>[39:283](1140017.htm#fr_282) <span
id="iv.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p13.2"></span>κρατον</span> .

<span id="fn_283"></span>[39:284](1140017.htm#fr_283) <span
id="iv.xiv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p14"></span> Morel. “make the intolerable (brightness)
of his countenance bearable to them.”

<span id="fn_284"></span>[39:285](1140017.htm#fr_284) <span
id="iv.xiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p15.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p15.2"></span>σκήνωσεν</span> .

<span id="fn_285"></span>[39:286](1140017.htm#fr_285) <span
id="iv.xiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p17"></span> \[were glorified.\]

<span id="fn_286"></span>[39:287](1140017.htm#fr_286) <span
id="iv.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p18.1"></span>παρανοίξαντες</span> .

<span id="fn_287"></span>[39:288](1140017.htm#fr_287) <span
id="iv.xiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p19"></span> al. “all but saying.”

<span id="fn_288"></span>[40:289](1140017.htm#fr_288) <span
id="iv.xiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p20"></span> al. “and Master.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[40:290](1140017.htm#fr_289) <span
id="iv.xiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p22.1"></span>παράστησαι</span> .

<span id="fn_290"></span>[40:291](1140017.htm#fr_290) <span
id="iv.xiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p24"></span> Morel. “and heavenly multitudes appearing
on earth of Angels ministering.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[40:292](1140017.htm#fr_291) <span
id="iv.xiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p25"></span> al. “coming together.”

<span id="fn_292"></span>[40:293](1140017.htm#fr_292) <span
id="iv.xiv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p26.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p26.2"></span>πτερώθησαν</span> , “made winged.”

<span id="fn_293"></span>[40:294](1140017.htm#fr_293) <span
id="iv.xiv-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p27.1"></span>μετέωροι</span> .

<span id="fn_294"></span>[40:295](1140017.htm#fr_294) <span
id="iv.xiv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p29"></span> al. “nature.”

<span id="fn_295"></span>[40:296](1140017.htm#fr_295) <span
id="iv.xiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p30"></span> “Throughout,” E.V.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[40:297](1140017.htm#fr_296) <span
id="iv.xiv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p31.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p31.2"></span>γκαλυψάμενος</span> .

<span id="fn_297"></span>[40:298](1140017.htm#fr_297) <span
id="iv.xiv-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p32"></span> al. “and death itself.”

<span id="fn_298"></span>[40:299](1140017.htm#fr_298) <span
id="iv.xiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p33.1"></span>τοὺς μεμήνοτας</span> .

<span id="fn_299"></span>[41:300](1140017.htm#fr_299) <span
id="iv.xiv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p35.1"></span>σαγηνεύσασα</span> from <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xiv-p35.2"></span>σαγήνη</span> , “a seine
net.”

<span id="fn_300"></span>[41:301](1140017.htm#fr_300) <span
id="iv.xiv-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p36"></span> al. “brought them out.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[41:302](1140017.htm#fr_301) <span
id="iv.xiv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p37.1"></span>πάθη</span> .

<span id="fn_302"></span>[41:303](1140017.htm#fr_302) <span
id="iv.xiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p38"></span> al. “we.”

<span id="fn_303"></span>[41:304](1140017.htm#fr_303) <span
id="iv.xiv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p40.1"></span>στοιχείοις</span> .

<span id="fn_304"></span>[41:305](1140017.htm#fr_304) <span
id="iv.xiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p41"></span> i.e. His Crucifixion.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[41:306](1140017.htm#fr_305) <span
id="iv.xiv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p42"></span> al. “then again.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[41:307](1140017.htm#fr_306) <span
id="iv.xiv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p43"></span> al. “a certain irresistible and divine.”

<span id="fn_307"></span>[41:308](1140017.htm#fr_307) <span
id="iv.xiv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p44"></span> Or “of their whole nature.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[42:309](1140017.htm#fr_308) <span
id="iv.xiv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p46.1"></span>οὗτοι κἀκεῖνοι</span> (G. T.).

<span id="fn_309"></span>[42:310](1140017.htm#fr_309) <span
id="iv.xiv-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p47"></span> al. “how.”

<span id="fn_310"></span>[42:311](1140017.htm#fr_310) <span
id="iv.xiv-p47.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xiv-p48.1"></span>προστασία</span> .

<span id="fn_311"></span>[42:312](1140017.htm#fr_311) <span
id="iv.xiv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xiv-p49"></span> There are places where he allows that the
prayers of others may avail a man in the Judgment, when they are the
consequence of his good deeds. See on Statues, Hom. ii. § 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 1.15](1140018)
