[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140122)  [Next](1140124) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxix"></span> <span id="v.xxix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xxix-p1.1"></span>Homily XXV.</span>

<span id="v.xxix-p2"></span> <span id="v.xxix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxix-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews xi.
17-19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#017)<span
id="v.xxix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p3"></span> *“ By faith \[Abraham\],*  <span
id="fr_3262"></span>[3263](#fn_3262) *when he was tried, offered up
Isaac; and he that had received the promises offered up his
only-begotten son, of whom it was said, That in Isaac shall thy seed be
called: accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead;
from whence also he received him in a figure.”*

<span id="v.xxix-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxix-p5.1"></span>Great</span> indeed was the faith of Abraham.
For while in the case of Abel, and of Noah, and of Enoch, there was an
opposition of reasonings only, and it was necessary to go beyond human
reasonings; in this case it was necessary not only to go beyond human
reasonings, but to manifest also something more. For what was of God
 <span id="fr_3263"></span>[3264](#fn_3263) seemed to be opposed to what
was of God; and faith opposed faith, and command promise.

<span id="v.xxix-p7"></span>I mean this: He had said, “Get thee out of
thy country, and from thy kindred, and I will give thee this land.” (
[Gen. 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007)<span id="v.xxix-p7.1"></span> .)
“He gave him none inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot
on.” ( [Acts vii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005) <span
id="v.xxix-p7.2"></span> .) Seest thou how what was done was opposed to
the promise? Again He said, “In Isaac shall thy seed be called” ( [Gen.
xxi. 12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012) <span id="v.xxix-p7.3"></span>
), and he believed: and again He says, Sacrifice to Me this one, who was
to fill all the world from his seed. Thou seest the opposition between
the commands and the promise? He enjoined things that were in
contradiction to the promises, and yet not even so did the righteous man
stagger, nor say he had been deceived.

<span id="v.xxix-p8"></span>For you indeed, he means, could not say
this, that He promised ease and gave tribulation. For in our case, the
things which He promised, these also He performs. How so? “In the world”
(He says), “ye shall have tribulation.” ( [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033) <span id="v.xxix-p8.1"></span> .)
“He that taketh not his cross and followeth Me, is not worthy of Me.” (
[Matt. x. 38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038) <span
id="v.xxix-p8.2"></span> .) “He that hateth not his life shall not find
it.” ( [John xii. 25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025) <span
id="v.xxix-p8.3"></span> .) And, “He that forsaketh not all that he
hath, and followeth after Me, is not worthy of Me.” ( [Luke
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#027),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#033)<span id="v.xxix-p8.4"></span> .)
And again, “Ye shall be brought before rulers and kings for My sake.” (
[Matt. x. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018) <span
id="v.xxix-p8.5"></span> .) And again, “A man’s foes shall be they of
his own household.” ( [Matt. x. 36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036)
<span id="v.xxix-p8.6"></span> .) But the things which pertain to rest
are yonder.

<span id="v.xxix-p9"></span>But with regard to Abraham, it was
different. He was enjoined to do what was opposed to the promises; and
yet not even so was he troubled, nor did he stagger, nor think he had
been deceived. But you endure nothing except what was promised, yet you
are troubled.

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span id="v.xxix-Page_478"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p10"></span> \[2.\] He heard the opposite of the
promises from Him who had made them; and yet he was not disturbed, but
did them as if they had been in harmony \[therewith\]. For they were in
harmony; being opposed indeed according to human calculations, but in
harmony \[when viewed\] by Faith. And how this was, the Apostle himself
has taught us, by saying, “accounting  <span
id="fr_3264"></span>[3265](#fn_3264) that God was able to raise Him up,
even from the dead.” By the same faith (he means) by which he believed
that God gave what was not,  <span id="fr_3265"></span>[3266](#fn_3265)
and raised up the dead, by the same was he persuaded that He would also
raise him up after he had been slain in sacrifice. For it was alike
impossible (to human calculation, I mean) from a womb which was dead and
grown old and already become useless for child-bearing to give a child,
and to raise again one who had been slain. But his previous faith
prepared the way for things to come.

<span id="v.xxix-p13"></span>And see; the good things came first, and
the hard things afterwards, in his old age. But for you, on the
contrary, (he says) the sad things are first, and the good things last.
This for those who dare to say, ‘He has promised us the good things
after death; perhaps He has deceived us.’ He shows that “God is able to
raise up even from the dead,” and if God be able to raise from the dead,
without all doubt He will pay all \[that He has promised\].

<span id="v.xxix-p14"></span>But if Abraham so many years before,
believed “that God is able to raise from the dead,” much more ought we
to believe it. Thou seest (what I at first said) that death had not yet
entered in and yet He drew them at once to the hope of the resurrection,
and led them to such full assurance, that when bidden, they even slay
their own sons, and readily offer up those from whom they expected to
people the world.

<span id="v.xxix-p15"></span>And he shows another thing too, by saying,
that “God tempted Abraham.” ( [Gen. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001) <span id="v.xxix-p15.1"></span> .)
What then? Did not God know that the man was noble and approved? Why
then did He tempt him? Not that He might Himself learn, but that He
might show to others, and make his fortitude manifest to all.  <span
id="fr_3266"></span>[3267](#fn_3266) And here also he shows the cause of
trials, that they may not suppose they suffer these things as being
forsaken \[of God\]. For in their case indeed, it was necessary that
they should he tried, because there were many who persecuted or plotted
against them: but in Abraham’s case, what need was there to devise
trials for him which did not exist? Now this trial, it is evident, was
by His command. The others indeed happened by His allowance, but this
even by His command. If then temptations make men approved in such wise
that, even where there is no occasion, God exercises His own athletes;
much more ought we to bear all things nobly.

<span id="v.xxix-p17"></span>And here he said emphatically, “By faith,
when he was tried, he offered up Isaac,” for there was no other cause
for his bringing the offering but that.

<span id="v.xxix-p18"></span>\[3.\] After this he pursues the same
thought. No one (he says) could allege, that he had another son, and
expected the promise to be fulfilled from him, and therefore confidently
offered up this one. “And” (his words are) “he offered up his
only-begotten, who had received the promises.” Why sayest thou
“only-begotten”? What then? Of whom was Ishmael sprung? I mean
“only-begotten” (he would say) so far as relates to the word of the
promise.  Therefore after saying, “Only-begotten,” showing that he says
it for this reason, he added, “of whom it was said, In Isaac shall thy
seed be called,” that is, “from” him. Seest thou how he admires what was
done by the Patriarch? “In Isaac shall thy seed be called,” and that son
he brought to be sacrificed.

<span id="v.xxix-p19"></span> Afterwards, that no one may suppose he
does this in despair, and in consequence of this command had cast away
that Faith,  <span id="fr_3267"></span>[3268](#fn_3267) but may
understand that this also was truly of faith, he says that he retained
that faith also, although it seem to be at variance with this. But it
was not at variance. For he did not measure the power of God by human
reasonings, but committed all to faith. And hence he was not afraid to
say, that God was “able to raise him up, even from the dead.”

<span id="v.xxix-p21"></span> “From whence also he received him in a
figure,”  <span id="fr_3268"></span>[3269](#fn_3268) that is in idea,
 <span id="fr_3269"></span>[3270](#fn_3269) by the ram, he means. How?
The ram having been slain, he was saved: so that by means of the ram he
received him again, having slain it in his stead. But these things were
types: for here it is the Son of God who is slain.

<span id="v.xxix-p24"></span>And observe, I beseech you, how great is
His lovingkindness. For inasmuch as a great favor was to be given to
men, He, wishing to do this, not by favor, but as a debtor, arranges
that a man should first give up his own son on account of God’s command,
in order that He Himself might seem to be doing nothing great in giving
up His own Son, since a man had done this before Him; that He might be
supposed to do it not of grace, but of debt. For we wish to do this
kindness also to those whom we love, others, to appear first to have
received some little thing <span id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span
id="v.xxix-Page_479"></span> from them, and so give them all: and we
boast more of the receiving than of the giving; and we do not say, We
gave him this, but, We received this from him.

<span id="v.xxix-p25"></span> “From whence also” (are his words) “he
received him in a figure,” i.e. as in a riddle  <span
id="fr_3270"></span>[3271](#fn_3270) (for the ram was as it were a
figure of Isaac) or, as in a type. For since the sacrifice had been
completed, and Isaac slain in purpose,  <span
id="fr_3271"></span>[3272](#fn_3271) therefore He gave him to the
Patriarch.

<span id="v.xxix-p28"></span>\[4.\] Thou seest, that what I am
constantly saying, is shown in this case also? When we have proved that
our mind is made perfect, and have shown that we disregard earthly
things, then earthly things also are given to us; but not before; lest
being bound to them already, receiving them we should be bound still.
Loose thyself from thy slavery first (He says), and then receive, that
thou mayest receive no longer as a slave, but as a master. Despise
riches, and thou shalt be rich. Despise glory, and thou shalt be
glorious. Despise the avenging thyself on thine enemies, and then shalt
thou attain it. Despise repose, and then thou shalt receive it that in
receiving thou mayest receive not as a prisoner, nor as a slave, but as
a freeman.

<span id="v.xxix-p29"></span>For as in the case of little children, when
the child eagerly desires childish playthings, we hide them from him
with much care, as a ball, for instance, and such like things, that he
may not be hindered from necessary things; but when he thinks little of
them, and no longer longs for them, we give them fearlessly, knowing
that henceforth no harm can come to him from them, the desire no longer
having strength enough to draw him away from things necessary; so God
also, when He sees that we no longer eagerly desire the things of this
world, thenceforward permits us to use them. For we possess them as
freemen and men, not as children.

<span id="v.xxix-p30"></span>For \[in proof\] that if thou despise the
avenging thyself on thine enemies, thou wilt then attain it, hear what
he says, “If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him
drink,” and he added, “for in so doing, thou shalt heap coals of fire on
his head.” ( [Rom. xii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020) <span
id="v.xxix-p30.1"></span> .) And again, that if thou despise riches,
thou shalt then obtain them, hear Christ saying, “There is no man which
hath left father, or mother, or house, or brethren, who shall not
receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.” ( [Matt.
xix. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029) <span
id="v.xxix-p30.2"></span> .) And that if thou despise glory, thou shalt
then attain it, again hear Christ Himself saying, “He that will be first
among you, let him be your minister.” ( [Matt. xx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026) <span id="v.xxix-p30.3"></span> .)
And again, “For whosoever shall humble himself, he shall be exalted.” (
[Matt. xxiii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012) <span
id="v.xxix-p30.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxix-p31"></span>What sayest thou? If I give drink to mine
enemy, do I then punish him? If I give up my goods, do I then possess
them? If I humble myself, shall I then be exalted? Yea, He says, for
such is My power, to give contraries by means of contraries. I abound in
resources and in contrivances: be not afraid. The ‘Nature of things’
follows My will: not I attend upon Nature. I do all things: I am not
controlled by them: wherefore also I am able to change their form and
order.

<span id="v.xxix-p32"></span> \[5.\] And why dost thou wonder if \[it is
so\] in these instances? For thou wilt find the same also in all others.
If thou injure, thou art injured;  <span
id="fr_3272"></span>[3273](#fn_3272) if thou art injured, then thou art
uninjured; if thou punish, then thou hast not punished another, but hast
punished thyself. For “he that loveth iniquity,” it is said, “hateth his
own soul.” ( [Ps. xi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005) <span
id="v.xxix-p33.3"></span> , LXX.) Seest thou that thou dost not injure,
but art injured?  <span id="fr_3273"></span>[3274](#fn_3273) Therefore
also Paul says, “Why do ye not rather take wrong?” ( [1 Cor. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#007) <span id="v.xxix-p34.8"></span> .)
Dost thou see that this is not to be wronged?

<span id="v.xxix-p35"></span>When thou insultest, then art thou
insulted. And most persons partly know this: as when they say one to
another, “Let us go away, do not disgrace yourself.” Why? Because the
difference is great between thee and him: for however much thou
insultest him, he accounts it a credit. Let us consider this in all
cases, and be above insults. I will tell you how.

<span id="v.xxix-p36"></span>Should we have a contest with him who wears
the purple, let us consider that in insulting him, we insult ourselves,
for we become worthy to be disgraced. Tell me, what dost thou mean? When
thou art a citizen of Heaven, and hast the Philosophy that is above,
dost thou disgrace thyself with him “that mindeth earthly things”? (
[Philip. iii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019) <span
id="v.xxix-p36.1"></span> .) For though he be in possession of countless
riches, though he be in power, he does not as yet know the good that is
therein. Do not in insulting him, insult thyself. Spare thyself, not
him. Honor thyself, not him. Is there not some Proverb such as this, He
that honoreth;  <span id="fr_3274"></span>[3275](#fn_3274) honoreth
himself? With good reason: for he honors not the other, but himself.
Hear what a certain wise man says, “Do honor to thy soul according to
the dignity thereof.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
10.28](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#028)<span id="v.xxix-p37.4"></span>
.) “According to the dignity thereof,” what is this? if he have
defrauded <span id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span
id="v.xxix-Page_480"></span> (it means), do not thou defraud; if he has
insulted, do not thou insult.

<span id="v.xxix-p38"></span>\[6.\] Tell me, I pray thee, if some poor
man has taken away clay thrown out of thy yard, wouldst thou for this
have summoned a court of justice? Surely not. Why? Lest thou shouldst
disgrace thyself; lest all men should condemn thee. The same also
happens in this case. For the rich man is poor, and the more rich he is,
the poorer is he in that which is indeed poverty. Gold is clay, cast out
in the yard, not lying in thy house, for thy house is Heaven. For this,
then, wilt thou summon a Court of Justice, and will not the citizens on
high condemn thee? Will they not cast thee out from their country, who
art so mean, who art so shabby, as to choose to fight for a little clay?
For if the world were thine, and then some one had taken it, oughtest
thou to pay any attention to it?

<span id="v.xxix-p39"></span>Knowest thou not, that if thou wert to take
the world ten times or an hundred times, or ten thousand times, and
twice that, it is not to be compared with the least of the good things
in Heaven? He then who admires the things here slights those yonder,
since he judges these worthy of exertion, though so far inferior to the
other. Nay, rather indeed he will not be able to admire those other. For
how \[can he\], whilst he is passionately excited towards these earthly
things? Let us cut through the cords and entanglements: for this is what
earthly things are.

<span id="v.xxix-p40"></span> How long shall we be stooping down? How
long shall we plot one against another, like wild beasts; like fishes?
Nay rather, the wild beasts do not plot against each other, but
\[against\] animals of a different tribe. A bear for instance does not
readily kill a bear, nor a serpent kill a serpent, having respect for
the sameness of race. But thou, with one of the same race, and having
innumerable claims,  <span id="fr_3275"></span>[3276](#fn_3275) as
common origin, rational faculties, the knowledge of God, ten thousand
other things, the force of nature, him who is thy kinsman, and partaker
of the same nature—him thou killest, and involvest in evils innumerable.
For what, if thou dost not thrust thy sword, nor plunge thy right hand
into his neck, other things more grievous than this thou doest, when
thou involvest him in innumerable evils. For if thou hadst done the
other, thou wouldst have freed him from anxiety, but now thou
encompassest him with hunger, with slavery, with feelings of
discouragement, with many sins. These things I say, and shall not cease
to say, not \[as\] preparing you to commit murder: nor as urging you to
some crime short of that; but that you may not be confident, as if you
were not to give account. “For” (it says) “he that taketh away a
livelihood” ( [Ecclesiasticus
34.22](../../../bib/apo/sir034.htm#022)<span id="v.xxix-p41.2"></span> )
and asketh bread, it says.  <span id="fr_3276"></span>[3277](#fn_3276)

<span id="v.xxix-p43"></span>\[7.\] Let us at length keep our hands to
ourselves, or rather, let us not keep them, but stretch them out
honorably, not for grasping, but for alms-giving. Let us not have our
hand unfruitful nor withered; for the hand which doeth not alms is
withered; and that which is also grasping, is polluted and unclean.

<span id="v.xxix-p44"></span> Let no one eat with such hands; for this
is an insult to those invited. For, tell me, if a man when he had made
us lie down on tapestry  <span id="fr_3277"></span>[3278](#fn_3277) and
a soft couch and linen interwoven with gold, in a great and splendid
house, and had set by us a great multitude of attendants, and had
prepared a tray  <span id="fr_3278"></span>[3279](#fn_3278) of silver
and gold, and filled it with many dainties of great cost and of all
sorts, then urged us to eat, provided we would only endure his
besmearing his hands with mire or with human ordure, and so sitting down
to meat with us—would any man endure this infliction? Would he not
rather have considered it an insult? Indeed I think he would, and would
have gone straightway off. But now in fact, thou seest not hands filled
with what is indeed filth, but even the very food, and yet thou dost not
go off, nor flee, nor find fault. Nay, if he be a person in authority,
thou even accountest it a grand affair, and destroyest thine own soul,
in eating such things. For covetousness is worse than any mire; for it
pollutes, not the body but the soul, and makes it hard to be washed.
Thou therefore, though thou seest him that sitteth at meat defiled with
this filth both on his hands and his face, and his house filled with it,
nay and his table also full of it (for dung, or if there be anything
more unclean than that, it is not so unclean and polluted as those
viands), dost thou feel as if forsooth thou wert highly honored, and as
if thou wert going to enjoy thyself?

<span id="v.xxix-p47"></span>And dost thou not fear Paul who allows us
to go without restraint to the Tables of the heathen if we wish, but not
even if we wish to those of the covetous? For, “if any man who is called
a Brother” ( [1 Cor. v. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011) <span
id="v.xxix-p47.1"></span> ), he says, meaning here by Brother every one
who is a believer simply, not him who leads a solitary life. For what is
it which makes brotherhood? The Washing of regeneration; the being
enabled to call God our Father. So that he that is a Monk, if he be a
Catechumen, is not a Brother,  <span
id="fr_3279"></span>[3280](#fn_3279) but <span id="page_481">p.
481</span> <span id="v.xxix-Page_481"></span> the believer though he be
in the world, is a Brother. “If any man,” saith he, “that is called a
Brother.” ( [1 Cor. v. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011) <span
id="v.xxix-p48.9"></span> .) For at that time there was not even a trace
of any one leading a Monastic life, but this blessed \[Apostle\]
addressed all his discourse to persons in the world. “If any man,” he
says, “that is called a Brother, be a fornicator, or covetous or a
drunkard, with such an one, no not to eat.” But not so with respect to
the heathen: but “If any of them that believe not,” meaning the heathen,
“bid you and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you eat.” (
[1 Cor. x. 27](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#027) <span
id="v.xxix-p48.10"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxix-p49"></span>\[8.\] “If any man that is called Brother
be” (he says) “a drunkard.” Oh! what strictness! Yet we not only do not
avoid drunkards, but even go to their houses, partaking of what they set
before us.

<span id="v.xxix-p50"></span>Therefore all things are upside down, all
things are in confusion, and overthrown, and ruined. For tell me, if any
such person should invite thee to a banquet, thee who art accounted poor
and mean, and then should hear thee say, “Inasmuch as the things set
before me are \[the fruit\] of overreaching, I will not endure to defile
my own soul,” would he not be mortified? Would he not be confounded?
Would he not be ashamed? This alone were sufficient to correct him, and
to make him call himself wretched for his wealth, and admire thee for
thy poverty, if he saw himself with so great earnestness despised by
thee.

<span id="v.xxix-p51"></span>But we “are become” (I know not why)
“servants of men” ( [1 Cor. vii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023)
<span id="v.xxix-p51.1"></span> ), though Paul cries aloud throughout,
“Be not ye the servants of men.” Whence then have we become “servants of
men”? Because we first became servants of the belly, and of money, and
of glory, and of all the rest; we gave up the liberty which Christ
bestowed on us.

<span id="v.xxix-p52"></span>What then awaiteth him who is become a
servant (tell me)? Hear Christ saying, “The servant abideth not in the
house for ever.” ( [John viii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035)
<span id="v.xxix-p52.1"></span> .) Thou hast a declaration complete in
itself, that he never entereth into the Kingdom; for this is what “the
House” means. For, He says, “in My Father’s House are many mansions.” (
[John xiv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002) <span
id="v.xxix-p52.2"></span> .) “The servant” then “abideth not in the
House for ever.” By a servant He means him who is “the servant of sin.”
But he that “abideth not in the House for ever,” abideth in Hell for
ever, having no consolation from any quarter.

<span id="v.xxix-p53"></span>Nay, to this point of wickedness are
matters come, that they even give alms out of these \[ill-gotten
gains\], and many receive \[them\]. Therefore our boldness has broken
down, and we are not able to rebuke any one. But however, henceforward
at least, let us flee the mischief arising from this; and ye who have
rolled yourselves in this mire, cease from such defilement, and restrain
your rage for such banquets, if even now we may by any means be able to
have God propitious to us, and to attain to the good things which have
been promised: which may we all obtain in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor,
now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3262"></span>[477:3263](1140123.htm#fr_3262) <span
id="v.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p4.1"></span>Mr. Field’s text omits</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p4.2"></span>̓</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p4.3"></span>Αβραὰμ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p4.4"></span>, and has</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p4.5"></span>δεξάμενος</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p4.6"></span>for</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p4.7"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p4.8"></span>ναδεξάμενος</span>

<span id="fn_3263"></span>[477:3264](1140123.htm#fr_3263) <span
id="v.xxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p6.1"></span>τὰ τοῦ Θεοῦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p6.2"></span>, the acts and words of God.</span>

<span id="fn_3264"></span>[478:3265](1140123.htm#fr_3264) <span
id="v.xxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p11.1"></span>λογισάμενος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p11.2"></span>. The cognate word</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p11.3"></span>λογισμὸς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p11.4"></span>is used throughout for
our</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p11.5"></span>reasoning,</span> ” “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p11.6"></span>calculation.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3265"></span>[478:3266](1140123.htm#fr_3265) <span
id="v.xxix-p11.7"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.1"></span>οὐκ ὄντα ἐχαρίσατο</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p12.2"></span>, i.e. Isaac. See</span>
<span id="v.xxix-p12.3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.4"></span>[Rom. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span
id="v.xxix-p12.5"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.6"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.7"></span>Before God, in whom he believed, who quickeneth
the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they
were</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.8"></span>(</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.9"></span>τὰ μὴ ὄντα ὡς ὄντα</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p12.10"></span>); and for the next
clause, see</span> [Rom. 4.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019)<span
id="v.xxix-p12.11"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.12"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.13"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.14"></span>He considered not his own body, now dead, nor
yet the deadness of Sarah’s womb</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p12.15"></span>: to which, so to say, life was
restored.</span>

<span id="fn_3266"></span>[478:3267](1140123.htm#fr_3266) <span
id="v.xxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p16.1"></span>\[See St. Cyr. Alex. *Glaph* . 87.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3267"></span>[478:3268](1140123.htm#fr_3267) <span
id="v.xxix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p20.1"></span>conviction \[?\].</span>

<span id="fn_3268"></span>[478:3269](1140123.htm#fr_3268) <span
id="v.xxix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p22.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p22.2"></span>ν παραβολῇ</span>

<span id="fn_3269"></span>[478:3270](1140123.htm#fr_3269) <span
id="v.xxix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p23.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p23.2"></span>ν ὑποδείγματι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p23.3"></span>, see</span> [Heb.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023)<span
id="v.xxix-p23.4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p23.5"></span></span>

<span id="fn_3270"></span>[479:3271](1140123.htm#fr_3270) <span
id="v.xxix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p26.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p26.2"></span>ν αἰνίγματι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p26.3"></span>, where one thing is said, and another covertly
meant: as the expression is used</span> <span id="v.xxix-p26.4"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p26.5"></span>[1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span
id="v.xxix-p26.6"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p26.7"></span>, of our present knowledge of the Blessedness
of Heaven.</span>

<span id="fn_3271"></span>[479:3272](1140123.htm#fr_3271) <span
id="v.xxix-p26.8"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p27.1"></span>τῇ προαιρέσει</span>

<span id="fn_3272"></span>[479:3273](1140123.htm#fr_3272) <span
id="v.xxix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p33.1"></span>ἠ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p33.2"></span>δικήθης</span>

<span id="fn_3273"></span>[479:3274](1140123.htm#fr_3273) <span
id="v.xxix-p33.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p34.1"></span>This reading, adopted by Mr. Field, is found
only in one <span class="c11"><span id="v.xxix-p34.2"></span>ms.</span>
followed by Savile and the later editions: the other authorities,
including Mutianus’ version, have,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p34.3"></span>Seest thou that thou hast not been injured, but
injurest?</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p34.4"></span>
Perhaps this may be the true reading, St Chrys. in these words turning
his address to those who are suffering worldly wrong: and saying that if
they patiently endure, they are not the sufferers, but inflict suffering
on their oppressors, though the expression</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p34.5"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p34.6"></span>δικεις</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p34.7"></span>is very strong.</span>

<span id="fn_3274"></span>[479:3275](1140123.htm#fr_3274) <span
id="v.xxix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p37.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p37.2"></span>respects \[another\], respects,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p37.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_3275"></span>[480:3276](1140123.htm#fr_3275) <span
id="v.xxix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p41.1"></span>δικαιώματα</span>

<span id="fn_3276"></span>[480:3277](1140123.htm#fr_3276) <span
id="v.xxix-p41.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p42.1"></span>καὶ ἄρτον αἰτῶν, φησί</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p42.2"></span>. There is great variation
in the <span class="c11"><span id="v.xxix-p42.3"></span>mss.</span> of
this passage: and possibly the true reading is lost. St. Chrys. partly
quotes [Ecclus. xxxi. 22](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#022)<span
id="v.xxix-p42.4"></span> of the Septuagint (</span> [Ecclesiasticus
34.22](../../../bib/apo/sir034.htm#022)<span
id="v.xxix-p42.5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p42.6"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p42.7"></span>of our Version),</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p42.8"></span>He that taketh away his
living slayeth his neighbor, and he that defraudeth the hireling of his
hire is a blood-shedder.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p42.9"></span> As the text stands we must suppose that he is
alluding to sayings which had become proverbial, and that his hearers
would supply the words,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p42.10"></span>is a murderer</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p42.11"></span>; or</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p42.12"></span>is the same.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3277"></span>[480:3278](1140123.htm#fr_3277) <span
id="v.xxix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p45.1"></span>ταπήτων</span>

<span id="fn_3278"></span>[480:3279](1140123.htm#fr_3278) <span
id="v.xxix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p46.1"></span>πίνακα</span>

<span id="fn_3279"></span>[480:3280](1140123.htm#fr_3279) <span
id="v.xxix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxix-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxix-p48.1"></span>It will be observed that the word</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p48.2"></span>πιστὸς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p48.3"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p48.4"></span>believer,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p48.5"></span>means</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p48.6"></span>one who believes and is
baptized</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p48.7"></span>:
as opposed to the unbaptized, even though they believed and were so
religious as to devote themselves to an ascetic life. Also, that at this
time there were those who had given themselves up to an ascetic life and
still deferred their Baptism, see St. Greg. Naz. Hom. xl. 18. In the
later form of the text, this clause has been altered to</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxix-p48.8"></span>So that a Catechumen, even
though he be a Monk, is not a brother.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXVI](1140124)
