[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140121)  [Next](1140123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxviii"></span> <span id="v.xxviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIV.</span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xxviii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxviii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews xi.
13-16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013.md)<span
id="v.xxviii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p3"></span> *“These all died in faith,*  <span
id="fr_3249"></span>[3250](#fn_3249.md) *not having received the promises,
but having seen them afar off,*  <span
id="fr_3250"></span>[3251](#fn_3250.md) *and embraced them, and confessed
that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. For they that say
such things, declare plainly that they seek a country. And truly if they
had been mindful of that country from whence they came out, they might
have had opportunity to have returned. But now they desire a better
country, that is, an heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed*  <span
id="fr_3251"></span>[3252](#fn_3251.md) *to be called their God, for He
hath prepared for them a city.”*

<span id="v.xxviii-p7"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxviii-p7.1"></span>The</span> first virtue, yea the whole of
virtue, is to be a stranger to this world, and a sojourner, and to have
nothing in common with things here, but to hang loose from them, as from
things strange to us; As those blessed disciples did, of whom he says,
“They wandered about in sheepskins, and in goat-skins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented:  <span id="fr_3252"></span>[3253](#fn_3252.md) of
whom the world was not worthy.” ( [Heb.
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#038)<span id="v.xxviii-p8.2"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xxviii-p9"></span>They called themselves therefore
“strangers”; but Paul said somewhat much beyond this: for not merely did
he call himself a stranger, but said that he was dead to the world, and
that the world was dead to him. “For the world” (he says) “has been
crucified to me and I to the world.” ( [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014) <span id="v.xxviii-p9.1"></span> ..md)
But we, both citizens  <span id="fr_3253"></span>[3254](#fn_3253.md) and
quite alive, busy ourselves about everything here as citizens. And what
righteous men were to the world, “strangers” and “dead,” that we are to
Heaven. And what they were to Heaven, alive and acting as citizens, that
we are to the world. Wherefore we are dead, because we have refused that
which is truly life, and have chosen this which is but for a time.
Wherefore we have provoked God to wrath, because when the enjoyments of
Heaven have been set before <span id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span
id="v.xxviii-Page_474"></span> us, we are not willing to be separated
from things on earth, but, like worms, we turn about from the earth to
the earth, and again from this to that;  <span
id="fr_3254"></span>[3255](#fn_3254.md) and in short are not willing to
look up even for a little while, nor to withdraw ourselves from human
affairs, but as if drowned in torpor and sleep and drunkenness, we are
stupefied with imaginations.

<span id="v.xxviii-p12"></span>\[2.\] And as those who are under the
power of sweet sleep lie on their bed not only during the night, but
even when the morning has over-taken them, and bright day has come, and
are not ashamed to indulge in pleasure, and to make the season of
business and activity a time of slumber and indolence, so truly we also,
when the day is drawing near, when the night is far spent, or rather the
day; for “work” (it is said) “while it is day” ( [John ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#004) <span id="v.xxviii-p12.1"></span> .md);
when it is day we practice all that belongs to the night, sleeping,
dreaming, indulging in luxurious fancies; and the eyes of our
understanding are closed as well as those of our body; we speak amiss,
we talk absurdly; even if a person inflict a deep wound upon us, if he
carry off all our substance, if he set the very house on fire, we are
not so much as conscious of it.

<span id="v.xxviii-p13"></span>Or rather, we do not even wait for others
to do this, but we do it ourselves, piercing and wounding ourselves
every day, lying in unseemly fashion, and stripped bare of all credit,
all honor, neither ourselves concealing our shameful deeds, nor
permitting others to do so, but lying exposed to public shame, to the
ridicule, the numberless jests of spectators and passers-by.

<span id="v.xxviii-p14"></span>\[3.\] Do ye not suppose that the wicked
themselves laugh at those who are of like characters to themselves, and
condemn them? For since God has placed within us a tribunal which cannot
be bribed nor ever utterly destroyed, even though we come to the very
lowest depth of vice; therefore even the wicked themselves give sentence
against themselves, and if one call them that which they are, they are
ashamed, they are angry, they say that it is an insult. Thus they
condemn what they do, even if not by their deeds, yet by their words, by
their conscience, nay rather even by their deeds. For when they carry on
their practices out of sight and secretly, they give the strongest proof
of the opinion they hold concerning the thing itself. For wickedness is
so manifest, that all men are its accusers, even those who follow after
it, while such is the quality of virtue, that it is admired even by
those who do not emulate it. For even the fornicator will praise
chastity, and the covetous will condemn injustice, and the passionate
will admire patience, and blame quarrelsomeness, and the wanton \[will
blame\] wantonness.

<span id="v.xxviii-p15"></span>How then (you say) does he pursue these
things? From excessive indolence, not because he judges it good;
otherwise he would not have been ashamed of the thing itself, nor would
he have denied it when another accused him. Nay many when caught, not
enduring the shame, have even hanged themselves. So strong is the
witness within us in behalf of what is good and becoming. Thus what is
good is brighter than the sun, and the contrary more unsightly than
anything.

<span id="v.xxviii-p16"></span> \[4.\] The saints were “strangers and
sojourners.” How and in what way? And where does Abraham confess himself
“a stranger and a sojourner”? Probably indeed he even himself confessed
it:  <span id="fr_3255"></span>[3256](#fn_3255.md) but David both confessed
“I am a stranger” and what? “As all my fathers were.” ( [Ps. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012.md) <span id="v.xxviii-p17.5"></span>
.) For they who dwell in tents, they who purchase even burial places for
money, evidently were in some sense strangers, as they had not even
where to bury their dead.

<span id="v.xxviii-p18"></span>What then? Did they mean that they were
“strangers” from the land that is in Palestine? By no means: but in
respect of the whole world: and with reason; for they saw therein none
of the things which they wished for, but everything foreign and strange.
They indeed wished to practice virtue: but here there was much
wickedness, and things were quite foreign to them. They had no friend,
no familiar acquaintance, save only some few.

<span id="v.xxviii-p19"></span>But how were they “strangers”? They had
no care for things here. And this they showed not by words, but by their
deeds. In what way?

<span id="v.xxviii-p20"></span>He said to Abraham, “Leave that which
seems thy country and come to one that is foreign”: And he did not
cleave to his kindred, but gave it up as unconcernedly as if he were
about to leave a foreign land. He said to him, “Offer up thy son,” and
he offered him up as if he had no son; as if he had divested himself of
his nature, so he offered him up. The wealth which he had acquired was
common to all passers-by, and this he accounted as nothing. He yielded
the first places to others: he threw himself into dangers; he suffered
troubles innumerable. He built no splendid houses, he enjoyed no
luxuries, he had no care about dress, which all are things of this
world; but lived in all respects as belonging to the City yonder; he
showed hospitality, brotherly love, mercifulness, forbearance, contempt
for wealth and for present glory, and for all else.

<span id="v.xxviii-p21"></span>And his son too was such as himself: when
he was driven away, when war was made on him, he yielded and gave way,
as being in a foreign land. For foreigners, whatever they suffer, <span
id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span id="v.xxviii-Page_475"></span> endure
it, as not being in their own country. Even when his wife was taken from
him, he endured this also as being in a strange land: and lived in all
respects as one whose home was above, showing sobermindedness and a
well-ordered life.  <span id="fr_3256"></span>[3257](#fn_3256.md) For after
he had begotten a son, he had no more commerce with his wife, and it was
when the flower of his youth had passed that he married her, showing
that he did it not from passion, but in subservience to the promise of
God.

<span id="v.xxviii-p23"></span>And what did Jacob? Did he not seek bread
only and raiment, which are asked for by those who are truly strangers;
by those that have come to great poverty? When he was driven out, did he
not as a stranger give place? Did he not serve for hire? Did he not
suffer afflictions innumerable, everywhere, as a stranger?

<span id="v.xxviii-p24"></span>\[5.\] And these things (he says) they
said, “seeking” their “own country.” Ah! how great is the difference!
They indeed were in travail-pains each day, wishing to be released from
this world, and to return to their country. But we, on the contrary, if
a fever attack us, neglecting everything, weeping like little children,
are frightened at death.

<span id="v.xxviii-p25"></span>Not without reason we are thus affected.
For since we do not live here like strangers, nor as if hastening to our
country, but are like persons that are going away to punishment,
therefore we grieve, because we have not used circumstances as we ought,
but have turned order upside down. Hence we grieve when we ought to
rejoice: hence we shudder, like murderers or robber chiefs, when they
are going to be brought before the judgment-seat, and are thinking over
all the things they have done, and therefore are fearful and trembling.

<span id="v.xxviii-p26"></span>They, however, were not such, but pressed
on. And Paul even groaned; “And we” (he says) “that are in this
tabernacle do groan, being burdened.” ( [2 Cor. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004) <span id="v.xxviii-p26.1"></span> ..md)
Such were they who were with Abraham; “strangers,” he says, they were in
respect of the whole world, and “they sought a country.”

<span id="v.xxviii-p27"></span>What sort of “country” was this? Was it
that which they had left? By no means. For what hindered them if they
wished, from returning again, and becoming citizens? but they sought
that which is in Heaven? Thus they desired their departure hence, and so
they pleased God; for “God was not ashamed to be called their God.”

<span id="v.xxviii-p28"></span>\[6.\] Ah! how great a dignity! He
vouch-safed “to be called their God.” What dost thou say? He is called
the God of the earth, and the God of Heaven, and hast thou set it down
as a great thing that “He is not ashamed to be called their God”? Great
and truly great this is, and a proof of exceeding blessedness. How?
Because He is called God of earth and of heaven as also of the Gentiles:
in that He created and formed them: but \[God\] of those holy men, not
in this sense, but as some true friend.

<span id="v.xxviii-p29"></span> And I will make it plain to you by an
example; as in the case of \[slaves\] in large households, when any of
those placed over the household are very highly esteemed, and manage
everything themselves, and can use great freedom towards their masters,
the Master is called after them, and one may find many so called. But
what do I say? As we might say the God, not of the Gentiles but of the
world, so we might say “the God of Abraham.” But you do not know how
great a dignity this is, because we do not attain to it. For as now He
is called the Lord of all Christians, and yet the name goes beyond our
deserts: consider the greatness if He were called the God of one
\[person\]! He who is called the God of the whole world is “not ashamed
to be called” the God of three men: and with good reason: for the saints
would turn the scale, I do not say against the world  <span
id="fr_3257"></span>[3258](#fn_3257.md) but against ten thousand such. “For
one man who doeth the will of the Lord,  <span
id="fr_3258"></span>[3259](#fn_3258.md) is better than ten thousand
transgressors.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
16.3](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#003.md)<span id="v.xxviii-p31.12"></span>
.)

<span id="v.xxviii-p32"></span>Now that they called themselves
“strangers” in this sense is manifest. But supposing that they said they
were “strangers” on account of the strange land, why did David also
\[call himself a stranger\]? Was not he a king? Was not he a prophet?
Did he not spend his life in his own country? Why then does he say, “I
am a stranger and a sojourner”? ( [Ps. xxxix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012.md) <span id="v.xxviii-p32.1"></span>
.) How art thou a stranger? “As” (he says) “all my fathers were.” Seest
thou that they too were strangers? We have a country, he means, but not
really our country. But how art thou thyself a stranger? As to the
earth. Therefore they also \[were strangers\] in respect of the earth:
For “as they were,” he says, so also am I; and as he, so they too.

<span id="v.xxviii-p33"></span>\[7.\] Let us even now become strangers;
that God may “not be ashamed of us to be called our God.” For it is a
shame to Him, when He is called the God of the wicked, and He also is
ashamed of them; as He is glorified when He is \[called the God\] of the
good and the kind, and of them that cultivate virtue. For if “we”
decline to be called the masters of our wicked slaves, and give them up;
and should any one <span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span
id="v.xxviii-Page_476"></span> come to us and say, ‘such a one does
innumerable bad things, he is your slave, is he not?’ We immediately
say, “by no means,” to get rid of the disgrace: for a slave has a close
relation to his master, and the discredit passes from the one to the
other.  <span id="fr_3259"></span>[3260](#fn_3259.md) —But they were so
illustrious, so full of confidence, that not only was He “not ashamed to
be called” from them, but He even Himself says, “I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” ( [Ex. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006) <span id="v.xxviii-p34.3"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xxviii-p35"></span>Let us also, my beloved, become
“strangers”; that God may “not be ashamed of us”; that He may not be
ashamed, and deliver us up to Hell. Such were they who said, “Lord, have
we not prophesied in Thy Name, and in Thy Name have done many wonderful
works!” ( [Matt. vii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p35.1"></span> .) But see what Christ says to them: “I know
you not:” the very thing which masters would do, when wicked slaves run
to them, wishing to be rid of the disgrace. “I know you not,” He says.
How then dost Thou punish those whom Thou knowest not? I said, “I know
not,” in a different sense: that is, “I deny you, and renounce you.” But
God forbid that we should hear this fatal and terrible utterance. For if
they who cast out demons and prophesied, were denied, because their life
was not suitable thereto; how much more we!

<span id="v.xxviii-p36"></span>\[8.\] And how (you ask) is it possible
that they should be denied, who have shown prophetic powers, and wrought
miracles, and cast out demons? Is it probable they were afterwards
changed, and became wicked; and therefore were nothing benefited, even
by their former virtue. For not only ought we to have our beginnings
splendid, but the end also more splendid still.

<span id="v.xxviii-p37"></span>For tell me, does not the Orator take
pains to make the end of his speech splendid, that he may retire with
applause? Does not the public officer make the most splendid display at
the close of his administration? The wrestler, if he do not make a more
splendid display and conquer unto the end, and if after vanquishing all
he be vanquished by the last, is not all unprofitable to him? Should the
pilot have crossed the whole ocean, yet if he wreck his vessel at the
port, has he not lost all his former labor? And what \[of\] the
Physician? If, after he has freed the sick man from his disease, when he
is on the point of discharging him cured, he should then destroy him,
has he not destroyed everything? So too in respect of Virtue, as many as
have not added an end suitable to the beginning, and in unison and
harmony with it, are ruined, and undone. Such are they who have sprung
forth from the starting place bright and exulting, and afterwards have
become faint and feeble. Therefore they are both deprived of the prize,
and are not acknowledged by their master.

<span id="v.xxviii-p38"></span>Let us listen to these things, those of
us who are in love of wealth: for this is the greatest iniquity. “For
the love of money is the root of all evil.” ( [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010.md) <span id="v.xxviii-p38.1"></span>
.) Let us listen, those of us who wish to make our present possessions
greater, let us listen and sometime cease from our covetousness, that we
may not hear the same things as they \[will hear\]. Let us listen to
them now, and be on our guard, that we may not hear them then. Let us
listen now with fear, that we may not then listen with vengeance:
“Depart from Me” (He says); “I never knew you” ( [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023.md) <span id="v.xxviii-p38.2"></span>
), no not even then (He means) when ye made a display of prophesyings,
and were casting out demons.

<span id="v.xxviii-p39"></span>It is probable that He also here hints at
something else, that even then they were wicked; and from the beginning,
grace wrought even by the unworthy. For if it wrought through Balaam,
much more through the unworthy, for the sake of those who shall profit
\[by it\].

<span id="v.xxviii-p40"></span> But if even signs and wonders did not
avail to deliver from punishment; much more, if a man happen to be in
the priestly dignity:  <span id="fr_3260"></span>[3261](#fn_3260.md) even
if he reach the highest honor, even if grace work in him to ordination,
even if unto all the other things, for the sake of those who need his
leadership,  <span id="fr_3261"></span>[3262](#fn_3261.md) he also shall
hear, “I never knew thee,” no, not even then when grace wrought in thee.

<span id="v.xxviii-p43"></span>\[9.\] O! how strict shall the search be
there as to purity of life! How does that, of itself, suffice to
introduce us into the kingdom? While the absence of it gives up the man
\[to destruction\], though he have ten thousand miracles and signs to
show. For nothing is so pleasing to God as an excellent course of life.
“If ye love Me” ( [John xiv. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p43.1"></span> ), He declares; He did not say, “work
miracles,” but what? “Keep My commandments.”  And again, “I call you
friends” ( [John xv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#014.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p43.2"></span> ), not when ye cast out demons, but “if ye
keep My words.” For those things come of the gift of God: but these
after the gift of God, of our own diligence also. Let us strive to
become friends of God, and not remain enemies to Him.

<span id="v.xxviii-p44"></span>These things we are ever saying, these
exhortations we are ever giving, both to ourselves and to you: but
nothing more is gained. Wherefore also I am afraid. And I would have
wished indeed to be silent, so as not to increase your danger. For when
a person often hears, and even so does not act, this is to provoke the
Lord to anger. But I fear also myself that other danger, that of
silence, if when I am ap <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="v.xxviii-Page_477"></span> pointed to the ministering of the word, I
should hold my peace.

<span id="v.xxviii-p45"></span>What shall we then do that we may be
saved? Let us begin \[the practice of\] virtue, as we have opportunity:
let us portion out the virtues to ourselves, as laborers do their
husbandry; in this month let us master evil-speaking, injuriousness,
unjust anger; and let us lay down a law for ourselves, and say, To-day
let us set this right. Again, in this month let us school ourselves in
forbearance, and in another, in some other virtue: And when we have got
into the habit of this virtue let us go to another, just as in the
things we learn at school, guarding what is already gained, and
acquiring others.

<span id="v.xxviii-p46"></span>After this let us proceed to contempt for
riches. First let us restrain our hands from grasping, and then let us
give alms. Let us not simply confound everything, with the same hands
both slaying and showing mercy forsooth. After this, let us go to some
other virtue, and from that, to another. “Filthiness and foolish talking
and jesting, let it not be even named among you.” ( [Eph.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#004.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003)<span id="v.xxviii-p46.1"></span> ..md)
Let us be thus far in the right way.

<span id="v.xxviii-p47"></span>There is no need of spending money, there
is no need of labor, none of sweat, it is enough to have only the will,
and all is done. There is no need to travel a long way, nor to cross a
boundless ocean, but to be in earnest and of ready mind, and to put a
bridle on the tongue. Unseasonable reproaches, anger, disorderly lusts,
luxuriousness, expensiveness, let us cast off; and the desire of wealth
also from our soul, perjury and habitual oaths.

<span id="v.xxviii-p48"></span>If we thus cultivate ourselves, plucking
out the former thorns, and casting in the heavenly seed, we shall be
able to attain the good things promised. For the Husbandman will come
and will lay us up in His Garner, and we shall attain to all good
things, which may we all attain, by the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost,
be glory, power, honor, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3249"></span>[473:3250](1140122.htm#fr_3249.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p4.1"></span>κατὰ πίστιν</span>

<span id="fn_3250"></span>[473:3251](1140122.htm#fr_3250.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p5.1"></span>\[The words of the A.V.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p5.2"></span>and were persuaded of
them,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p5.3"></span>καὶ
πεισθέντες</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p5.4"></span>,
are not in St. Chrysostom’s text or in that of any critical edition. In
the R.V. they are omitted.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3251"></span>[473:3252](1140122.htm#fr_3251.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p5.5"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p6.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p6.2"></span>ashamed of them, to be,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p6.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_3252"></span>[473:3253](1140122.htm#fr_3252.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p8"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p8.1"></span>ill-treated.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3253"></span>[473:3254](1140122.htm#fr_3253.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p10.1"></span>πολῖτας</span>

<span id="fn_3254"></span>[474:3255](1140122.htm#fr_3254.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p11.1"></span>from this piece of earth to that.</span>

<span id="fn_3255"></span>[474:3256](1140122.htm#fr_3255.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p17.1"></span>See</span> <span id="v.xxviii-p17.2"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p17.3"></span>[Gen. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.xxviii-p17.4"></span></span>

<span id="fn_3256"></span>[475:3257](1140122.htm#fr_3256.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p22.1"></span>σωφροσύνην κοσμιότητα</span>

<span id="fn_3257"></span>[475:3258](1140122.htm#fr_3257.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p30.1"></span>See on ver. 36, pp. 488 sqq.</span>

<span id="fn_3258"></span>[475:3259](1140122.htm#fr_3258.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p31.1"></span>Mr. Field observes that St. Chrys. repeatedly
cites</span> [Ecclesiasticus 16.3](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#003.md)<span
id="v.xxviii-p31.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p31.3"></span>[Ecclus. xvi.
3](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#003.md)<span
id="v.xxviii-p31.4"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p31.5"></span>, thus; and that while the Greek is
simply,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p31.6"></span>or
one is better than a thousand,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p31.7"></span>the Syriac seems to have read</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p31.8"></span>ὅ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p31.9"></span>τι κρείσσων εἱς ποιῶν
θέλημα</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxviii-p31.10"></span>,
&c. So the English version has</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p31.11"></span>for one *that is just* .</span> ”

<span id="fn_3259"></span>[476:3260](1140122.htm#fr_3259.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p34.1"></span>The sentence is left incomplete: The common
editions add,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p34.2"></span>much more does God.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3260"></span>[476:3261](1140122.htm#fr_3260.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p41.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p41.2"></span>ξιώματι ἱερατικῷ</span>

<span id="fn_3261"></span>[476:3262](1140122.htm#fr_3261.md) <span
id="v.xxviii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxviii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxviii-p42.1"></span>τῆς προστασίας</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXV](1140123.md)
