[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140000)  [Next](1140002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="ii-Page_v"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="ii-p3"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="ii-p3.1"></span>This</span> volume closes the American edition of
the Works of St. Chrysostom, and at the same time the First Series of
the Nicene and Post-Nicene Library of the Christian Fathers.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>The best works of St. Augustin and St.
Chrysostom are thus brought within the reach of the English reader in a
more complete form and at a lower price than ever before.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>The Epistle to the Hebrews was the last volume
of the Oxford “Library of the Fathers,” published under the direction
and with a Preface of the late Dr. Pusey, the chief originator of that
valuable Library. His Preface is dated, Oxford, May, 1877. He died Sept.
16, 1882.

<span id="ii-p6"></span> The American editor of the Homilies on the
Hebrews has thoroughly revised the Oxford translation and enlarged it
with a valuable introduction on the authorship of the Epistle (about
which St. Chrysostom was mistaken), and a considerable number of
explanatory footnotes. Unfortunately he died shortly before his <span
class="c11"><span id="ii-p6.1"></span>ms</span> . was sent to the
printer, but his son read the proofs.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>The Rev. Dr. Frederic Gardiner (born Sept. 11,
1822, died July 17, 1889) was for many years Professor in the Berkeley
Episcopal Divinity School at Middletown, Conn., and President of the
Society of Biblical Literature and Exegesis. He edited a Greek Harmony
of the Four Gospels, and several exegetical works, and was a contributor
to Lange’s Commentary, Ellicott’s Commentary for English Readers, and
various periodicals. The revision of the Homilies on the Epistle to the
Hebrews was his last work.

<span id="ii-p8"></span> The Homilies on the Fourth Gospel appears in
the Oxford “Library of the Fathers,” with a few additional notes. The
Rev. Charles Marriott (1811–1858) edited them, and wrote the preface to
the first volume. For fourteen years, from 1841 to 1855, he was
associated with Dr. Pusey as working editor, and superintended the
publication of at least twenty-four volumes (twelve of St. Chrysostom,
eight of St. Augustin, four of St. Gregory I.), *i.e* . more than
one-half of that Library. It was with both a labor of love and
sacrifice, without fee or reward except the approval of the conscience
and of good men. To their unselfish labors the American edition owes a
great debt of gratitude. Mr. Marriott did most of the literary drudgery,
as translator, corrector, and proof-reader, with untiring fidelity and
painstaking zeal till he was struck down by paralysis in 1855, “to wait
in stillness for his Lord’s last call.” Dean Burgon states these facts
in a interesting account of his intimate friend (in *Lives of Twelve
Good Men* , London and New York, 1888, vol. I. 296–376). He calls
Marriott “a character unique, beautiful, and saint-like,” and adds that
he “lived quite above the world, and, like Enoch, walked habitually with
God.”

<span id="ii-p9"></span>I feel very thankful that this Patristic Library
has so far been finished, and I am happy to announce that the “Christian
Literature Company” is sufficiently encouraged to publish the second
series, which will contain the Greek Fathers from Eusebius to John of
Damascus, and the Latin Fathers from Hilary to Gregory the Great. I
secured the coöperation of eminent patristic scholars of England and
America several years ago for the completion of this enterprise.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>

<span id="ii-p11"></span>                                       
                                                         PHILIP SCHAFF

<span id="ii-p12"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="ii-p12.1"></span>Union Theological Seminary,</span>

<span id="ii-p13"></span> *New York, Dec. 24, 1889.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Comparative Table of the Works of St. Chrysostom in the American
and Migne’s Editions.](1140002)
