[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140092)  [Next](1140094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xc"></span> <span id="iv.xc-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xc-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xc-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xc-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xc-p2.2"></span>[John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.xc-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p3"></span>“So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon
Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me more than these? He saith
unto Him, Yea, Lord, Thou knowest that I love Thee.”

<span id="iv.xc-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xc-p4.1"></span>There</span> are indeed many other things which
are able to give us boldness towards God, and to show us bright and
approved, but that which most of all brings good will from on high, is
tender care for our neighbor. Which therefore Christ requireth of Peter.
For when their eating was ended, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, “Simon, son
of Jonas, lovest thou Me more than these? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord,
Thou knowest that I love Thee.”

<span id="iv.xc-p5"></span> “He saith unto him, Feed My sheep.”  <span
id="fr_2613"></span>[2614](#fn_2613.md)

<span id="iv.xc-p7"></span> And why, having passed by the others, doth
He speak with Peter on these matters? He was the chosen one of the
Apostles, the mouth of the disciples, the leader of the band; on this
account also Paul went up upon a time to enquire of him rather than the
others. And at the same time to show him that he must now be of good
cheer, since the denial was done away,  <span
id="fr_2614"></span>[2615](#fn_2614.md) Jesus putteth into his hands the
chief authority  <span id="fr_2615"></span>[2616](#fn_2615.md) among the
brethren; and He bringeth not forward the denial, nor reproacheth him
with what had taken place, but saith, “If thou lovest Me, preside over
thy brethren, and the warm love which thou didst ever manifest, and in
which thou didst rejoice, show thou now; and the life which thou saidst
thou wouldest lay down for Me, now give for My sheep.”

<span id="iv.xc-p10"></span> When then having been asked once and again,
he called Him to witness who knoweth the secrets of the heart,  <span
id="fr_2616"></span>[2617](#fn_2616.md) and then was asked even a third
time,  <span id="fr_2617"></span>[2618](#fn_2617.md) he was troubled,
fearing a repetition of what had happened before, (for then, having been
strong in assertion, he was afterwards convicted,) and therefore he
again betaketh himself to Him. For the saying,

<span id="iv.xc-p13"></span> [John
21.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.xc-p13.1"></span> .
“Thou knowest all things,” meaneth, “things present, and things to
come.” Seest thou how he had become better and more sober, being no more
self-willed, or contradicting? For on this account he was troubled,
“lest perchance I think that I love, and love not, as before when I
thought and affirmed much, yet I was convicted at last.” But Jesus
asketh him the third time, and the third time giveth him the same
injunction, to show at what a price He setteth the care  <span
id="fr_2618"></span>[2619](#fn_2618.md) of His own sheep, and that this
especially is a sign of love towards Him. And having spoken to him
concerning the love towards Himself, He foretelleth to him the martyrdom
which he should undergo, showing that He said not to Him what he said as
distrusting, but as greatly trusting him; wishing besides to point out a
proof of love towards Him, and to instruct us in what manner especially
we ought to love Him. Wherefore He saith,

<span id="iv.xc-p15"></span> [John
21.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.xc-p15.1"></span> .
“When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou
wouldest; but when thou art old, others shall gird thee,  <span
id="fr_2619"></span>[2620](#fn_2619.md) and carry thee whither thou willest
not.”

<span id="iv.xc-p17"></span>And yet this he did will, and desired; on
which account also He hath revealed it to him. For since Peter had
continually said, “I will lay down my life for Thee” ( [John
13.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037)<span id="iv.xc-p17.1"></span> .md),
and, “Though I should die with Thee, yet will I not deny Thee” ( [Matt.
xxvi. 35](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#035.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p17.2"></span> ): He hath given him back  <span
id="fr_2620"></span>[2621](#fn_2620.md) his desire. What then is the,
“Whither thou willest not”? He speaketh of natural feeling, and the
necessity of  <span id="fr_2621"></span>[2622](#fn_2621.md) the flesh, and
that the soul is unwillingly torn away from the body. So that even
though the will were firm, yet still even then nature would be found
<span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span id="iv.xc-Page_330"></span> in
fault. For no one lays aside the body without feeling, God, as I said
before, having suitably ordained this, that violent deaths might not be
many. For if, as things are, the devil has been able to effect this, and
has led ten thousand to precipices and pits; had not the soul felt such
a desire for the body, the many would have rushed to this under any
common discouragement. The, “whither thou willest not,” is then the
expression of one signifying natural feeling.

<span id="iv.xc-p20"></span> But how after having said, “When thou wast
young,” doth He again say, “When thou art old”? For this is the
expression of one declaring that he was not then young; (nor was he; nor
yet old, but a man of middle age.  <span
id="fr_2622"></span>[2623](#fn_2622) .md) Wherefore then did He recall to
his memory his former life? Signifying, that this is the nature of what
belongeth to Him. In things of this life the young man is useful, the
old useless; “but in Mine,” He saith, “not so; but when old age hath
come on, then is excellence brighter, then is manliness more
illustrious, being nothing hindered by the time of life.” This He said
not to terrify, but to rouse Him; for He knew his love, and that he long
had yearned for this blessing. At the same time He declareth the kind of
death. For since Peter ever desired to be in the dangers which were for
His sake, “Be of good cheer,” He saith, “I will so satisfy thy desire,
that, what thou sufferedst not when young, thou must suffer when thou
art old.” Then the Evangelist, to rouse the hearer, has added,

<span id="iv.xc-p22"></span> [John
21.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#019.md)<span id="iv.xc-p22.1"></span> .
“This spake He, signifying by what death he should glorify God.”

<span id="iv.xc-p23"></span>He said not, “Should die,” but, “Should
glorify God,” that thou mayest learn, that to suffer for Christ, is
glory and honor to the sufferer.

<span id="iv.xc-p24"></span> “And when He had spoken this, He saith,
 <span id="fr_2623"></span>[2624](#fn_2623.md) Follow Me.”

<span id="iv.xc-p26"></span> Here again He alludeth to his tender
carefulness, and to his being very closely attached to Himself. And if
any should say, “How then did James receive the chair at Jerusalem?” I
would make this reply, that He appointed Peter  <span
id="fr_2624"></span>[2625](#fn_2624.md) teacher, not of the chair, but of
the world.

<span id="iv.xc-p28"></span> [John
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#021.md)<span id="iv.xc-p28.1"></span> .
“Then Peter turning about, seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved
following; who also leaned on His breast at supper; and saith,  <span
id="fr_2625"></span>[2626](#fn_2625.md) Lord, and what shall this man do?”

<span id="iv.xc-p30"></span>\[2.\] Wherefore hath he reminded us of that
reclining? Not without cause or in a chance way, but to show us what
boldness Peter had after the denial. For he who then did not dare to
question Jesus, but committed the office to another, was even entrusted
with the chief authority over the brethren, and not only doth not commit
to another what relates to himself, but himself now puts a question to
his Master concerning another. John is silent, but Peter speaks. He
showeth also here the love which he bare towards him; for Peter greatly
loved John, as is clear from what followed, and their close union is
shown through the whole Gospel, and in the Acts. When therefore Christ
had foretold great things to him, and committed the world to him, and
spake beforehand of his martyrdom, and testified that his love was
greater than that of the others, desiring to have John also to share
with him, he said, “And what shall this man do?” “Shall he not come the
same way with us?” And as at that other time not being able himself to
ask, he puts John forward, so now desiring to make him a return, and
supposing that he would desire to ask about the matters pertaining to
himself, but had not courage, he himself undertook the questioning. What
then saith Christ?

<span id="iv.xc-p31"></span> [John
21.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#022.md)<span id="iv.xc-p31.1"></span> .
“If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?”  <span
id="fr_2626"></span>[2627](#fn_2626.md)

<span id="iv.xc-p33"></span> Since he spake from strong affection, and
wishing not to be torn away from him,  <span
id="fr_2627"></span>[2628](#fn_2627.md) Christ, to show that however much
he might love, he could not go beyond His love, saith, “If I will that
he tarry—what is that to thee?” By these words teaching us not to be
impatient, nor curious beyond what seemeth good to Him. For because
Peter was ever hot, and springing forward to enquiries such as this, to
cut short his warmth, and to teach him not to enquire farther, He saith
this.

<span id="iv.xc-p35"></span> [John
21.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.xc-p35.1"></span> .
“Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple
should not die; yet Jesus said not  <span
id="fr_2628"></span>[2629](#fn_2628.md) that he shall not die; but, If I
will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?”

<span id="iv.xc-p37"></span> “Do not thou on any account suppose,” He
saith, “that I order your matters after a single rule.” And this He did
to withdraw them from  <span id="fr_2629"></span>[2630](#fn_2629.md) their
unseasonable sympathy for each other; for since they were about to
receive the charge of the world, it was necessary that they should no
longer be closely associated together; for assuredly this would have
been a great loss to the world. Wherefore He saith unto him, “Thou hast
had a work entrusted to thee, look to it, accomplish it, labor and
struggle. What if I will that he tarry here? Look thou to and care for
thine own matters.” And observe, I pray thee, here also the absence of
pride in the Evangelist; for having mentioned the opinion of the
disciples, he corrects it, as though they had not comprehended what
Jesus meant. “Jesus <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="iv.xc-Page_331"></span> said not,” he tells us, “that ‘he shall not
die, but, If I will that he tarry.’”

<span id="iv.xc-p39"></span> [John
21.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.xc-p39.1"></span> .
“This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these
things, and we know that his testimony is true.”

<span id="iv.xc-p40"></span> Why is it, that then, when none of the
others do so, he alone uses these words, and that for the second time,
witnessing to himself? for it seems to be offensive to the hearers. What
then is the cause? He is said to have been the last who came to writing,
Christ  <span id="fr_2630"></span>[2631](#fn_2630.md) having moved and
roused him to the work; and on this account he continually sets forth
his love, alluding to the cause by which he was impelled to write.
Therefore also he continually makes mention of it, to make his record
trustworthy, and to show, that, moved from thence,  <span
id="fr_2631"></span>[2632](#fn_2631.md) he came to this work. “And I know,”
he saith, “that the things are true which he saith. And if the many
believe not, it is permitted them to believe from this.” “From what?”
From that which is said next.

<span id="iv.xc-p43"></span> [John
21.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025.md)<span id="iv.xc-p43.1"></span> .
“There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could
not contain the books that should be written.”

<span id="iv.xc-p44"></span> “Whence it is clear that I could not have
written to court favor; for I who, when the miracles were so many, have
not even related so many as the others have, but omitting most of them,
have brought forward the plots of the Jews, the stonings, the hatred,
the insults, the revilings, and have shown how they called Him a
demoniac and a deceiver, certainly could not have acted to gain favor.
For it behooved one who courted favor to do the contrary, to reject
 <span id="fr_2632"></span>[2633](#fn_2632.md) the reproachful, to set
forth the glorious.” Since then he wrote what he did from full
assurance, he does not decline to produce his own testimony, challenging
men separately to enquire into and scrutinize the circumstances. For it
is a custom with us, when we think that we are speaking exactly true,
never to refuse our testimony; and if we do this, much more would he who
wrote by the Spirit. What then the other Apostles when they preached
declared, he also saith; “We are witnesses of the things spoken,  <span
id="fr_2633"></span>[2634](#fn_2633.md) and the Spirit which He hath given
 <span id="fr_2634"></span>[2635](#fn_2634.md) to them that obey Him.” (
[Acts v. 32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p47.3"></span> .) And besides, he was present at all, and did
not desert Him even when being crucified, and had His mother entrusted
to him; all which things are signs of his love for Him, and of his
knowing all things exactly. And if he has said that so many miracles had
taken place, marvel thou not, but, considering the ineffable power of
the Doer, receive with faith what is spoken. For it was as easy for Him
to do whatever He would, as it is for us to speak, or rather much
easier; for it sufficed that He should will only, and all followed.

<span id="iv.xc-p48"></span> \[3.\] Let us then give exact heed to the
words, and let us not cease to unfold and search them through, for it is
from continual application that we get some advantage. So shall we be
able to cleanse our life, so to cut up the thorns; for such a thing is
sin and worldly care, fruitless and painful. And as the thorn whatever
way it is held pricks the holder, so the things of this life, on
whatever side they be laid hold of, give pain to him who hugs and
cherishes them. Not such are spiritual things; they resemble a pearl,
whichever way thou turn it, it delights the eyes. As thus. A man hath
done a deed of mercy; he not only is fed with hopes of the future, but
also is cheered by the good things here, being everywhere full of
confidence, and doing all with much boldness. He hath got the better of
an evil desire; even before obtaining the Kingdom, he hath already
received the fruit here, being praised and approved,  <span
id="fr_2635"></span>[2636](#fn_2635.md) before all others,  <span
id="fr_2636"></span>[2637](#fn_2636.md) by his own conscience. And every
good work is of this nature; just as conscience also punishes wicked
deeds here, even before the pit. For if, after sinning, thou considerest
the future, thou becomest afraid and tremblest, though no man punish
thee; if the present, thou hast many enemies, and livest in suspicion,
and canst not henceforth even look in the face those who have wronged
thee, or rather, those who have not wronged thee.  <span
id="fr_2637"></span>[2638](#fn_2637.md) For we do not in the case of those
evil deeds reap so much pleasure, as we do despondency, when conscience
cries out against us, men, without, condemn us, God is angered, the pit
travailing to receive us, our thoughts not at rest. A heavy, a heavy and
a burdensome thing is sin, harder to bear than any lead. He at least who
hath any sense of it will not be able to look up ever so little, though
he be very dull. Thus, for instance, Ahab, though very impious, when he
felt this, walked bending downwards, crushed and afflicted. On this
account he clothed himself in sackcloth, and shed fountains of tears. (
[1 Kings xxi. 27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#027.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p51.2"></span> .) If we do this, and grieve as he did, we
shall put off our faults as did Zacchæus, and we too shall obtain some
pardon. ( [Luke xix. 9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p51.3"></span> .) For as in the case of tumors,  <span
id="fr_2638"></span>[2639](#fn_2638.md) and fistulous ulcers,  <span
id="fr_2639"></span>[2640](#fn_2639.md) if one stay not first the discharge
which runs over and inflames the wound, how many soever remedies he
applies, while the source of the evil is not stopped, he doth all in
vain; so too if we stay not our hand from covetousness, and check not
that evil afflux of wealth, although we give alms, we do all to no <span
id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span id="iv.xc-Page_332"></span> purpose.
For that which was healed by it,  <span
id="fr_2640"></span>[2641](#fn_2640.md) covetousness coming after is wont
to overwhelm  <span id="fr_2641"></span>[2642](#fn_2641.md) and spoil, and
to make harder to heal than before. Let us then cease from rapine, and
so do alms. But if we betake ourselves to precipices, how shall we be
able to recover ourselves?  <span id="fr_2642"></span>[2643](#fn_2642.md)
for if one party (that is, alms-doing) were to pull at a falling man
from above, while another was forcibly dragging him from below, the only
result of such a struggle would be, that the man would be torn asunder.
That we may not suffer this, nor, while covetousness weighs us down from
below, alms-doing depart and leave us, let us lighten ourselves, and
spread our wings,  <span id="fr_2643"></span>[2644](#fn_2643.md) that
having been perfected by the riddance of evil things, and the practice
of good,  <span id="fr_2644"></span>[2645](#fn_2644.md) we may obtain the
goods everlasting, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,
dominion, and honor, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2613"></span>[329:2614](1140093.htm#fr_2613.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p6"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p6.1"></span>My lambs,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p6.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2614"></span>[329:2615](1140093.htm#fr_2614.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p8.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p8.2"></span>driven away.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2615"></span>[329:2616](1140093.htm#fr_2615.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p9.1"></span>προστασίαν</span>

<span id="fn_2616"></span>[329:2617](1140093.htm#fr_2616.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p11"></span> [John
21.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.xc-p11.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p11.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p11.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p11.4"></span>He saith to him again the second time, Simon,
son of Jonas, lovest thou Me? He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord, Thou knowest
that I love Thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p11.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2617"></span>[329:2618](1140093.htm#fr_2617.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p11.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p12"></span> [John
21.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.xc-p12.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p12.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p12.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p12.4"></span>He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of
Jonas, lovest thou Me? Peter was grieved because He said unto him the
third time, Lovest thou Me; and he said unto Him, Lord, Thou knowest all
things; Thou knowest that I love Thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my
sheep.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p12.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2618"></span>[329:2619](1140093.htm#fr_2618.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p14.1"></span>προστασίαν</span>

<span id="fn_2619"></span>[329:2620](1140093.htm#fr_2619.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p16"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p16.1"></span>when thou art old thou shalt stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird thee,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p16.2"></span>&c. N.T. and some <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xc-p16.3"></span>mss.</span> </span>

<span id="fn_2620"></span>[329:2621](1140093.htm#fr_2620.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p18.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p18.2"></span>given him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2621"></span>[329:2622](1140093.htm#fr_2621.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p19.1"></span>i.e. weakness inseparable from.</span>

<span id="fn_2622"></span>[330:2623](1140093.htm#fr_2622.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p21.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p21.2"></span>a perfect man.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2623"></span>[330:2624](1140093.htm#fr_2623.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p25"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p25.1"></span>saith unto him,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p25.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2624"></span>[330:2625](1140093.htm#fr_2624.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p27.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p27.2"></span>this man.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2625"></span>[330:2626](1140093.htm#fr_2625.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p29"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p29.1"></span>at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that
betrayeth Thee? Peter seeing him saith.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p29.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2626"></span>[330:2627](1140093.htm#fr_2626.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p32"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p32.1"></span>to thee? Follow thou Me.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p32.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2627"></span>[330:2628](1140093.htm#fr_2627.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p34.1"></span>i.e. St. John.</span>

<span id="fn_2628"></span>[330:2629](1140093.htm#fr_2628.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p36"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p36.1"></span>said not unto him,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p36.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2629"></span>[330:2630](1140093.htm#fr_2629.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p38.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p38.2"></span>on account of.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2630"></span>[331:2631](1140093.htm#fr_2630.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p41.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p41.2"></span>God.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2631"></span>[331:2632](1140093.htm#fr_2631.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p41.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p42.1"></span>i.e. by his love.</span>

<span id="fn_2632"></span>[331:2633](1140093.htm#fr_2632.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p45.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p45.2"></span>conceal.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2633"></span>[331:2634](1140093.htm#fr_2633.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p46"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p46.1"></span>His witnesses of these words.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2634"></span>[331:2635](1140093.htm#fr_2634.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p47"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p47.1"></span>Holy Spirit which God hath given.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p47.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2635"></span>[331:2636](1140093.htm#fr_2635.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p49.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p49.2"></span>admired.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2636"></span>[331:2637](1140093.htm#fr_2636.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p50.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p50.2"></span>all other things.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2637"></span>[331:2638](1140093.htm#fr_2637.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p51.1"></span>i.e. in wronging thee, have not wronged thee,
because thou deservest punishment.</span>

<span id="fn_2638"></span>[331:2639](1140093.htm#fr_2638.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p51.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p52.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p52.2"></span>diseases.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2639"></span>[331:2640](1140093.htm#fr_2639.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p53.1"></span>συρίγγων</span>

<span id="fn_2640"></span>[332:2641](1140093.htm#fr_2640.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p54.1"></span>i.e. by the alms.</span>

<span id="fn_2641"></span>[332:2642](1140093.htm#fr_2641.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p55.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p55.2"></span>undo.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2642"></span>[332:2643](1140093.htm#fr_2642.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p56.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p56.2"></span>recover breath.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2643"></span>[332:2644](1140093.htm#fr_2643.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p56.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p57.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p57.2"></span>expand ourselves.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2644"></span>[332:2645](1140093.htm#fr_2644.md) <span
id="iv.xc-p57.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xc-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p58.1"></span>Sav. and Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xc-p58.2"></span>everlasting goods.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p58.3"></span> But <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xc-p58.4"></span>mss.</span> omit</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xc-p58.5"></span>αἰωνίων</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Homilies of St. John Chrysostom on the Epistle to the
Hebrews.](1140094.md)
