[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140107)  [Next](1140109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xiv"></span> <span id="v.xiv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xiv-p1.1"></span>Homily X.</span>

<span id="v.xiv-p2"></span> <span id="v.xiv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xiv-p2.2"></span>[Heb.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008)<span id="v.xiv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p3"></span> *“For the Earth which drinketh in the rain
that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom
it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God. But if it bear*  <span
id="fr_2892"></span>[2893](#fn_2892) *thorns and briars it is rejected,
and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.”*

<span id="v.xiv-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xiv-p5.1"></span>Let</span> us hear the oracles of God with fear,
with fear and much trembling. For (it is said) “Serve the Lord with
fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling.” ( [Ps. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011) <span id="v.xiv-p5.2"></span> .)
 But if even our joy and our exultation ought to be “with trembling,” of
what punishment are we not worthy, if we listen not with terror to what
is said, when the things spoken, as now, are themselves fearful?

<span id="v.xiv-p6"></span> For having said that “it is impossible for
those who have fallen away” to be baptized a second time, and to receive
remission through the laver, and having pointed out the awfulness of the
case, he goes on: “for the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh
oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom it is
dressed, receiveth blessing from God. But if it bear thorns and
thistles, it is rejected,  <span id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893)
and nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned.”

<span id="v.xiv-p8"></span>Let us then fear, beloved! This threat is not
Paul’s, these words are not of man: they are of the Holy Ghost, of
Christ that speaketh in him. Is there then any one that is clear from
these thorns? And even if we were clear, not even so ought we to be
confident, but to fear and tremble lest at any time thorns should spring
up in us. But when we are “thorns and thistles” through and through,
whence (tell me) are we confident? And are becoming supine?  What is it
which makes us inert? If “he that thinketh he standeth” ought to fear
“lest he fall”; for <span id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="v.xiv-Page_414"></span> (he says) “Let him that thinketh he
standeth, take heed lest he fall” ( [1 Cor. x.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012) <span id="v.xiv-p8.1"></span> ); he
that falleth, how anxious ought he to be that he may rise up again! If
Paul fears, “lest that by any means, when he had preached to others, he
himself should be a castaway” ( [1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027) <span id="v.xiv-p8.2"></span> );
and he who had been so approved is afraid lest he should become
disapproved:  <span id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894) what pardon
shall we have who are already disapproved, if we have no fear, but
fulfill our Christianity as a custom, and for form’s sake. Let us then
fear, beloved: “For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven.” ( [Rom.
i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018) <span id="v.xiv-p9.21"></span>
.) Let us fear, for it “is revealed” not “against impiety” only, but
“against all unrighteousness.” What is “against all unrighteousness”?
\[Against all\] both small and great.

<span id="v.xiv-p10"></span>\[2.\] In this passage he intimates the
lovingkindness of God towards man: and the teaching \[of the Gospel\] he
calls “rain”: and what he said above, “when for the time ye ought to be
teachers” ( [Heb. 5.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span
id="v.xiv-p10.1"></span> ), this he says here also. Indeed in many
places the Scripture calls the teaching “rain.” For (it says) “I will
command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it” ( [Isa. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006) <span id="v.xiv-p10.2"></span> ),
speaking of “the vineyard.” The same which in another place it calls “a
famine of bread, and a thirst of water.” ( [Amos viii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011) <span id="v.xiv-p10.3"></span> .)
And again, “The river of God is full of waters.” ( [Ps. lxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009) <span id="v.xiv-p10.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiv-p11"></span>“For land,” he says, “which drinketh in the
rain that cometh oft upon it.” Here he shows that they received and
drank in the word, yea and often enjoyed this, and yet even so they were
not profited. For if (he means) thou hadst not been tilled, if thou
hadst enjoyed no rains, the evil would not have been so great.  For (it
is said) “If I had not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin.”
( [John xv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022) <span
id="v.xiv-p11.1"></span> .) But if thou hast often drunk and received
\[nourishment\], wherefore hast thou brought forth other things instead
of fruits? For (it is said) “I waited that it should bring forth grapes,
and it brought forth thorns.” ( [Isa. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002) <span id="v.xiv-p11.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiv-p12"></span>Thou seest that everywhere the Scripture
calleth sins “thorns.” For David also saith, “I was turned into mourning
when a thorn was fixed in me.” ( [Ps. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#004) <span id="v.xiv-p12.1"></span> , so
LXX.) For it does not simply come on us, but is fixed in; and even if
but a little of it remain in, even if we take it not out entirely, that
little of itself in like manner causes pain, as in the case of a thorn.
 And why do I say, ‘that little of itself’? Even after it has been taken
out, it leaves therein for a long time the pain of the wound. And much
care and treatment is necessary, that we may be perfectly freed from it.
For it is not enough merely to take away the sin, it is necessary also
to heal the wounded place.

<span id="v.xiv-p13"></span>But I fear however lest the things said
apply to us more than to others. “For,” he says, “the earth which
drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it.” We are ever drinking,
ever hearing, but “when the sun is risen” ( [Matt. xiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#006) <span id="v.xiv-p13.1"></span> ) we
straightway lose our moisture, and therefore bring forth thorns. What
then are the thorns? Let us hear Christ saying, that “the care of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word, and it becometh
unfruitful.” ( [Matt. xiii. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#022) <span
id="v.xiv-p13.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiv-p14"></span>\[3.\] “For the earth which drinketh in the
rain that cometh oft upon it,” he says, “and bringeth forth meet herbs.”
Because nothing is so meet as purity of life, nothing so suitable as the
best life, nothing so meet as virtue.

<span id="v.xiv-p15"></span>“And bringeth forth” (saith he) “herbs meet
for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God.” Here he
says that God is the cause of all things, giving the heathen a blow, who
ascribed the production of fruits to the power of the earth. For (he
says) it is not the hands of the husbandman which stir up the earth to
bear fruits, but the command from God. Therefore he says, “receives
blessing from God.”

<span id="v.xiv-p16"></span> And see how in speaking of the thorns, he
said not, “bringing forth  <span id="fr_2895"></span>[2896](#fn_2895)
thorns,” nor did he use this word expressive of what is useful; but
what? “Bearing”  <span id="fr_2896"></span>[2897](#fn_2896) \[literally
“putting out”\] “thorns,” as if one should say, “forcing out,” “throwing
out.”

<span id="v.xiv-p19"></span>“Rejected” (he says) “and nigh unto
cursing.” Oh! how great consolation in this word! For he said “nigh unto
cursing,” not “a curse.” Now he that hath not yet fallen into a curse,
but is come to be near \[thereto\], may also come to be far off
\[therefrom\].

<span id="v.xiv-p20"></span>And not by this only did he encourage them,
but also by what follows. For he did not say “rejected and nigh unto
cursing,” “which shall be burned,” but what? “Whose end is to be
burned,” if he continue \[such\] (he means) unto the end. So that, if we
cut out and burn the thorns, we shall be able to enjoy those good things
innumerable and to become approved, and to partake of blessing.

<span id="v.xiv-p21"></span> And with good reason did he call sin “a
thistle,”  <span id="fr_2897"></span>[2898](#fn_2897) saying “that which
beareth thorns and thistles”; for on whatever side you lay hold on it,
it wounds and stings, and it is unpleasant even to look at.

<span id="v.xiv-p23"></span>\[4.\] Having therefore sufficiently rebuked
them, and alarmed and wounded them, he in turn heals them, so as not to
cast them down too much, and make them supine. For he that <span
id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span id="v.xiv-Page_415"></span> strikes
one that is “dull,” makes him more dull. So then he neither flatters
them throughout, lest he should make them supine, nor does he wound them
throughout, but having inserted a little to wound them, he applies much
to heal in what follows.

<span id="v.xiv-p24"></span>For what does he say? We speak not these
things, as having condemned you, nor as thinking you to be full of
thorns, but fearing lest this should come to pass. For it is better to
terrify you by words, that ye may not suffer by the realities. And this
is specially of Paul’s wisdom.

<span id="v.xiv-p25"></span>Moreover he did not say, We think, or, we
conjecture, or, we expect, or, we hope, but what? ( [Heb.
6.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#009)<span id="v.xiv-p25.1"></span> )
“But beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
accompany salvation, though we thus speak.” Which word he also used in
writing to the Galatians: “But I am persuaded of you in the Lord, that
ye will be none otherwise minded.” ( [Gal. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#010) <span id="v.xiv-p25.2"></span> .)
For in that instance, inasmuch as they were greatly to be condemned, and
he could not praise them from things present, he does it from things
future (“that ye will be none otherwise minded,” he says): he said not,
ye are, but “ye will be none otherwise minded.” But here he encourages
them from things present. “We are persuaded better things of you,
beloved, and things that accompany to salvation, though we thus speak.”
And since he was not able to say so much from things present, he
confirms his consolation from things past; and says,

<span id="v.xiv-p26"></span> [Heb.
6.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010)<span id="v.xiv-p26.1"></span> .
“For God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and  <span
id="fr_2898"></span>[2899](#fn_2898) the love, which ye have showed
toward His name, in that ye have ministered unto the saints and do
minister.” O how did he here restore their spirit, and give them fresh
strength, by reminding them of former things, and bringing them to the
necessity of not supposing that God had forgotten. (For he cannot but
sin who is not fully assured concerning his hope, and says that God is
unrighteous. Accordingly he obliged them by all means to look forward to
those future things. For one who despairs of present things, and has
given up exerting himself, may be restored by \[the prospect of\] things
future.) As he himself also said in writing to the Galatians, “Ye did
run well” ( [Gal. v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007) <span
id="v.xiv-p27.6"></span> ): and again, “Have ye suffered so many things
in vain? if it be yet in vain.” ( [Gal. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004) <span id="v.xiv-p27.7"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiv-p28"></span>And as in this place he puts the praise with
the reproof, saying, “When for the time ye ought to be teachers” ( [Heb.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="v.xiv-p28.1"></span> ),
so also there, “I marvel that ye are so soon removed.” ( [Gal. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#006) <span id="v.xiv-p28.2"></span> .)
With the reproof is the praise. For respecting great things we marvel,
when they fail. Thou seest that praise is concealed under the accusation
and the blame. Nor does he say this concerning himself only, but also
concerning all. For he said not, I am persuaded, but “we are persuaded
better things of you,” even good things (he means). He says this either
in regard to matters of conduct, or to the recompense. In the next
place, having said above, that it is “rejected and nigh unto a curse,”
and that it “shall be for burning,” he says, we do not by any means
speak this of you. “For God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and
love.” ( [Heb. 6.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#010)<span
id="v.xiv-p28.3"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiv-p29"></span>\[5.\] Why then did we say these things? (
[Heb. 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#012)<span id="v.xiv-p29.1"></span> )
“But we desire that everyone of you do show the same diligence to the
full assurance of hope unto the end; that ye be not slothful, but
followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”

<span id="v.xiv-p30"></span>“We desire,” he says, and we do not
therefore merely labor for, or even so far as words go, wish this. But
what? “We desire” that ye should hold fast to virtue, not as condemning
your former conduct (he means), but fearing for the future. And he did
not say, ‘not as condemning your former conduct, but your present; for
ye have fainted, ye are become too indolent’; but see how gently he
indicated it, and did not wound them.

<span id="v.xiv-p31"></span>For what does he say? “But we desire that
every one of you do show the same diligence unto the end.” For this is
the admirable part of Paul’s wisdom, that he does not expressly show
that they “had” given in, that they “had” become negligent. For when he
says, “We desire that every one of you”—it is as if one should say, I
wish thee to be always in earnest; and such as thou wert before, such to
be now also, and for the time to come. For this made his reproof more
gentle and easy to be received.

<span id="v.xiv-p32"></span>And he did not say, “I will,” which would
have been expressive of the authority of a teacher, but what is
expressive of the affection of a father, and what is more than
“willing,” “we desire.” All but saying, Pardon us, even if we say what
is distasteful.

<span id="v.xiv-p33"></span>“We desire that every one of you do show the
same diligence to the full assurance of your hope unto the end.” Hope
(he means) carries us through: it recovers us again. Be not wearied out,
do not despair, lest your hope be in vain. For he that worketh good
hopeth also good, and never despairs of himself.

<span id="v.xiv-p34"></span> “That ye may not become dull.”  <span
id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899) Still  <span
id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900) “become”; and yet he said above,
“seeing ye are become dull  <span id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901)
of hearing.” ( [Heb. 5.11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011)<span
id="v.xiv-p37.10"></span> .) Ob <span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="v.xiv-Page_416"></span> serve however how he limited the dullness to
the hearing. And here he hints the very same thing; instead of ‘that ye
may not continue in it,’ he says \[this\]. But again he leads on to that
future time for which they were not yet responsible; saying in effect
“that ye may not become too slothful”: since for that which is not yet
come we could not be responsible. For he who in regard to the present
time is exhorted to be in earnest, as being remiss, will perhaps become
even more slothful, but he who is exhorted with reference to the future,
not so.

<span id="v.xiv-p38"></span>“We desire” (he says) “that every one of
you.” Great is his affection for them: he cares equally for great and
small; moreover he knows all, and overlooks no one, but shows the same
tender care for each, and equal value for all: from which cause also he
the rather persuaded them to receive what was distasteful in his words.

<span id="v.xiv-p39"></span>“That ye be not slothful,” he says. For as
inactivity hurts the body, so also inactivity as to what is good renders
the soul more supine and feeble.

<span id="v.xiv-p40"></span> \[6.\] “But followers” (he says) “of them,
who through faith and patience inherit the promises.” And who they are,
he tells afterwards. He said before, “Imitate your own former
well-doings.” Then, lest they should say, What? He leads them back to
the Patriarch: bringing before them examples of well-doing indeed from
their own history,  <span id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902) but of
the thought of being forsaken, from the Patriarch; that they might not
suppose that they were disregarded and forsaken as worthy of no account,
but might know that it is \[the portion\] of the very noblest men to
make the journey of life through trials; and that God has thus dealt
with great and admirable men.

<span id="v.xiv-p42"></span>Now we ought (he says) to bear all things
with patience: for this also is believing: whereas if He say that He
gives and thou immediately receivest, how hast thou also believed? Since
in that case this is no longer of thy faith, but of Me, the Giver. But
if I say that I give, and give after an hundred years, and thou hast not
despaired; then hast thou accounted Me worthy to be believed, then thou
hast the right opinion concerning Me. Thou seest that oftentimes
unbelief arises not from want of hope only, but also from
faintheartedness, and want of patience, not from condemning him who made
the promise.

<span id="v.xiv-p43"></span>“For God” (he says) “is not unrighteous to
forget your love” and the zeal “which ye have showed toward His Name, in
that ye have ministered unto the saints, and do minister.” He testifies
great things of them, not deeds only; but deeds done with alacrity,
which he says also in another place, “and not only so, but they gave
themselves also to the Lord and to us.” ( [2 Cor. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005) <span id="v.xiv-p43.1"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiv-p44"></span> “Which” (he says) “ye have showed toward
His Name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister.”
See how again he soothes them, by adding “and do minister.” Still even
at this time (he says) ye are ministering, and he raises them up by
showing that they had done \[what they did\] not to them \[the saints\],
but to God. “Which ye have showed” (he says); and he said not “unto the
saints,” but “towards God,” for this is “toward His Name.” It is for His
Name’s sake (he means) that ye have done all. He therefore who has the
enjoyment from you of  <span id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903) so
great zeal and love, will never despise you nor forget you.

<span id="v.xiv-p46"></span>\[7.\] Hearing these things, let us, I
beseech you, “minister to the saints.” For every believer is a saint in
that he is a believer. Though he be a person living in the world, he is
a saint. “For” (he says) “the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the
wife, and the unbelieving wife by the husband.” ( [1 Cor. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#014) <span id="v.xiv-p46.1"></span> .)
See how the faith makes the saintship. If then we see even a secular
person in misfortune, let us stretch out a hand \[to him\]. Let us not
be zealous for those only who dwell in the mountains; they are indeed
saints both in manner of life and in faith; these others however are
saints by their faith, and many of them also in manner of life. Let us
not, if we see a monk \[cast\] into prison, in that case go in; but if
it be a secular person, refuse to go in. He also is a saint and a
brother.

<span id="v.xiv-p47"></span>What then (you say) if he be unclean and
polluted? Listen to Christ saying, “Judge not that ye be not judged.” (
[Matt. vii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001) <span
id="v.xiv-p47.1"></span> .) Do thou act for <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xiv-p47.2"></span>God’s</span> sake. Nay, what am I saying? Even
if we see a heathen in misfortune, we ought to show kindness to him, and
to every man without exception who is in misfortunes, and much more to a
believer who is in the world. Listen to Paul, saying, “Do good unto all
men, but especially to those who are of the household of faith.” ( [Gal.
vi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010) <span id="v.xiv-p47.3"></span>
.)

<span id="v.xiv-p48"></span> But I know not whence this \[notion\] has
been introduced, or whence this custom hath prevailed. For he that only
seeks after the solitaries, and is willing to do good to them alone, and
with regard to others on the contrary is over-curious in his enquiries,
and says, ‘unless he be worthy,  <span
id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904) unless he be righteous, unless he
work miracles, I stretch out no hand’; \[such an one\] has taken away
the greater part of charity,  <span id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905)
yea and in time he will in turn destroy the very thing itself. And yet
that is charity,  <span id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906) \[which is
shown\] <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="v.xiv-Page_417"></span> towards sinners, towards the guilty. For
this is charity,  <span id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907) not the
pitying those who have done well, but those who have done wrong.

<span id="v.xiv-p53"></span>\[8.\] And that thou mayest understand this,
listen to the Parable: “A certain man” (it is said) “went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves” ( [Luke x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030) <span id="v.xiv-p53.1"></span> ,
&c.); and when they had beaten him, they left him by the way-side,
having badly bruised him. A certain Levite came, and when he saw him, he
passed by; A priest came, and when he saw him, he hastened past; a
certain Samaritan came, and bestowed great care upon him. For he “bound
up his wounds” ( [Luke x. 34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034) <span
id="v.xiv-p53.2"></span> ), dropped oil on them, set him upon his ass,
“brought him to the inn, said to the host, Take care of him” ( [Luke x.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#035) <span id="v.xiv-p53.3"></span> );
and (observe his great liberality), “and I,” he says, “will give thee
whatsoever thou shalt expend.” Who then is his neighbor? “He,” it is
said, “that showed mercy on him. Go thou then also,” He says, “and do
likewise.” ( [Luke x. 37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#037) <span
id="v.xiv-p53.4"></span> .) And see what a parable He spake. He said not
that a Jew did \[so and so\] to a Samaritan, but that a Samaritan showed
all that liberality. Having then heard these things, let us not care
only for “those that are of the household of faith” ( [Gal. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010) <span id="v.xiv-p53.5"></span> ),
and neglect others. So then also thou, if thou see any one in
affliction, be not curious to enquire further. His being in affliction
involves a just claim on thy aid.  <span
id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908) For if when thou seest an ass
choking thou raisest him up, and dost not curiously enquire whose he is,
much more about a man one ought not to be over-curious in enquiring
whose he is. He is God’s, be he heathen or be he Jew; since even if he
is an unbeliever, still he needs help. For if indeed it had been
committed to thee to enquire and to judge, thou wouldst have well said
thus, but, as it is, his misfortune does not suffer thee to search out
these things. For if even about men in good health it is not right to be
over-curious, nor to be a busybody in other men’s matters, much less
about those that are in affliction.

<span id="v.xiv-p55"></span>\[9.\] But on another view what \[shall we
say\]? Didst thou see him in prosperity, in high esteem, that thou
shouldst say that he is wicked and worthless? But if thou seest him in
affliction, do not say that he is wicked. For when a man is in high
credit, we fairly say these things; but when he is in calamity, and
needs help, it is not right to say that he is wicked. For this is
cruelty, inhumanity, and arrogance. Tell me what was ever more
iniquitous than the Jews. But nevertheless while God punished them, and
that justly, yea, very justly, yet He approved of those who had
compassion on them, and those who rejoiced over them He punished. (
[Amos vi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006) <span
id="v.xiv-p55.1"></span> .) For “they were not grieved,” it is said, “at
the affliction of Joseph.”

<span id="v.xiv-p56"></span>And again it is said “Redeem \[Ransom\]
those who are ready to be slain: spare not.” ( [Prov. xxiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011) <span id="v.xiv-p56.1"></span> .)
(He said not, enquire curiously, and learn who he is; and yet, for the
most part, they who are led away to execution are wicked,) for this
especially is charity. For he that doeth good to a friend, doeth it not
altogether for God’s sake: but he that \[doeth good\] to one unknown,
this man acts purely for God’s sake. “Do not spare” thy money, even if
it be necessary to spend all, yet give.

<span id="v.xiv-p57"></span> But we, when we see persons in extreme
distress,  <span id="fr_2909"></span>[2910](#fn_2909) bewailing
themselves, suffering things more grievous than ten thousand deaths, and
oftentimes unjustly, we \[I say\] are sparing of our money, and
unsparing of our brethren; we are careful of lifeless things, but
neglect the living soul. And yet Paul says, “in meekness instruct those
that oppose themselves, if peradventure God should give them repentance
to the acknowledging of the truth, and they may recover themselves out
of the snare of the devil who are taken captive by him, at His will.” (
[2 Tim. 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#026)<span id="v.xiv-p58.3"></span> .)
“If peradventure,” he says; thou seest of how great long-suffering the
word is full.

<span id="v.xiv-p59"></span>Let us also imitate Him, and despair of no
one. For the fishermen too, when they have cast many times \[suppose
it\], have not succeeded; but afterwards having cast again, have gained
all. So we also expect that ye will all at once show to us ripe fruit.
For the husbandman too, after he has sown, waits one day or two days,
and is a long while in expectation: and all at once he sees the fruits
springing up on every side. This we expect will take place in your case
also by the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom
to the Father and also to the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and
for ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2892"></span>[413:2893](1140108.htm#fr_2892) <span
id="v.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p4.1"></span>The received version is necessarily altered here:
St. Chrysostom’s commentary will be more readily understood if it is
kept in mind that the exact translation would be as below: </span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p4.2"></span>the land which hath
drunk in,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p4.3"></span>&c.,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p4.4"></span>partaketh of blessing,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p4.5"></span>&c. </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p4.6"></span>But if it bear thorns and
thistles, it is reprobate, and nigh unto a curse, whose end is for
burning.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p4.7"></span>
\[There seems to be no need of this slight correction; the present
participle of the Greek is even more closely represented by the A.V.
than by the above translation. But in view of this note, it must be
allowed to stand.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[413:2894](1140108.htm#fr_2893) <span
id="v.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p7.2"></span>δόκιμος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p7.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p7.4"></span>reprobate.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[414:2895](1140108.htm#fr_2894) <span
id="v.xiv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p9.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p9.2"></span>δόκιμος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p9.3"></span>. In the original it is one and the same word
which in the text,</span> <span id="v.xiv-p9.4"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.5"></span>[Heb. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008)<span id="v.xiv-p9.6"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.7"></span>, is translated</span>
“ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.8"></span>rejected,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.9"></span>in</span> <span
id="v.xiv-p9.10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p9.11"></span>[1 Cor. ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span
id="v.xiv-p9.12"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p9.13"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p9.14"></span>a castaway</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p9.15"></span>; it is in this clause opposed to</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.16"></span>δόκιμος</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.17"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.18"></span>approved,</span> ” “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.19"></span>accepted.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p9.20"></span> It means rejected after
testing, as in case of metals: which may take place, as St. Chrys.
implies in this passage, either here or hereafter; either for a time or
for eternity.</span>

<span id="fn_2895"></span>[414:2896](1140108.htm#fr_2895) <span
id="v.xiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p17.1"></span>τίκτουσα</span>

<span id="fn_2896"></span>[414:2897](1140108.htm#fr_2896) <span
id="v.xiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p18.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p18.2"></span>κφέρουσα</span>

<span id="fn_2897"></span>[414:2898](1140108.htm#fr_2897) <span
id="v.xiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p22.1"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p22.2"></span>τρίβολον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p22.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p22.4"></span>a burr.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p22.5"></span>\]</span>

<span id="fn_2898"></span>[415:2899](1140108.htm#fr_2898) <span
id="v.xiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p27.1"></span>Sav. and Ben. here, and in other places where
the text is cited, insert</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p27.2"></span>τοῦ κόπου</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p27.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p27.4"></span>the labor of love,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p27.5"></span>&c. These words are probably
not part of the sacred text. They are not referred to by St.
Chrysostom.</span>

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[415:2900](1140108.htm#fr_2899) <span
id="v.xiv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p35.1"></span>νωθροὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p35.2"></span>. The same word is translated</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p35.3"></span>slothful</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p35.4"></span>and</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p35.5"></span>dull</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p35.6"></span>in these two passages. It
means</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p35.7"></span>sluggish,</span> ” “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p35.8"></span>stupid,</span> ” “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p35.9"></span>without quickness in perception or energy in
action.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[415:2901](1140108.htm#fr_2900) <span
id="v.xiv-p35.10"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p36.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p36.2"></span>κμὴν</span>

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[415:2902](1140108.htm#fr_2901) <span
id="v.xiv-p36.3"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p37.1"></span>νωθροὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p37.2"></span>. The same word is translated</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p37.3"></span>slothful</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p37.4"></span>and</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p37.5"></span>dull</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p37.6"></span>in these two passages. It
means</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p37.7"></span>sluggish,</span> ” “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p37.8"></span>stupid,</span> ” “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p37.9"></span>without quickness in perception or energy in
action.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[416:2903](1140108.htm#fr_2902) <span
id="v.xiv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p41.1"></span>οἴκοθεν</span>

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[416:2904](1140108.htm#fr_2903) <span
id="v.xiv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p45.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p45.2"></span>πολαύων</span>

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[416:2905](1140108.htm#fr_2904) <span
id="v.xiv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p49.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p49.2"></span>ὰ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p49.3"></span>ν μἡ ᾖ ἄξιος, ἐὰν μὴ ᾖ δίκαιος</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p49.4"></span>. Mr. Field retains</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p49.5"></span>μὴ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p49.6"></span>in these clauses, in
accordance with the common editions, though all the <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xiv-p49.7"></span>mss.</span> omit the negative
in the first clause, and the best <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xiv-p49.8"></span>mss.</span> in the second also, and it was not
read by Mutianus. If it be omitted, the passage would run thus,</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiv-p49.9"></span>and says, If he be
worthy, if he be righteous \[I will help him\]. Unless he work miracles
I stretch out no hand,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p49.10"></span>&c.; which seems to give a good sense.</span>

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[416:2906](1140108.htm#fr_2905) <span
id="v.xiv-p49.11"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p50.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p50.2"></span>λεημοσύνη</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p50.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p50.4"></span>mercifulness.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p50.5"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p50.6"></span>almsgiving.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[416:2907](1140108.htm#fr_2906) <span
id="v.xiv-p50.7"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p51.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p51.2"></span>λεημοσύνη</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p51.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p51.4"></span>mercifulness.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p51.5"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p51.6"></span>almsgiving.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[417:2908](1140108.htm#fr_2907) <span
id="v.xiv-p51.7"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p52.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p52.2"></span>λεημοσύνη</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p52.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p52.4"></span>mercifulness.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p52.5"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p52.6"></span>almsgiving.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[417:2909](1140108.htm#fr_2908) <span
id="v.xiv-p53.6"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p54.1"></span>τὸ δικαίωμα τῆς βοηθείας</span>

<span id="fn_2909"></span>[417:2910](1140108.htm#fr_2909) <span
id="v.xiv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiv-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p58.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiv-p58.2"></span>γχομένους</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XI](1140109)
