[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140102)  [Next](1140104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ix"></span> <span id="v.ix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.ix-p1.1"></span>Homily V.</span>

<span id="v.ix-p2"></span> <span id="v.ix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.ix-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews ii.
16-17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#016.md)<span
id="v.ix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.ix-p3"></span> *“For verily He taketh not hold of Angels,
but of the seed of Abraham He taketh hold.*  <span
id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799.md) *Wherefore in all things it
behooved Him to be made like unto His brethren.”*

<span id="v.ix-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ix-p5.1"></span>Paul</span> wishing to show the great kindness of
God towards man, and the Love which He had for the human race, after
saying: “Forasmuch then as the children were partakers of blood and
flesh, He also Himself likewise took part of the same” ( [Heb.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014.md)<span id="v.ix-p5.2"></span>
)—follows up the subject in this passage. For do not regard lightly what
is spoken, nor think this merely a slight \[matter\], His taking on Him
our flesh. He granted not this to Angels; “For verily He taketh not hold
of Angels, but of the seed of Abraham.” What is it that he saith? He
took not on Him an Angel’s nature, but man’s. But what is “He taketh
hold of”? He did not (he means) grasp that nature, which belongs to
Angels, but ours. But why did he not say, “He took on Him,” but used
this expression, “He taketh hold of”? It is derived from the figure of
persons pursuing those who turn away from them, and doing everything to
overtake them as they flee, and to take hold of them as they are
bounding away. For when human nature was fleeing from Him, and fleeing
far away (for we “were far off”— [Eph. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013) <span id="v.ix-p5.3"></span> .md), He
pursued after and overtook us. He showed that He has done this only out
of kindness, and love, and tender care. As then when he saith, “Are they
not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall
be heirs of salvation” ( [Heb.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span id="v.ix-p5.4"></span> .md)—he
shows His extreme interest in behalf of human nature, and that God makes
great account of it, so also in this place he sets it forth much more by
a comparison, for he says, “He taketh not hold of angels.” For in very
deed it is a great and a wonderful thing, and full of amazement that our
flesh should sit on high, and be adored by Angels and Archangels, by the
Cherubim and the Seraphim. For myself having oftentimes thought upon
this, I am amazed at it, and imagine to myself great things concerning
the human race. For I see that the introductions are great and splendid,
and that God has great zeal on behalf of our nature.

<span id="v.ix-p6"></span>Moreover he said not “of men (simply) He
taketh hold,” but wishing to exalt them \[the Hebrews\] and to show that
their race is great and honorable, he says, “but of the seed of Abraham
He taketh hold.”

<span id="v.ix-p7"></span>“Wherefore it behooved \[Him\] in all things
to be made like unto His brethren.” What is this, “in all things”? He
was born (he means), was brought up, grew, suffered all things
necessary, at last He died. This is, “in all things to be made like unto
His brethren.” For after he had discoursed much concerning His majesty
and the glory on high, he then begins concerning the dispensation. And
consider with how great power \[he doth this\]. How he represents Him as
having great zeal “to be made like unto us”: which was a sign of much
care. For having said above, “Inasmuch then as the children were
partakers of flesh and blood, He also Himself in like manner took part
of the same”; <span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="v.ix-Page_389"></span> in this place also he says, “in all things to
be made like unto His brethren.” Which is all but saying, He that is so
great, He that is “the brightness of His glory,” He that is “the express
image of His person,” He that “made the worlds,” He that “sitteth on the
right hand of the Father,” He was willing and earnest to become our
brother in all things, and for this cause did He leave the angels and
the other powers, and come down to us, and took hold of us, and wrought
innumerable good things. He destroyed Death, He cast out the devil from
his tyranny, He freed us from bondage: not by brotherhood alone did He
honor us, but also in other ways beyond number. For He was willing also
to become our High Priest with the Father: for he adds,

<span id="v.ix-p8"></span>\[2.\] “That He might become a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God.” For this cause (he
means) He took on Him our flesh, only for Love to man, that He might
have mercy upon us. For neither is there any other cause of the economy,
but this alone. For He saw us, cast on the ground, perishing, tyrannized
over by Death, and He had compassion on us. “To make reconciliation,” he
says, “for the sins of the people. That He might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest.”

<span id="v.ix-p9"></span>What is “faithful”? True, able. For the Son is
a faithful High Priest, able to deliver from their sins those whose High
Priest He is. In order then that He might offer a sacrifice able to
purify us, for this cause He has become man.

<span id="v.ix-p10"></span>Accordingly he added, “in things pertaining
to God,”—that is, for the sake of things in relation to God. We were
become altogether enemies to God, (he would say) condemned, degraded,
there was none who should offer sacrifice for us. He saw us in this
condition, and had compassion on us, not appointing a High Priest for
us, but Himself becoming a High Priest. In what sense He was “faithful,”
he added \[viz.\], “to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.”

<span id="v.ix-p11"></span> [Heb.
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#018.md)<span id="v.ix-p11.1"></span> .
“For,” he says, “in that He hath suffered Himself being tempted, He is
able to succor them that are tempted.” This is altogether low and mean,
and unworthy of God. “For in that He hath suffered Himself,” he says. It
is of Him who was made flesh that he here speaks, and it was said for
the full assurance of the hearers, and on account of their weakness.
That is (he would say) He went through the very experience of the things
which we have suffered; “now” He is not ignorant of our sufferings; not
only does He know them as God, but as man also He has known them, by the
trial wherewith He was tried; He suffered much, He knows how to
sympathize. And yet God is incapable of suffering: but he describes here
what belongs to the Incarnation, as if he had said, Even the very flesh
of Christ suffered many terrible things. He knows what tribulation is;
He knows what temptation is, not less than we who have suffered, for He
Himself also has suffered.

<span id="v.ix-p12"></span>(What then is this, “He is able to succor
them that are tempted”? It is as if one should say, He will stretch
forth His hand with great eagerness, He will be sympathizing.)

<span id="v.ix-p13"></span>\[3.\] Since they wished for something great,
and to have an advantage over the \[converts\] from the Gentiles, he
shows that they have an advantage in this while he did not hurt those
from the Gentiles at all. In what respect now is this? Because of them
is the salvation, because He took hold of them first, because from that
race He assumed flesh. “For,” he says, “He taketh not hold of angels,
but of the seed of Abraham He taketh hold.” Hereby he both gives honor
to the Patriarch, and shows also what “the seed of Abraham” is. He
reminds them of the promise made to him, saying, “To thee and to thy
seed will I give this land” ( [Gen. xiii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015) <span id="v.ix-p13.1"></span> .md);
showing by the very least thing, the nearness \[of the relationship\] in
that they were “all of one.” But that nearness was not great: \[so\] he
comes back to this, and thenceforward dwells upon the dispensation which
was after the flesh, and says, Even the mere willing to become man was a
proof of great care and love; but now it is not this alone, but there
are also the undying benefits which are bestowed on us through Him, for,
he says, “to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.”

<span id="v.ix-p14"></span> Why said he not, of the world, instead of
“the people”? for He bare away the sins of all. Because thus far his
discourse was concerning them \[the Hebrews\]. Since the Angel also said
to Joseph, “Thou shalt call His name <span class="c11"><span
id="v.ix-p14.1"></span>Jesus</span> , for He shall save His people.” (
[Matt. i. 21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021.md) <span
id="v.ix-p14.2"></span> .) For this too ought to have taken place first,
and for this purpose He came, to save them and then through them the
rest, although the contrary came to pass. This also the Apostles said at
the first, “To you \[God\] having raised up His Son, sent \[Him\] to
bless you” ( [Acts iii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026.md) <span
id="v.ix-p14.3"></span> ): and again, “To you was the word of this
Salvation sent.” ( [Acts xiii. 26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026.md)
<span id="v.ix-p14.4"></span> .) Here he shows the noble birth of the
Jews, in saying, “to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.”
For a while he speaks in this way. For that it is He who forgives the
sins of all men, He declared both in the case of the paralytic, saying,
“Thy sins are forgiven” ( [Mark ii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#005.md)
<span id="v.ix-p14.5"></span> ); and also in that of Baptism: for He
says to the disciples, “Go ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” ( [Matt.
xxviii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019.md) <span
id="v.ix-p14.6"></span> .)

<span id="v.ix-p15"></span> <span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="v.ix-Page_390"></span> \[4.\] But when Paul has once taken in hand
the flesh, he proceeds to utter all the lowly things, without any fear:
for see what he says next:

<span id="v.ix-p16"></span> [Heb. 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002.md)<span id="v.ix-p16.1"></span> .
“Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider
the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ <span
class="c11"><span id="v.ix-p16.2"></span>Jesus</span> , who was faithful
to Him that appointed \[ *or* made\] Him, as also Moses \[was faithful\]
in all His house.”

<span id="v.ix-p17"></span>Being about to place Him before Moses in
comparison, he led his discourse to the law of the high-priesthood; for
they all had a high esteem for Moses: moreover, he is already beforehand
casting down the seeds of the superiority. Therefore he begins from the
flesh, and goes up to the Godhead, where there was no longer any
comparison. He began from the flesh \[from His Human nature\], by
assuming for a time the equality, and says, “as also Moses in all His
house”:  nor does he at first show His superiority lest the hearer
should start away, and straightway stop his ears. For although they were
believers, yet nevertheless they still had strong feeling of conscience
as to Moses. “Who was faithful,” he says, “to Him that made Him”—made
\[Him\] what? “Apostle and High Priest.” He is not speaking at all in
this place of His Essence, nor of His Godhead; but so far concerning
human dignities.

<span id="v.ix-p18"></span>“As also Moses in all His house,” that is,
either among the people, or in the temple. But here he uses the
expression “in His house,” just as one might say, concerning those in
the household; even as some guardian and steward of a household, so was
Moses to the people. For that by “house” he means the people, he added,
“whose house we are” ( [Heb. 3.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.ix-p18.1"></span> ); that is, we are in His creation. Then
\[comes\] the superiority.

<span id="v.ix-p19"></span> [Heb.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#003.md)<span id="v.ix-p19.1"></span> .
“For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses,” (Again \[he
is speaking\] of the Flesh), “inasmuch as he who hath builded  <span
id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800.md) \[the house\] hath more honor than
the house”; \[Moses\] himself also (he means) was of the house.
(Moreover he did not say, For this one was a servant, but the Other a
master, but he covertly intimated it.) If the people were the house and
he was of the people, then he certainly was of the household. For so
also we are accustomed to say, such an one is of such an one’s house.
For here he is speaking of a house, not of the temple, for the temple
was not constructed by God, but by men. But He that made  <span
id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801.md) him \[is\] God. Moses he means. And
see how he covertly shows the superiority. “Faithful,” he says, “in all
His house,” being himself also of the house, that is, of the people. The
builder has more honor than the house, yet he did not say “the artificer
hath more honor than his works,” but “he that hath builded the house,
than the house.” ( [Heb. 3.4](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.ix-p21.6"></span> .) “But He that built all things is God.” Thou
seest that he is speaking not about the temple but about the whole
people.

<span id="v.ix-p22"></span> [Heb.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#005.md)<span id="v.ix-p22.1"></span> .
“And Moses verily \[was\] faithful in all His house, as a servant, for a
testimony of those things which were to be spoken.” See also another
point of superiority, that \[which is derived\] from the Son and the
servants. You see again that by the appellation of The Son, he intimates
true relationship. ( [Heb. 3.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006.md)<span
id="v.ix-p22.2"></span> .) “But Christ as a Son over His own house.”
Perceivest thou how he separates the thing made and the maker, the
servant and the son? Moreover He indeed enters into His Father’s
property as a master, but the other as a servant.

<span id="v.ix-p23"></span>“Whose” \[i.e.\] God’s “house are we, if we
hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
end.” Here again he encourages them to press forward nobly, and not to
fall: for we shall be the “house” of God (he says), as Moses was, “if we
hold fist our confidence and our rejoicing firm unto the end.” He
however (he would say) that is distressed in his trials, and who falls,
doth not glory: he that is ashamed, he that hideth himself, has no
confidence, he that is perplexed doth not glory.

<span id="v.ix-p24"></span>And then he also commends them, saying, “if
we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the
end,” implying that they had even made a beginning; but that there is
need of the end, and not simply to stand, but to have their hope firm
“in full assurance of faith,” without being shaken by their trials.

<span id="v.ix-p25"></span>\[5.\] And be not astonished, that the
\[words\] “Himself being tempted” ( [Heb.
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#018)<span id="v.ix-p25.1"></span> .md)
are spoken more after the manner of men. For if the Scripture says of
the Father, who was not made flesh, “The Lord looked down from heaven,
and beheld all the sons of men” ( [Ps. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002) <span id="v.ix-p25.2"></span> .md),
that is, accurately acquainted Himself with all things; and again, “I
will go down, and see whether they do altogether according to the cry of
them” ( [Gen. xviii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021.md) <span
id="v.ix-p25.3"></span> ); and again, “God cannot endure the evil ways
of men” ( [Gen. vi. 5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005.md) <span
id="v.ix-p25.4"></span> ?), the divine Scripture shows forth the
greatness of His wrath: much more, who even suffered in the flesh, these
things are said of Christ. For since many men consider experience the
most reliable means of knowledge, he wishes to show that He that has
suffered knows what human nature suffers.

<span id="v.ix-p26"></span> “Whence  <span
id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802.md) holy brethren” (he says “whence”
instead of “for this cause”), “partakers of an <span id="page_391">p.
391</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_391"></span> heavenly calling”—(seek
nothing here, if ye have been called yonder—yonder is the reward, yonder
the recompense. What then?) “Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
profession, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to Him that appointed Him, as
also Moses \[was faithful\] in all His house.” (What is “who was
faithful to Him that appointed Him?” it is, well disposed, protecting
what belongs to Him, not allowing them to be lightly carried away, “as
also Moses in all His house”) that is, know who your High Priest is, and
what He is, and ye will need no other consolation nor encouragement. Now
he calls Him “Apostle,” on account of His having been “sent,” and “high
priest of our profession,” that is of the Faith. This One also was
entrusted with a people, as the other with the leadership of a people,
but a greater one and upon higher grounds.

<span id="v.ix-p28"></span>“For a testimony of those things which shall
be spoken.” What meanest thou? Doth God receive the witness of man? Yes,
certainly. For if He call to witness heaven and earth and hills (saying
by the prophet, “Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth, for the Lord
hath spoken”— [Isa. i. 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002.md) <span
id="v.ix-p28.1"></span> —and “Hear ye ravines,  <span
id="fr_2803"></span>[2804](#fn_2803.md) foundations of the earth, for the
Lord hath a controversy with His people”— [Mic. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#002) <span id="v.ix-p29.19"></span> .md),
much more men; that is, that they may be witnesses, when themselves
\[the Jews\] shameless.

<span id="v.ix-p30"></span> [Heb.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006.md)<span id="v.ix-p30.1"></span> .
“But Christ as a Son.” The one takes care of the property of others, but
this One of His own. “And the rejoicing of the hope.” Well said he “of
the hope.” For since the good things were all in hope, and yet we ought
so “to hold it fast,” as even now to glory as for things which had
already come to pass: for this cause he says, “the rejoicing of the
hope.”

<span id="v.ix-p31"></span>And adds, “let us hold it firm unto the end.”
( [Rom. viii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md) <span
id="v.ix-p31.1"></span> .) For “by hope we are saved”; if therefore “we
are saved by hope,” and “are waiting with patience” ( [Rom. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025) <span id="v.ix-p31.2"></span> .md),
let us not be grieved at present things, nor seek now those that have
been promised afterwards; “For” (he says) “hope which is seen is not
hope.” For since the good things are great, we cannot receive them here
in this transitory life. With what object then did He even tell us of
them beforehand, when He was not about to give them here? In order that
by the promise He might refresh our souls, that by the engagement He
might strengthen our zeal, that He might anoint \[preparing us for our
contests\] and stir up our mind. For this cause then all these things
were done.

<span id="v.ix-p32"></span>\[6.\] Let us not then be troubled, let no
man be troubled, when he seeth the wicked prospering. The recompense is
not here, either of wickedness or of virtue; and if in any instance
there be either of wickedness or of virtue, yet is it not according to
desert, but merely as it were a taste of the judgment, that they who
believe not the resurrection may yet even by things that happen here be
brought to their senses. When then we see a wicked man rich, let us not
be cast down; when we see a good man suffering, let us not be troubled.
For yonder are the crowns, yonder the punishments.

<span id="v.ix-p33"></span>Yea and in another point of view, it is not
possible either that a bad man should be altogether bad, but he may have
some good things also: nor again that a good man should be altogether
good, but he may also have some sins. When therefore the wicked man
prospers, it is for evil on his own head, that having here received the
reward of those few good things, he may hereafter be utterly punished
yonder; for this cause does he receive his recompense in this life. And
happy is he most of all who is punished here, that having put away all
his sins, he may depart approved, and pure, and without having to be
called to account. And this Paul teacheth us when he says, “For this
cause many \[are\] weak and sickly among you, and many sleep.” ( [1 Cor.
xi. 30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030.md) <span id="v.ix-p33.1"></span>
.) And again, “I have delivered such an one to Satan.” ( [1 Cor. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005) <span id="v.ix-p33.2"></span> ..md) And
the prophet says, “for she hath received of the Lord’s hand her sins
double” ( [Isa. xl. 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002.md) <span
id="v.ix-p33.3"></span> ); and again David, “Behold mine enemies that
they are multiplied above the hairs of my head  <span
id="fr_2804"></span>[2805](#fn_2804.md) and \[with\] an unjust hatred have
they hated me”: “and forgive Thou all my sins.” ( [Ps.
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#019.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#018)<span id="v.ix-p34.6"></span> ..md)
And again another: “O Lord, our God, give peace unto us; for Thou hast
rendered all things to us again.” ( [Isa. xxvi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012) <span id="v.ix-p34.7"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.ix-p35"></span>These however are \[the words\] of one
showing that good men receive here the punishments of their sins. But
where are the wicked \[mentioned\] who receive their good things here,
and there are utterly punished? Hear Abraham saying to the rich man,
“Thou didst receive good things,” and “Lazarus evil things.” ( [Luke
xvi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025.md) <span id="v.ix-p35.1"></span>
.) What good things? For in this place by saying “thou receivest,  <span
id="fr_2805"></span>[2806](#fn_2805.md) ” and not thou “hadst taken,  <span
id="fr_2806"></span>[2807](#fn_2806.md) ” he shows that it was according to
what was due to him that each was treated, and that the one was in
prosperity, and the other in adversity. And he says, “Therefore he is
comforted” here (for thou seest him pure from sins) “and thou art
tormented.” Let us not then be perplexed when we see sinners well off
here; but when we ourselves are afflicted, let us rejoice.  <span
id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span id="v.ix-Page_392"></span> For this
very thing is paying off the penalty  <span
id="fr_2807"></span>[2808](#fn_2807.md) of sins.

<span id="v.ix-p39"></span>\[7.\] Let us not then seek relaxation: for
Christ promised tribulation to His disciples and Paul says, “All Who
will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.” ( [2 Tim.
iii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012.md) <span id="v.ix-p39.1"></span>
.) No noble-spirited wrestler, when in the lists,  <span
id="fr_2808"></span>[2809](#fn_2808.md) seeks for baths, and a table full
of food and wine. This is not for a wrestler, but for a sluggard. For
the wrestler contendeth with dust, with oil, with the heat of the sun’s
ray, with much sweat, with pressure and constraint. This is the time for
contest and for fighting, therefore also for being wounded, and for
being bloody and in pain. Hear what the blessed Paul says, “So fight I,
not as one that beateth the air.” ( [1 Cor. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026) <span id="v.ix-p40.2"></span> ..md)
Let us consider that our whole life is in combats, and then we shall
never seek rest, we shall never feel it strange when we are afflicted:
no more than a boxer feels it strange, when he combats. There is another
season for repose. By tribulation we must be made perfect.

<span id="v.ix-p41"></span>And even if there be no persecution, nor
tribulation, yet there are other afflictions which befall us every day.
And if we do not bear these, we should scarcely endure those. “There
hath no temptation taken you,” it is said, “but such as is common to
man.” ( [1 Cor. x. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013.md) <span
id="v.ix-p41.1"></span> .) Let us then pray indeed to God that we may
not come into temptation; but if we come into it, let us bear it nobly.
For that indeed is the part of prudent men, not to throw themselves upon
dangers; but this of noble men and true philosophers. Let us not then
lightly cast ourselves upon \[dangers\], for that is rashness; nor yet,
if led into them, and called by circumstances let us give in, for that
is cowardice. But if indeed the Gospel  <span
id="fr_2809"></span>[2810](#fn_2809.md) call us, let us not refuse; but in
a simple case, when there is no reason, nor need, nor necessity which
calls us in the fear of God, let us not rush in. For this is mere
display, and useless ambition. But should any of those things which are
injurious to religion occur, then though it be necessary to endure ten
thousand deaths, let us refuse nothing. Challenge not trials, when thou
findest the things that concern godliness prosper as thou desirest. Why
draw down needless dangers which bring no gain?

<span id="v.ix-p43"></span>These things I say, because I wish you to
observe the laws of Christ who commands us to “pray that we enter not
into temptation” ( [Matt. xxvi. 41](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#041.md)
<span id="v.ix-p43.1"></span> ), and commands us to “take up the cross
and follow” Him. ( [Matt. xvi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024.md)
<span id="v.ix-p43.2"></span> .) For these things are not contradictory,
nay they are rather exceedingly in harmony. Do thou be so prepared as is
a valiant soldier, be continually in thine armor, sober, watchful, ever
looking for the enemy: do not however breed wars, for this is not \[the
act\] of a soldier but of a mover of sedition. But if on the other hand
the trumpet of godliness call thee, go forth immediately, and make no
account of thy life, and enter with great eagerness into the contests,
break the phalanx of the adversaries, bruise the face of the devil, set
up thy trophy. If however godliness be in nowise harmed, and no one lay
waste our doctrines (those I mean which relate to the soul), nor compel
us to do anything displeasing to God, do not be officious.

<span id="v.ix-p44"></span>The life of the Christian must be full of
blood-sheddings; I say not in shedding that of others, but in readiness
to shed one’s own. Let us then pour out our own blood, when it is for
Christ’s sake, with as great readiness as one would pour out water (for
the blood which flows about the body is water), and let us put off our
flesh with as much good temper, as one even would a garment. And this
shall we do, if we be not bound to riches, if not to houses, if not to
affections, if we be detached from all things. For if they who live this
life of \[earthly\] soldiers bid farewell to all things, and
whithersoever war calls them there present themselves, and make
journeys, and endure all things with ready mind; much more ought we, the
soldiers of Christ, so to have prepared ourselves, and to set ourselves
firm against the war of the passions.

<span id="v.ix-p45"></span>\[8.\] There is no persecution now, and God
grant there may never be: but there is another war, that of the desire
of money, of envy, of the passions. Paul, describing this war, says, “We
wrestle not against flesh and blood.” ( [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012) <span id="v.ix-p45.1"></span> ..md)
This war is ever at hand. Therefore he wishes us to stand ever armed.
Because he wishes us to stand ever armed, he says, “Stand, having girded
yourselves about.” ( [Eph. vi. 14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md)
<span id="v.ix-p45.2"></span> .) Which itself also belongs to the time
present, and expresses that we ought ever to be armed. For great is the
war through the tongue, great that through the eyes; this then we must
keep down—great \[too\] is that of the lusts.

<span id="v.ix-p46"></span>Therefore he begins at that point to arm the
soldier of Christ: for “stand,” saith he, “having your loins girt
about,” and he added “with truth.” ( [Eph. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014) <span id="v.ix-p46.1"></span> ..md)
Why “with truth”? Because lust is a mockery and a lie: wherefore the
prophet says, “My loins are filled with mockings.” ( [Ps. xxxviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007) <span id="v.ix-p46.2"></span> ..md) The
thing is not pleasure, but a shadow of pleasure. “Having your loins,” he
says, “girt about with truth”; that is, with true pleasure, with
temperance, with orderly behavior. For this cause he gives this advice,
knowing the unreasonableness of sin, and wishing that all our members
should be hedged round; for “unjust anger” it is said, “shall not be
guiltless.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
1.22](../../../bib/apo/sir001.htm#022)<span id="v.ix-p46.3"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.ix-p47"></span> <span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="v.ix-Page_393"></span> Moreover he wishes us to have around us a
breastplate and a buckler. For desire is a wild beast which easily
springs forth, and we shall have need of walls and fences innumerable,
to overcome, and to restrain it. And for this cause God has built this
part \[of our body\] especially with bones, as with a kind of stones,
placing around it a support, so that \[desire\] might not at any time,
having broken or cut through, easily injure the whole man. For it is a
fire (it is said) and a great tempest, and no other part of the body
could endure this violence. And the sons of the physicians too say that
for this cause the lungs have been spread under the heart, so that the
heart being itself \[put\] into something soft and tender, by beating as
it were into a sort of sponge, may continually be rested, and not \[by
striking\] against the resisting and hard sternum, receive hurt through
the violence of its beatings. We have need therefore of a strong
breastplate, so as to keep this wild beast alway quiet.

<span id="v.ix-p48"></span>We have need also of an helmet; for since the
reasoning faculty is there, and from this it is possible for us either
to be saved, when what is right is done, or it is possible for us to be
ruined—therefore he says, “the helmet of salvation.” ( [Eph. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017) <span id="v.ix-p48.1"></span> ..md)
For the brain is indeed by nature tender, and therefore is covered above
with the skull, as with a kind of shell. And it is to us the cause of
all things both good and evil, knowing what is fitting, or what is not
so. Yea and our feet too and our hands need armor, not these hands, nor
these feet, but as before those of the soul—the former by being employed
about what is right, the latter, that they may walk where they ought.
Thus then let us thoroughly arm ourselves, and we shall be able to
overcome our enemies, and to wreathe ourselves with the crown in Christ
Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father together with the Holy Ghost be
glory, might, honor, now and for ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[388:2800](1140103.htm#fr_2799.md) <span
id="v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p4.1"></span>marg. of E.V.</span>

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[390:2801](1140103.htm#fr_2800.md) <span
id="v.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p20.1"></span>κατασκεύασας</span>

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[390:2802](1140103.htm#fr_2801.md) <span
id="v.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p21.1"></span>ποιήσας</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p21.2"></span>. Referring to what is implied in</span> [Heb.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002.md)<span id="v.ix-p21.3"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p21.4"></span></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p21.5"></span>, that Moses was faithful to
Him that made him.</span>

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[390:2803](1140103.htm#fr_2802.md) <span
id="v.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p27.1"></span>ὅ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p27.2"></span>θεν</span>

<span id="fn_2803"></span>[391:2804](1140103.htm#fr_2803.md) <span
id="v.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.1"></span>St. Chrys. had mentioned hills (</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.2"></span>βουνοὶ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.3"></span>) as called to witness by
God: in the verse preceding this ([Mic. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#001)<span id="v.ix-p29.4"></span>.md) occur
the words,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.5"></span>let
*the hills* hear Thy voice</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.6"></span>; and this verse itself runs,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.7"></span>Hear ye hills</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.8"></span>(</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.9"></span>βουνοὶ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.10"></span>) according to the
Alexandrine <span class="c11"><span id="v.ix-p29.11"></span>mss.</span>
of the LXX. or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.12"></span>ye mountains</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.13"></span>(</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.14"></span>ὄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.15"></span>ρη</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.16"></span>according to the Vatican),</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p29.17"></span>the judgment of the Lord,
and ye ravines,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p29.18"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2804"></span>[391:2805](1140103.htm#fr_2804.md) <span
id="v.ix-p33.4"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p34.1"></span>The words</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p34.2"></span>above the hairs of my head</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p34.3"></span>are part of another</span>
[Ps. 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012.md), [Ps.
69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004.md)<span id="v.ix-p34.4"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="v.ix-p34.5"></span></span>

<span id="fn_2805"></span>[391:2806](1140103.htm#fr_2805.md) <span
id="v.ix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p36.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p36.2"></span>πέλαβες</span>

<span id="fn_2806"></span>[391:2807](1140103.htm#fr_2806.md) <span
id="v.ix-p36.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p37.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p37.2"></span>λαβες</span>

<span id="fn_2807"></span>[392:2808](1140103.htm#fr_2807.md) <span
id="v.ix-p37.3"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p38.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p38.2"></span>κτισις</span>

<span id="fn_2808"></span>[392:2809](1140103.htm#fr_2808.md) <span
id="v.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p40.1"></span>σκάμματι</span>

<span id="fn_2809"></span>[392:2810](1140103.htm#fr_2809.md) <span
id="v.ix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.ix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.ix-p42.1"></span>κήρυγμα</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VI](1140104.md)
