[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140052)  [Next](1140054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.l"></span> <span id="iv.l-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span id="iv.l-Page_171"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.l-p1.1"></span>Homily XLVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.l-p2"></span> <span id="iv.l-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.l-p2.2"></span>[John
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002)<span id="iv.l-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.l-p3"></span>“After these things Jesus walked in Galilee;
for He would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews sought to kill Him. Now
the Jews’ feast of tabernacles was at hand.”

<span id="iv.l-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.l-p4.1"></span>Nothing</span> is worse than envy and malice;
through these death entered into the world. For when the devil saw man
honored, he endured not his prosperity, but used every means to destroy
him. ( [Wisd. ii. 24](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#024) <span
id="iv.l-p4.2"></span> .) And from the same root one may everywhere see
this same fruit produced. Thus Abel was slain; thus David, with many
other just men, was like to have been so; from this also the Jews became
Christ-slayers. And declaring this the Evangelist said, “After these
things Jesus walked in Galilee; for He had not power  <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345) to walk in Jewry, because the Jews
sought to kill Him.” What sayest thou, O blessed John? Had not He
“power,” who was able to do all that He would? He that said, “Whom seek
ye?” ( [John 18.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006)<span
id="iv.l-p5.2"></span> ) and cast them backward? He who was present, yet
not seen ( [John 21.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#004)<span
id="iv.l-p5.3"></span> ), had not He “power”? How then afterwards did He
come among them in the midst of the temple, in the midst of the feast,
when there was an assembly, when they that longed for murder were
present, and utter those sayings which enraged them yet the more? Yea,
this at least men marveled at, saying, “Is not this He, whom they seek
to kill? And, lo, He speaketh boldly, and they say nothing unto Him.” (
[John 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#026)<span id="iv.l-p5.4"></span> <span
id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346)  <span
id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347)  <span
id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348)  <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349)

<span id="iv.l-p10"></span> <span id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350)
 <span id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351) while here the writer
mentions the “feast of tabernacles,” and during the five months hath
neither related or taught us anything else, except the miracle of the
loaves, and the sermon made to those who ate them. Yet He ceased not to
work miracles, and to converse, both in the day, and in the evening, and
oftentimes at night; at least, it was thus that He presided over His
disciples, as all the Evangelists tell us. Why then have they omitted
that interval? Because it was impossible to recount everything fully,
and moreover, because they were anxious to mention those points which
were followed  <span id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352) by any
fault-finding or gainsaying of the Jews. There were many circumstances
like those which here are omitted; for that He raised the dead, healed
the sick, and was admired, they have frequently recorded;  <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353) but when they have anything
uncommon to tell, when they have to describe any charge seemingly put
forth against Him, these things they set down; such as this now, that
“His brethren believed Him not.” For a circumstance like this brings
with it no slight suspicion, and it is worth our while to admire their
truth-loving disposition, how they are not ashamed to relate things
which seem to bring disgrace upon their Teacher, but have been even more
anxious to report these than other matters. For instance, the writer
having passed by many signs and wonders and sermons, has sprung at once
to this.

<span id="iv.l-p15"></span> [John
7.3-5](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#003)<span id="iv.l-p15.1"></span> .
For, saith he, “His brethren said unto Him, Depart hence, and go into
Judæa, that Thy disciples also may see the works that Thou doest; for
there is no man that doeth anything in secret, and he himself seeketh to
be known openly. Show thyself to the world. For neither did His brethren
believe in Him.”

<span id="iv.l-p16"></span> \[2.\] What unbelief, saith some one, is
here? They exhort  <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354) Him to
work miracles. It is great deed; for of unbelief come their words, and
their insolence, and their unseasonable freedom <span id="page_172">p.
172</span> <span id="iv.l-Page_172"></span> of speech. For they thought,
that owing to their relationship, it was lawful  <span
id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) for them to address Him boldly. And
their request seems forsooth to be that of friends, but the words were
those of great maliciousness.  <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) For in this place they reproach Him
with cowardice and vainglory: since to say, “no man doeth anything in
secret,” is the expression of persons charging Him with cowardice, and
suspecting the things done by Him as being not really done; and to add,
that “he seeketh to be known,” was to accuse Him of vainglory. But
observe, I pray you, the power of Christ. Of those who said these
things, one became first Bishop of Jerusalem, the blessed James, of whom
Paul saith, “Other of the Apostles saw I none, save James, the Lord’s
brother” ( [Gal. i. 19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019) <span
id="iv.l-p19.3"></span> ); and Judas also is said to have been a
marvelous man. And yet these persons had been present also at Cana, when
the wine was made, but as yet they profited nothing. Whence then had
they so great unbelief? From their evil mind,  <span
id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) and from envy; for superiority
among kindred is wont somehow to be envied by such as are not alike
exalted. But who are those that they call disciples here? The crowd that
followed Him, not the twelve. What then saith Christ? Observe how mildly
He answered; He said not, “Who are ye that counsel and instruct Me
thus?” but,

<span id="iv.l-p21"></span> [John
7.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006)<span id="iv.l-p21.1"></span> . “My
time is not yet come.”

<span id="iv.l-p22"></span>He here seemeth to me to hint at something
other than He expresseth; perhaps in their envy they designed to deliver
Him up to the Jews; and pointing out this to them, He saith, “My time is
not yet come,” that is, “the time of the Cross and the Death, why then
hasten ye to slay Me before the time?”

<span id="iv.l-p23"></span>“But your time is always ready.”

<span id="iv.l-p24"></span>As though He had said, “Though ye be ever
with the Jews, they will not slay you who desire the same things with
them; but Me they will straightway wish to kill. So that it is ever your
time to be with them without danger, but My time is when the season of
the Cross is at hand, when I must die.” For that this was His meaning,
He showed by what followed.

<span id="iv.l-p25"></span> [John
7.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007)<span id="iv.l-p25.1"></span> .
“The world cannot hate you;” (how should it hate those who desire, and
who run for the same objects as itself?) “but Me it hateth, because I
testify of it, that the works thereof are evil.”

<span id="iv.l-p26"></span>“That is, because I upbraid and rebuke it,
therefore I am hated.” From this let us learn to master our anger, and
not to give way to unworthy passion, though they be mean men who give us
counsel. For if Christ meekly bore with unbelievers counseling Him, when
their counsel was improper and not from any good intention, what pardon
shall we obtain, who being but dust and ashes, yet are annoyed with
those who counsel us, and deem that we are unworthily treated, although
the persons who do this may be but a little humbler than ourselves?
Observe in this instance how He repelleth their accusation with all
gentleness; for when they say, “Show Thyself to the world,” He replieth,
“The world cannot hate you, but Me the world hateth”; thus removing
their accusation. “So far,” He saith, “am I from seeking honor from men,
that I cease not to reprove them, and this when I know that by this
course hatred is produced against and death prepared for Me.” “And
where,” asketh some one, “did He rebuke men?” When did He ever cease to
do so? Did He not say, “Think not that I will accuse you to the Father?
There is one that accuseth you, even Moses.” ( [John
5.45](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#045)<span id="iv.l-p26.1"></span> .) 
And again; “I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you”: and
“How can ye believe, who receive honor from men,  <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) and seek not the honor that cometh
from God only?” Seest thou how He hath everywhere shown, that it was the
open rebuke, not the violation of the Sabbath, which caused the hatred
against Him?

<span id="iv.l-p28"></span>And wherefore doth He send them to the feast,
saying,

<span id="iv.l-p29"></span> [John
7.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#008)<span id="iv.l-p29.1"></span> . “Go
ye up to the feast: I go not up yet”?

<span id="iv.l-p30"></span> To show that He said these things not as
needing them, or desiring to be flattered  <span
id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) by them, but permitting them to do
what pertained to Jews. “How then,” saith some one, “went He up after
saying, ‘I go not up’?” He said not, once for all,  <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) “I go not up,” but, “now,” that is,
“not with you.”

<span id="iv.l-p33"></span>“For My time is not yet fulfilled.”

<span id="iv.l-p34"></span> And yet He was about to be crucified at the
coming Passover. “How then went He not up also? for if He went not up
because the time was not yet come, He ought not to have gone up at all.”
But He went not up for this purpose, that He might suffer, but that He
might instruct them. “But wherefore secretly? since He might by going
openly both have been amidst them, and have restrained their unruly
impulses as He often did.” It was because He would not do this
continually. Since had He gone up openly, and again blinded them,  <span
id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361) He would have made His Godhead to
shine through in a greater degree, which at present behooved not, but He
rather concealed it.  <span id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362) And
since they thought that His remaining was from cowardice, He showeth
them the contrary, and that it was from <span id="page_173">p.
173</span> <span id="iv.l-Page_173"></span> confidence, and a
dispensation,  <span id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363) and that
knowing beforehand the time when He should suffer, He would, when it
should at length be at hand, be most desirous of going up to Jerusalem.
And methinks by saying, “Go ye up,” He meant, “Think not that I compel
you to stay with Me against your will,” and this addition of, “My time
is not yet fully come,” is the expression of one declaring that miracles
must be wrought and sermons spoken, so that greater multitudes might
believe, and the disciples be made more steadfast by seeing the boldness
and the sufferings of their Master.

<span id="iv.l-p38"></span>\[3.\] Learn we then, from what hath been
said, His kindness and gentleness; “Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly
of heart” ( [Matt. xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029) <span
id="iv.l-p38.1"></span> ); and let us cast away  <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) all bitterness. If any exalt
himself against us, let us be humble; if any be bold, let us wait upon
him; if any bite and devour us with mocks and jests, let us not be
overcome; lest in defending ourselves we destroy ourselves. For wrath is
a wild beast, a wild beast keen and angry. Let us then repeat to
ourselves  <span id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365) soothing charms
drawn from the holy Scripture, and say, “Thou art earth and ashes.” “Why
is earth and ashes proud?” ( [Ecclesiasticus
10.9](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#009)<span id="iv.l-p40.3"></span> ),
and, “The sway of his fury shall be his destruction” ( [Ecclesiasticus
1.22](../../../bib/apo/sir001.htm#022)<span id="iv.l-p40.4"></span> ):
and, “The wrathful man is not comely” ( [Prov. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025) <span id="iv.l-p40.5"></span> ,
LXX.); for there is nothing more shameful, nothing uglier than a visage
inflamed with anger. As when you stir up mud there is an ill savor, so
when a soul is disturbed by passion there is great indecency and
unpleasantness. “But,” saith some one, “I endure not insult from mine
enemies.” Wherefore? tell me. If the charge be true, then thou oughtest,
even before the affront, to have been pricked at heart, and thank thine
enemy for his rebukes; if it be false, despise  <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366) it. He hath called thee poor, laugh
at him; he hath called thee base-born and foolish, then mourn for him;
for “He that saith to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell
fire.” ( [Matt. v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022) <span
id="iv.l-p41.3"></span> .) Whenever therefore one insults thee, consider
the punishment that he undergoeth; then shalt thou not only not be
angry, but shalt even shed tears for him. For no man is wroth with one
in a fever or inflammation, but pities and weeps for all such; and such
a thing is a soul that is angry. Nay, if even thou desire to avenge
thyself, hold thy peace, and thou hast dealt thine enemy a mortal blow;
while if thou addest reviling to reviling, thou hast kindled a fire.
“But,” saith some one, “the bystanders accuse us of weakness if we hold
our peace.” No, they will not condemn your weakness, but admire you for
your wisdom. Moreover, if you are stung by insolence, you become
insolent; and being stung, compel men to think that what hath been said
of you is true. Wherefore, tell me, doth a rich man laugh when he is
called poor? Is it not because he is conscious that he is not poor? if
therefore  <span id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367) we will laugh at
insults, we shall afford the strongest proof that we are not conscious
of the faults alleged. Besides, how long are we to dread the accounts we
render to men? how long are we to despise our common Lord, and be nailed
to the flesh? “For whereas there is among you strife, and envying, and
divisions, are ye not carnal?” ( [1 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003) <span id="iv.l-p42.3"></span> .) Let
us then become spiritual, and bridle this dreadful wild beast. Anger
differs nothing from madness, it is a temporary devil, or rather it is a
thing worse than having a devil; for one that hath a devil may be
excused, but the angry man deserves ten thousand punishments,
voluntarily casting himself into the pit of destruction, and before the
hell which is to come suffering punishment from this already, by
bringing a certain restless turmoil and never silent  <span
id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368) storm of fury, through all the
night and through all the day, upon the reasonings of his soul. Let us
therefore, that we may deliver ourselves from the punishment here and
the vengeance hereafter, cast out this passion, and show forth all
meekness and gentleness, that we may find rest for our souls both here
and in the Kingdom of Heaven. To which may we all attain, through the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with
whom, to the Father and the Holy Spirit be glory, now and ever and world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[171:1346](1140053.htm#fr_1345) <span
id="iv.l-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p5.1"></span>οὔ γὰρ εἶχεν ἐξουσίαν</span>

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[171:1347](1140053.htm#fr_1346) <span
id="iv.l-p5.5"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p6.1"></span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p6.2"></span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p6.3"></span></span>

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[171:1348](1140053.htm#fr_1347) <span
id="iv.l-p6.4"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p7"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p7.1"></span></span>

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[171:1349](1140053.htm#fr_1348) <span
id="iv.l-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p8"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p8.1"></span></span>

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[171:1350](1140053.htm#fr_1349) <span
id="iv.l-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p9"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p9.1"></span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p9.2"></span></span>

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[171:1351](1140053.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="iv.l-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p11"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p11.1"></span></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p11.2"></span></span>

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[171:1352](1140053.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="iv.l-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p12"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p12.1"></span></span>[John
6.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#004)<span id="iv.l-p12.2"></span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.l-p12.3"></span></span>

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[171:1353](1140053.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="iv.l-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p13.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p13.2"></span>to be followed.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[171:1354](1140053.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="iv.l-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p14.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p14.2"></span>we have often heard.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[171:1355](1140053.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="iv.l-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p17.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p17.2"></span>what a word of unbelief, spake they,
exhorting.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[172:1356](1140053.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="iv.l-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p18.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p18.2"></span>was fitting.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[172:1357](1140053.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="iv.l-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p19.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p19.2"></span>bitterness.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[172:1358](1140053.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="iv.l-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p20.2"></span>deliberate choice.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[172:1359](1140053.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="iv.l-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p27"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p27.1"></span>one of another,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.l-p27.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[172:1360](1140053.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="iv.l-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p31.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p31.2"></span>desiring their company and honor.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[172:1361](1140053.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="iv.l-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p32.1"></span>καθάπαξ</span>

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[172:1362](1140053.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="iv.l-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p35.1"></span>αὑτοὺς ἐπήρωσε</span>

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[172:1363](1140053.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="iv.l-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p36.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p36.2"></span>He would have displayed greater signs of the
Godhead, and revealed It in greater degree.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[173:1364](1140053.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="iv.l-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p37.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p37.2"></span>at once a dispensation and a confidence.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[173:1365](1140053.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="iv.l-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p39.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p39.2"></span>cut up.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[173:1366](1140053.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="iv.l-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p40.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p40.2"></span>to it.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[173:1367](1140053.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="iv.l-p40.6"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p41.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p41.2"></span>laugh at.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[173:1368](1140053.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="iv.l-p41.4"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p42.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p42.2"></span>so also do ye; if rather.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[173:1369](1140053.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="iv.l-p42.4"></span>

<span id="iv.l-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p43.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.l-p43.2"></span>unbearable.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 7.9,10](1140054)
