[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140053)  [Next](1140055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.li"></span> <span id="iv.li-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span id="iv.li-Page_174"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.li-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIX.</span>

<span id="iv.li-p2"></span> <span id="iv.li-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.li-p2.2"></span>[John
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010)<span
id="iv.li-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.li-p3"></span> *“When He had said these words unto them, He
abode still in Galilee. But when His brethren were gone up, then went He
up also unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret.”*  <span
id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369)

<span id="iv.li-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.li-p5.1"></span>The</span> things done  <span
id="fr_1370"></span>[1371](#fn_1370) by Christ after the manner of men,
are not so done only to establish the Incarnation, but also to educate
us for virtue. For had He done all as God, how could we have known, on
falling in with such things as we wished not, what we must do? As, for
instance, when He was in this very place, and the Jews would have killed
Him, He came into the midst of them, and so appeased the tumult. Now had
He done this continually, how should we, not being able to do so, and
yet falling into the like case, have known in what way we ought to deal
with the matter, whether to perish at once, or even to use some
contrivance  <span id="fr_1371"></span>[1372](#fn_1371) in order that
the word might go forward? Since, therefore, we who have no power could
not have understood what to do on coming into the midst of our foes, on
this account we are taught this very thing by Him. For, saith the
Evangelist, Jesus, “when He had said these words, abode in Galilee; but
when His brethren were gone up, then went He up also unto the feast, not
openly, but as it were in secret.” The expression, “when His brethren
were gone up,” is that of one showing that He chose not to go up with
them. On which account He abode where He was, and manifested not
Himself, although they in a manner urged  <span
id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372) Him to do so. But why did He, who
ever spake openly, do so now “as it were in secret”? The writer saith
not “secretly,” but, “as it were in secret.” For thus, as I have said,
He seemed  <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373) to be instructing
us how to manage matters. And, apart from this,  <span
id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374) it was not the same to come among
them when heated and restive,  <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375) as to do so afterwards when the
feast was ended.

<span id="iv.li-p12"></span> [John
7.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#011)<span id="iv.li-p12.1"></span> .
“Then the Jews sought Him,  <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376)
and said, Where is He?”

<span id="iv.li-p14"></span> Excellent truly the good deeds at their
feasts! they are eager for murder, and wish to seize Him, even during
the feast.  <span id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377) At least, in
another place they speak thus, “Think ye that He will not come to the
feast?” ( [John xi. 56](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#056) <span
id="iv.li-p15.3"></span> ); and here they said, “Where is He?” Through
their excessive hatred and enmity they would not even call Him by name.
Great was their reverence towards the feast, great their caution. By
occasion of  <span id="fr_1378"></span>[1379](#fn_1378) the very feast
they wished  <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1380](#fn_1379) to entrap Him!

<span id="iv.li-p18"></span> [John
7.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012)<span id="iv.li-p18.1"></span> .
“And there was much murmuring among the people concerning Him.”

<span id="iv.li-p19"></span> I think they were exasperated by the place
where the miracle had been wrought, and were  <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380) greatly infuriated and afraid, not
so much from anger at what had gone before, as from fear lest He should
again work something similar. But all fell out contrary to what they
desired, and against their will they rendered Him conspicuous.

<span id="iv.li-p21"></span>“And some said, He is a good man; others
said, Nay, but He deceiveth the people.”

<span id="iv.li-p22"></span> Methinks the first of these opinions was
that of the many, the other that of the rulers and priests. For to
slander Him suited their malice and wickedness. “He deceiveth,” say
they, “the people.” How, tell me? Was it by seeming to work, not really
working miracles? But experience witnesses  <span
id="fr_1381"></span>[1382](#fn_1381) the contrary.

<span id="iv.li-p24"></span> [John
7.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#013)<span id="iv.li-p24.1"></span> .
“Howbeit no man spake openly of Him for fear of the Jews.”

<span id="iv.li-p25"></span> Seest thou everywhere the ruling body
corrupted, and the ruled sound indeed in judgment, but not having that
proper courage  <span id="fr_1382"></span>[1383](#fn_1382) which a
multitude especially lacketh?  <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[1384](#fn_1383)

<span id="iv.li-p28"></span> [John
7.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#014)<span id="iv.li-p28.1"></span> .
“Now about the middle of the feast Jesus went up  <span
id="fr_1384"></span>[1385](#fn_1384) and taught.”

<span id="iv.li-p30"></span> By the delay He made them more attentive;
for they who had sought Him on the first days and said,  <span
id="fr_1385"></span>[1386](#fn_1385) “Where is He?” when they saw Him
suddenly present, observe how they drew near, and were like to press
upon Him as He was speaking, both those who said that He was a good man,
and those who said that He was not such;  <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[1387](#fn_1386) the former so as to profit by and
admire Him, the latter to lay hold on and detain Him. One party then
said, “He deceiveth the people,” by reason of the teaching and the
doctrines, not understanding His meaning; the other on account of the
miracles said, “He is a good man.” He therefore thus came among them
when He had slackened  <span id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387) their
anger, so that they might <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span
id="iv.li-Page_175"></span> hear His words at leisure, when passion no
longer stopped their ears. What He taught, the Evangelist hath not told
us; that He taught marvelously, this only he saith, and that He won
 <span id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388) and brought them over. Such
was the power of His speech. And they who had said, “He deceiveth the
people,” altered their opinion, “and marveled.” Wherefore also they
said,

<span id="iv.li-p35"></span> [John
7.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#015)<span id="iv.li-p35.1"></span> .
“How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?”

<span id="iv.li-p36"></span> Observest thou how the Evangelist showeth
here also their marveling to be full of wickedness? for he saith not,
that they admired the teaching, or that they received the words, but
simply that they “marveled.” That is, were thrown into a state of
astonishment, and doubted, saying, “Whence hath this man  <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389) these things”? when they ought from
this very difficulty to have known that there was nothing merely human
in Him. But because they would not confess  <span
id="fr_1390"></span>[1391](#fn_1390) this, but stopped at wondering
only, hear what He saith.

<span id="iv.li-p39"></span> [John
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)<span id="iv.li-p39.1"></span> .
“My doctrine is not Mine.”

<span id="iv.li-p40"></span>Again He answereth to their secret thoughts,
referring them to the Father, and so desiring to stop their mouths.

<span id="iv.li-p41"></span> [John
7.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017)<span id="iv.li-p41.1"></span> .
“If any man will do His will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of Myself.”

<span id="iv.li-p42"></span>What He saith is this, “Cast out from
yourselves the malice and wrath and envy and hatred which has without
cause been conceived against Me, then there is nothing to hinder you
from knowing that My words are indeed the words of God. For at present
these things cast a darkness over you, and destroy the light of right
judgment, while if ye remove them this shall no longer be your case.”
Yet He spake not (plainly) thus, (for so He would have confounded them
exceedingly,) but implied it all by saying, “He that doeth His will
shall know of the doctrine, whether it is of God, or whether I speak of
Myself”; that is, “whether I speak anything different and strange and
contrary to God.” For, “of Myself” is always put with this meaning, that
“I say nothing except what seemeth good to Him, but all that the Father
willeth, I will also.”

<span id="iv.li-p43"></span>“If any man do His will, he shall know of
the doctrine.”

<span id="iv.li-p44"></span>“What meaneth,” “If any man do His will?”
“If any man be a lover of the life which is according to virtue, he
shall know the power of the sayings.” “If any man will give heed to the
prophecies, to see whether I speak according to them or not.”

<span id="iv.li-p45"></span>\[2.\] But how is the doctrine His and not
His? For He said not, “This doctrine is not Mine”; but having first
said, “it is Mine,” and having claimed it as His own, He then added, “it
is not Mine.” How then can the same thing be both “His” and not “His”?
It is “His,” because He spake it not as one who had been taught; and it
is “not His,” because it was the doctrine of the Father. How then saith
He, “All that is the Father’s is Mine, and Mine His”? ( [John
17.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span id="iv.li-p45.1"></span> .
 <span id="fr_1391"></span>[1392](#fn_1391) ) “For if because the
doctrine is the Father’s, it is not thine, that other assertion is
false, for according to that it ought to be thine.” But the “is not
Mine,” affords a strong proof that His doctrine and the Father’s are
one; as if He had said, “It hath nothing different,  <span
id="fr_1392"></span>[1393](#fn_1392) as though it were another’s. For
though My Person  <span id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393) be
different, yet so do I speak and do as not to be supposed to speak or do
anything contrary to the Father, but rather the very same things that
the Father saith and doeth.” Then He addeth another incontrovertible
argument, bringing forward something merely human, and instructing them
by things to which they were accustomed. And what is that?

<span id="iv.li-p49"></span> [John
7.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018)<span id="iv.li-p49.1"></span> .
“He that speaketh of himself seeketh his own glory.”

<span id="iv.li-p50"></span> That is, “He that desireth to establish any
doctrine of his own, desireth to do so only that he himself may enjoy
the glory.  <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394) Now if I desire
not to enjoy glory, wherefore should I desire to establish any doctrine
of My own? He that speaketh of himself, that is, who speaketh anything
peculiar or different from others, speaketh on this account, that he may
establish his own glory; but if I seek the glory of Him that sent Me,
wherefore should I choose to teach other  <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1396](#fn_1395) things?” Seest thou that there was
a cause wherefore He said there too that He “did nothing of Himself”? (
[John 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019), [John
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028)<span id="iv.li-p52.2"></span> .)
What was it? It was that they might believe that He desired not the
honor of the many. Therefore when His words are lowly, “I seek,” He
saith, “the glory of the Father,” everywhere desiring to persuade them
that He Himself loveth not glory. Now there are many reasons for His
using lowly words, as that He might not be deemed unbegotten, or opposed
to God, His being clothed with flesh, the infirmity of His hearers, that
He might teach men to be modest, and to speak no great thing of
themselves: while for speaking lofty words one could only find one
reason, the greatness of His Nature. And if when He said, “Before
Abraham was, I am” ( [John 8.58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span
id="iv.li-p52.3"></span> ), they were offended, what would have been
their case if they had continually heard high expressions?

<span id="iv.li-p53"></span> <span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="iv.li-Page_176"></span>[John
7.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019)<span id="iv.li-p53.1"></span> .
“Did not Moses give you the Law? and yet none of you keepeth the Law?
Why go ye about to kill Me?”

<span id="iv.li-p54"></span> “And what connection,” saith some one, “has
this, or what has this to do with what was said before?” The Jews
brought against Him two accusations; one, that He broke the Sabbath; the
other, that He called God His Father, making Himself equal with God. And
that this was no imagination of theirs, but His own declared judgment,
 <span id="fr_1396"></span>[1397](#fn_1396) and that He spake not as do
the many, but in a special and peculiar sense, is clear from this
circumstance. Many often called God their Father; as “Have we not all
one Father, hath not one God created us?” ( [Mal. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010) <span id="iv.li-p55.2"></span> ),
but not for that was the people equal to God, on which account the
hearers were not offended. As then when the Jews said, “This man is not
from God,” He often healed them,  <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[1398](#fn_1397) and made defense for the violation
of the Sabbath; so now had the sense they assigned to His words been
according to their imagination, not according to His intention, He would
have corrected them, and said, “Why suppose ye Me equal to God? I am not
equal”; yet He said nothing of the kind, but, on the contrary, declared
by what followed, that He is equal. For, “As the Father raiseth up the
dead, and quickeneth them, so also the Son” ( [John
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span id="iv.li-p56.2"></span> );
and “That all may honor the Son as they honor the Father”; and “The
works which He doeth, the same doeth the Son likewise;” all these go to
establish His equality. Again, concerning the Law He saith, “Think not
that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets.” ( [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017) <span id="iv.li-p56.3"></span> .)
Thus He knoweth how to remove evil suspicions which are in their minds;
but in this place He not only doth not remove, but even confirmeth their
suspicion of His equality. On which account also, when they said in
another place, “Thou makest thyself God,” He did not remove their
suspicion, but even confirmed it, saying, “That ye may know that the Son
of Man hath power on earth to forgive sins, He saith to the sick of the
palsy, Take up thy bed, and walk.”  <span
id="fr_1398"></span>[1399](#fn_1398) ( [Matt. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006) <span id="iv.li-p57.3"></span> .)
This then He first aimed at, to make Himself equal with God, showing
that He was not God’s adversary, but that He said the same and taught
the same with Him, and afterwards He setteth Himself to  <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[1400](#fn_1399) the breach of the Sabbath, saying,
“Did not Moses give you the Law, and none of you keepeth the Law?” As
though He had said, “The Law saith, Thou shalt not kill; but ye kill,
and yet accuse Me as transgressing the Law.” But wherefore saith He,
“None of you”? Because they all sought to kill Him. “And if,” He saith,
“I even have broken the Law, it was in saving a man, but ye transgress
it for evil. And if My action was even a transgression, yet it was in
order to save, and I ought not to be judged by you who transgress in the
greatest matters. For your conduct is a subverting of the whole Law.”
Then also He presseth it farther, although He had said many things to
them before, but at that former time He spake after a loftier manner,
and more suitably to His own dignity, while now He speaketh more humbly.
Wherefore? Because He would not continually irritate them. At present
their anger had become intense, and they went on to murder. And
therefore He continueth to check them in these two ways, by reproving
their evil daring, and saying, “Why go ye about to kill Me?” and by
modestly calling Himself, “A Man that hath told you the truth” ( [John
8.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#040)<span id="iv.li-p58.2"></span> ),
and by showing that murderers in heart are not worthy to judge others.
And observe both the humility of Christ’s question, and the insolence of
their answer.

<span id="iv.li-p59"></span> [John
7.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020)<span id="iv.li-p59.1"></span> .
“Thou hast a devil; who goeth about to kill thee?”

<span id="iv.li-p60"></span> \[3.\] The expression is one of wrath and
anger, and of a soul made shameless by an unexpected reproof, and put to
confusion before their time, as they thought.  <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1401](#fn_1400) For just as a sort of robbers who
sing over their plots, then when they desire to put him against whom
they are plotting off his guard, effect their object by keeping silence,
so also do these. But He, omitting to rebuke them for this, so as not to
make them more shameless, again taketh in hand His defense with respect
to the Sabbath, reasoning with them from the Law. And observe how
prudently. “No wonder,” He saith, “if ye disobey Me, when ye disobey the
Law which ye think ye obey, and which ye hold to have been given you by
Moses. It is therefore no new thing, if ye give not heed to My words.”
For because  <span id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401) they said, “God
spake to Moses, but as for this fellow we know not whence he is” ( [John
9.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#029)<span id="iv.li-p62.3"></span> ),
He showeth that they were insulting Moses as well as Himself, for Moses
gave them the Law, and they obeyed it not.

<span id="iv.li-p63"></span> [John
7.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#021)<span id="iv.li-p63.1"></span> .
“I have done one work, and ye all marvel.”

<span id="iv.li-p64"></span> Observe how He argueth, where it is
necessary to defend Himself, and make His defense a charge against them.
 <span id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402) For with respect to that
which had been wrought, He introduceth not the Person of the Father, but
His own: “I have done one work.” He would show,  <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) that not to have done it would have
been to break the Law, <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="iv.li-Page_177"></span> and that there are many things more
authoritative  <span id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404) than the Law,
and that “Moses” endured to receive a command against  <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405) the Law, and more authoritative
than the Law. For “circumcision” is more authoritative than the Sabbath,
and yet circumcision is not of the Law, but of “the fathers.” “But I,”
He saith, “have done that which is more authoritative and better than
circumcision.” Then He mentioneth not the command of the Law; for
instance, that the Priests profane the Sabbath, as He had said already,
but speaketh more largely. The meaning of, “Ye marvel” ( [Matt. xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#005) <span id="iv.li-p68.2"></span> ) is,
“Ye are confused,” “are troubled.” For if the Law was to be lasting,
circumcision would not have been more authoritative than it. And He said
not, “I have done a thing greater than circumcision,” but abundantly
refuteth them by saying,  <span id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406)

<span id="iv.li-p70"></span> [John
7.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#023)<span id="iv.li-p70.1"></span> .
“If a man receive circumcision.”  <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407)

<span id="iv.li-p72"></span>“Seest thou that the Law is most established
when a man breaketh it? Seest thou that the breaking of the Sabbath is
the keeping of the Law? that if the Sabbath were not broken, the Law
must needs have been broken? so that I also have established the Law.”
He said not, “Ye are wroth with Me because I have wrought a thing which
is greater than circumcision,” but having merely mentioned what had been
done, He left it to them to judge, whether entire health was not a more
necessary thing than circumcision. “The Law,” He saith, “is broken, that
a man may receive a sign which contributeth nothing to health; are ye
vexed and indignant at its being broken, that one might be freed from so
grievous a disease?”

<span id="iv.li-p73"></span> [John
7.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024)<span id="iv.li-p73.1"></span> .
“Judge not according to appearance.”

<span id="iv.li-p74"></span> What is, “according to appearance”? “Do
not, since Moses hath the greatest honor among you, give your decision
according to your estimation of persons, but according to the nature of
things; for this is to judge rightly. Wherefore hath no one of you
reproved Moses? Wherefore hath no one disobeyed him when he ordereth
that the Sabbath be broken by a commandment introduced from without into
the Law? He alloweth a commandment to be of more authority than his own
Law; a commandment not introduced by the Law, but from without, which is
especially wonderful; while ye who are not lawgivers are beyond measure
jealous for the Law, and defend it. Yet Moses, who ordereth that the Law
be broken by a commandment which is not of the Law, is more worthy of
confidence than you.” By saying then, (I have made) “a whole man
(healthy),” He showeth that circumcision also was “partial” health. And
what was the health procured by circumcision?  “Every soul,”  <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) It saith, “that is not circumcised,
shall be utterly destroyed.” ( [Gen. xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014) <span id="iv.li-p75.3"></span> .)
“But I have raised up a man not partially afflicted, but wholly undone.”
“Judge not,” therefore, “according to appearance.”

<span id="iv.li-p76"></span> Be we persuaded that this is  <span
id="fr_1409"></span>[1410](#fn_1409) said not merely to the men of that
time, but to us also, that in nothing we pervert justice, but do all in
its behalf; that whether a man be poor or rich, we give no heed to
persons, but enquire into things. “Thou shalt not pity,”  <span
id="fr_1410"></span>[1411](#fn_1410) It saith, “the poor in judgment.” (
[Ex. xxiii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#003) <span
id="iv.li-p78.3"></span> .) What is meant? “Be not broken down, nor
bent,” It saith, “if he that doth the wrong be a poor man.” Now if you
may not favor a poor man, much less a rich. And this I say not only to
you who are judges, but to all men, that they nowhere pervert justice,
but preserve it everywhere pure. “The Lord,” It saith, “loveth
righteousness”; and, “he that loveth iniquity hateth his own soul.” (
[Ps. 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005)<span id="iv.li-p78.4"></span> ,
LXX.) Let us not, I entreat, hate our own souls, nor love
unrighteousness. For certainly its profit in the present world is little
 <span id="fr_1411"></span>[1412](#fn_1411) or nothing, and for the
world to come it brings great damage.  <span
id="fr_1412"></span>[1413](#fn_1412) Or rather, I should say, that not
even here can we enjoy it; for when we live softly, yet with an evil
conscience, is not this vengeance and punishment? Let us then love
righteousness, and never look aside  <span
id="fr_1413"></span>[1414](#fn_1413) from that law. For what fruit shall
we gain from the present life, if we depart without having attained unto
excellence? What there will help us? Will friendship, or relations, or
this or that man’s favor? What am I saying? this or that man’s favor?
Though we have Noah, Job, or Daniel for a father, this will avail us
nothing if we be betrayed by our own works. One thing alone we need,
that is, excellency of soul. This will be able to carry you safe
through, and to deliver you from everlasting fire, this will escort
 <span id="fr_1414"></span>[1415](#fn_1414) you to the Kingdom of
Heaven. To which may we all attain, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the
Holy Ghost be glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[174:1370](1140054.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="iv.li-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p4.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p4.2"></span>but secretly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1370"></span>[174:1371](1140054.htm#fr_1370) <span
id="iv.li-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p6.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p6.2"></span>dispensed.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1371"></span>[174:1372](1140054.htm#fr_1371) <span
id="iv.li-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p7.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p7.2"></span>economize somewhat.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[174:1373](1140054.htm#fr_1372) <span
id="iv.li-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p8.2"></span>were eager.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[174:1374](1140054.htm#fr_1373) <span
id="iv.li-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p9.2"></span>it behooved.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[174:1375](1140054.htm#fr_1374) <span
id="iv.li-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p10.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p10.2"></span>besides, because.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[174:1376](1140054.htm#fr_1375) <span
id="iv.li-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p11.1"></span>σφαδαζόντων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p11.2"></span>, al.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p11.3"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p11.4"></span>κμαζόντων</span>

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[174:1377](1140054.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="iv.li-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p13"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p13.1"></span>at the feast,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p13.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[174:1378](1140054.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="iv.li-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p15.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p15.2"></span>they were always eager for murder, and by means
of these (feasts) desired to catch Him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[174:1379](1140054.htm#fr_1378) <span
id="iv.li-p15.4"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p16.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p16.2"></span>directly after.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[174:1380](1140054.htm#fr_1379) <span
id="iv.li-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p17.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p17.2"></span>were eager.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[174:1381](1140054.htm#fr_1380) <span
id="iv.li-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p20.2"></span>and at the same time.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[174:1382](1140054.htm#fr_1381) <span
id="iv.li-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p23.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p23.2"></span>showed.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[174:1383](1140054.htm#fr_1382) <span
id="iv.li-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p26.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p26.2"></span>opinion.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[174:1384](1140054.htm#fr_1383) <span
id="iv.li-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p27.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p27.2"></span>which thing is especially characteristic of the
multitude.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[174:1385](1140054.htm#fr_1384) <span
id="iv.li-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p29"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p29.1"></span>into the Temple,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.li-p29.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[174:1386](1140054.htm#fr_1385) <span
id="iv.li-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p31.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p31.2"></span>they who seek Him and say.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[174:1387](1140054.htm#fr_1386) <span
id="iv.li-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p32.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p32.2"></span>was wicked.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[174:1388](1140054.htm#fr_1387) <span
id="iv.li-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p33.1"></span>χαλάσας</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p33.2"></span>, al.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p33.3"></span>χαυνώσας</span>

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[175:1389](1140054.htm#fr_1388) <span
id="iv.li-p33.4"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p34.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p34.2"></span>took.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[175:1390](1140054.htm#fr_1389) <span
id="iv.li-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p37.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p37.2"></span>knoweth he.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[175:1391](1140054.htm#fr_1390) <span
id="iv.li-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p38.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p38.2"></span>reveal.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[175:1392](1140054.htm#fr_1391) <span
id="iv.li-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p46"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p46.1"></span>all Mine are Thine,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.li-p46.2"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[175:1393](1140054.htm#fr_1392) <span
id="iv.li-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p47.1"></span>i.e. from the Father’s.</span>

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[175:1394](1140054.htm#fr_1393) <span
id="iv.li-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p48.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p48.2"></span>ποστάσις</span>

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[175:1395](1140054.htm#fr_1394) <span
id="iv.li-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p51.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p51.2"></span>He that desires to speak of himself, desires it
on no other account, but only to reap glory from this.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[175:1396](1140054.htm#fr_1395) <span
id="iv.li-p51.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p52.1"></span>i.e. other than He willeth.</span>

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[176:1397](1140054.htm#fr_1396) <span
id="iv.li-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p55.1"></span>γνώμης</span>

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[176:1398](1140054.htm#fr_1397) <span
id="iv.li-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p56.1"></span>i.e. of their error.</span>

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[176:1399](1140054.htm#fr_1398) <span
id="iv.li-p56.4"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p57"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p57.1"></span>go to thine house,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.li-p57.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[176:1400](1140054.htm#fr_1399) <span
id="iv.li-p57.4"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p58.1"></span>i.e. to meet the charge of.</span>

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[176:1401](1140054.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="iv.li-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p61.1"></span>προκαταπληττομένης αὐτῶν ὡς ᾠόντο</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.li-p61.2"></span>. This appears to be the
meaning, if the text is correct. The passage is suspected, but there is
no other reading.</span>

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[176:1402](1140054.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="iv.li-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p62.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p62.2"></span>when.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[176:1403](1140054.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="iv.li-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p65.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p65.2"></span>to admit what had taken place as a charge
against Himself.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[176:1404](1140054.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="iv.li-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p66.1"></span>i.e. by</span> [John
7.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#022)<span
id="iv.li-p66.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p66.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p66.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p66.5"></span>Moses therefore gave you circumcision (not
because it is of Moses, but the fathers) and ye on the Sabbath day
circumcise a man.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[177:1405](1140054.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="iv.li-p66.6"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p67.1"></span>κυριώτερα</span>

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[177:1406](1140054.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="iv.li-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p68.1"></span>κατὰ τοῦ ν</span>

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[177:1407](1140054.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="iv.li-p68.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p69.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p69.2"></span>but hinted by saying.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[177:1408](1140054.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="iv.li-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p71"></span> [John
7.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#023)<span
id="iv.li-p71.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p71.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p71.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p71.4"></span>If a man on the Sabbath day receive
circumcision, that the Law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry
at Me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath
day?</span> ”

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[177:1409](1140054.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="iv.li-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p75.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p75.2"></span>soul of man.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[177:1410](1140054.htm#fr_1409) <span
id="iv.li-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p77"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p77.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p77.2"></span>but this is.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[177:1411](1140054.htm#fr_1410) <span
id="iv.li-p77.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p78.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p78.2"></span>λεήσεις</span>

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[177:1412](1140054.htm#fr_1411) <span
id="iv.li-p78.5"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p79"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p79.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p79.2"></span>for how great is, &c. little.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[177:1413](1140054.htm#fr_1412) <span
id="iv.li-p79.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p80.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p80.2"></span>and afterwards we perish miserably.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[177:1414](1140054.htm#fr_1413) <span
id="iv.li-p80.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p81.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p81.2"></span>offend against.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[177:1415](1140054.htm#fr_1414) <span
id="iv.li-p81.3"></span>

<span id="iv.li-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p82.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.li-p82.2"></span>escorts.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 7.25–27](1140055)
