[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140106)  [Next](1140108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xiii"></span> <span id="v.xiii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xiii-p1.1"></span>Homily IX.</span>

<span id="v.xiii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xiii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xiii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews vi.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001)<span
id="v.xiii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p3"></span> *“Therefore leaving the principles of the
Doctrine of Christ,*  <span id="fr_2862"></span>[2863](#fn_2862) *let us
go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance
from dead works, and of faith toward God; of the doctrine of baptisms,
and of laying on of hands; and of resurrection of the dead, and of
eternal judgment. And this we will do, if God permit.”*

<span id="v.xiii-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xiii-p5.1"></span>You</span> have heard how much Paul found fault
with the Hebrews for wishing to be always learning about the same
things. And with good reason: “For when for the time ye ought to be
teachers, ye have need again that some one teach you the elements of the
first principles  <span id="fr_2863"></span>[2864](#fn_2863) of the
oracles of God.” ( [Heb. 5.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span
id="v.xiii-p6.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiii-p7"></span>I am afraid that this might fitly be said to
you also, that “when for the time ye ought to be teachers,” ye do not
maintain the rank of learners, but ever hearing the same things, and on
the same subjects, you are in the same condition as if you heard no one.
And if any man should question you, no one will be able to answer,
except a very few who may soon be counted.

<span id="v.xiii-p8"></span>But this is no trifling loss. For oftentimes
when the teacher wishes to go on further, and to touch on higher and
more mysterious themes, the want of attention in those who are to be
taught prevents.

<span id="v.xiii-p9"></span>For just as in the case of a grammar-master,
if a boy though hearing continually the first elements does not master
them, it will be necessary for him to be continually dinning the same
things into the boy, and he will not leave off teaching, until the boy
has been able to learn them accurately; for it is great folly to lead
him on to other things, without having put the first well into him; so
too in the Church, if while we constantly say the same things you learn
nothing more, we shall never cease saying the same things.

<span id="v.xiii-p10"></span>For if our preaching were a matter of
display and ambition, it would have been right to jump from one subject
to another and change about continually, taking no thought for you, but
only <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="v.xiii-Page_409"></span> for your applauses. But since we have not
devoted our zeal to this, but our labors are all for your profit, we
shall not cease discoursing to you on the same subjects, till you
succeed in learning them. For I might have said much about Gentile
superstition, and about the Manichæans, and about the Marcionists, and
by the grace of God have given them heavy blows, but this sort of
discourse is out of season. For to those who do not yet know accurately
their own affairs, to those who have not yet learned that to be covetous
is evil, who would utter such discourses as those, and lead them on to
other subjects before the time?

<span id="v.xiii-p11"></span>We then shall not cease to say the same
things, whether ye be persuaded or not. We fear however, that by
continually saying the same things, if ye hearken not, we may make the
condemnation heavier for the disobedient.

<span id="v.xiii-p12"></span> I must not however say this in regard to
you all; for I know many who are benefited by their coming here, who
might with justice cry out against those others, as insidiously injuring
them  <span id="fr_2864"></span>[2865](#fn_2864) by their ignorance and
inattention. But not even so will they be injured. For hearing the same
things continually is useful even to those who know them, since by often
hearing what we know we are more deeply affected. We know, for instance,
that Humility is an excellent thing, and that Christ often discoursed
about it; but when we listen to the words themselves and the reflections
made upon them, we are yet more affected, even if we hear them ten
thousand times.

<span id="v.xiii-p14"></span>\[2.\] It is then a fitting time for us
also to say now to you, “Wherefore leaving the beginning of the doctrine
of Christ, let us go unto perfection.”

<span id="v.xiii-p15"></span> What is “the beginning of the doctrine”?
 <span id="fr_2865"></span>[2866](#fn_2865) He goes on to state it
himself, saying, “not laying again” (these are his words) “the
foundation of repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, of the
doctrine of baptisms and of laying on of hands, of the resurrection of
the dead, and of eternal judgment.”

<span id="v.xiii-p17"></span> But if this be “the Beginning,” what else
is our doctrine save to repent “from dead works,” and through the Spirit
to receive “the faith,”  <span id="fr_2866"></span>[2867](#fn_2866) in
“the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment”? But what is “the
Beginning”? “The Beginning,” he says, is nothing else than this, when
there is not a strict life. For as it is necessary to instruct one who
is entering on the study of grammar, in the Elements  <span
id="fr_2867"></span>[2868](#fn_2867) first, so also must the Christian
know these things accurately, and have no doubt concerning them. And
should he again have need of teaching, he has not yet the foundation.
For one who is firmly grounded ought to be fixed and to stand steady,
and not be moved about. But if one who has been catechised and baptized
is going ten years afterwards to hear again about the Faith, and that we
ought to “believe” in “the resurrection of the dead,” he does not yet
have the foundation, he is again seeking after the beginning of the
Christian religion.  For that the Faith is the foundation, and the rest
the building, hear him \[the Apostle\] saying; “I have laid the
foundation and another buildeth thereupon.” ( [1 Cor. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010) <span id="v.xiii-p19.3"></span> .)
“If any man build upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
wood, hay, stubble.” ( [1 Cor. iii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)
<span id="v.xiii-p19.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiii-p20"></span>“Not laying again” (he says) “the
foundation of repentance from dead works.”

<span id="v.xiii-p21"></span> \[3.\] But what is, “let us go on unto
perfection”? Let us henceforth proceed (he means) even to the very roof,
that is, let us have the best life. For as in the case of the letters
the Alpha  <span id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868) involves the
whole, and as the foundation, the whole building, so also does full
assurance concerning the Faith involve purity of life. And without this
it is not possible to be a Christian, as without foundations there can
be no building; nor skill in literature without the letters. Still if
one should be always going round about the letters, or if about the
foundation, not about the building, he will never gain anything.

<span id="v.xiii-p23"></span>Do not however think that the Faith is
depreciated by being called elementary: for it is indeed the whole
power: for when he says, “For every one that useth milk is unskilled in
the word of righteousness, for he is a babe” ( [Heb.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#013)<span id="v.xiii-p23.1"></span> ),
it is not this which he calls “milk.” But to be still doubting about
these things is \[a sign\] of a mind feeble, and needing many
discourses. For these are the wholesome doctrines. For we call him “a
perfect man” \[i.e. “of full age”\] who with the faith has a right life;
but if any one have faith, yet does evil, and is in doubt concerning
\[the faith\] itself, and brings disgrace on the doctrine, him we shall
with reason call “a babe,” in that he has gone back again to the
beginning. So that even if we have been ten thousand years in the faith,
yet are not firm in it, we are babes; when we show a life not in
conformity with it; when we are still laying a foundation.

<span id="v.xiii-p24"></span>\[4.\] But besides \[their way of\] life he
brings another charge also against these \[Hebrews\], as being shaken to
and fro, and needing “to lay a foundation of repentance from dead
works.” For he who changes from one to another, giving up this, and
choosing that, ought first to condemn this, and to be separated from the
system, and then to pass to the other. But if he intends <span
id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span id="v.xiii-Page_410"></span> again to
lay hold on the first, how shall he touch the second?

<span id="v.xiii-p25"></span>What then of the Law (he says)? We have
condemned it, and again we run back to it. This is not a shifting about,
for here also \[under the Gospel\] we have a law. “Do we then” (he says)
“make void the law through faith? God forbid, yea we establish the Law.”
( [Rom. iii. 31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031) <span
id="v.xiii-p25.1"></span> .) I was speaking concerning evil deeds. For
he that intends to pursue virtue ought to condemn wickedness first, and
then go in pursuit of it. For repentance cannot prove  <span
id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869) them clean. For this cause they
were straightway baptized, that what they were unable to accomplish by
themselves, this might be effected by the grace of Christ. Neither then
does repentance suffice for purification, but men must first receive
baptism. At all events, it was necessary to come to baptism, having
condemned the sins thereby and given sentence against them.

<span id="v.xiii-p27"></span> But what is “the doctrine of baptisms”?
Not as if there were many baptisms, but one only.  <span
id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870) Why then did he express it in the
plural? Because he had said, “not laying again a foundation of
repentance.” For if he again baptized them and catechised them afresh,
and having been baptized at the beginning  <span
id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871) they were again taught what things
ought to be done and what ought not, they would remain perpetually
incorrigible.

<span id="v.xiii-p30"></span>“And of laying on of hands.” For thus did
they receive the Spirit, “when Paul had laid his hands on them” ( [Acts
xix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006) <span id="v.xiii-p30.1"></span>
), it is said.

<span id="v.xiii-p31"></span>“And of the resurrection of the dead.” For
this is both effected in baptism, and is affirmed in the confession.

<span id="v.xiii-p32"></span> “And of eternal judgment.” But why does he
say this? Because it was likely that, having already believed, they
would either be shaken \[from their faith\], or would lead evil and
slothful lives, he says, “be wakeful.”  <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872)

<span id="v.xiii-p34"></span>It is not open to them to say, If we live
slothfully we will be baptized again, we will be catechised again, we
will again receive the Spirit; even if now we fall from the faith, we
shall be able again by being baptized, to wash away our sins, and to
attain to the same state as before. Ye are deceived (he says) in
supposing these things.

<span id="v.xiii-p35"></span>\[5.\] [Heb.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#005)<span id="v.xiii-p35.1"></span> .
“For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,
and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance,
crucifying  <span id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873) to themselves the
Son of God afresh, and putting Him to an open shame.”

<span id="v.xiii-p37"></span> And see how putting them to shame,  <span
id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874) and forbiddingly he begins.
“Impossible.” No longer (he says) expect that which is not possible;
(For he said not, It is not seemly, or, It is not expedient, or, It is
not lawful, but “impossible,” so as to cast \[them\] into despair), if
ye have once been altogether enlightened.

<span id="v.xiii-p39"></span>Then he adds, “and have tasted of the
heavenly gift. If ye have tasted” (he says) “of the heavenly gift,” that
is, of forgiveness. “And been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
tasted the good word of God” (he is speaking here of the doctrine) “and
the powers of the world to come” (what powers is he speaking of? either
the working of miracles, or “the earnest of the Spirit”— [2 Cor. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022) <span id="v.xiii-p39.1"></span> )
“and have fallen away, to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they
crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh and put Him to an open
shame.” “Renew them,” he says, “unto repentance,” that is, by
repentance, for unto repentance is by repentance. What then, is
repentance excluded? Not repentance, far from it! But the renewing again
by the laver.  <span id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875) For he did not
say, “impossible” to be renewed “unto repentance,” and stop, but added
how “impossible, \[by\] crucifying afresh.”

<span id="v.xiii-p41"></span>To “be renewed,” that is, to be made new,
for to make men new is \[the work\] of the laver only: for (it is said)
“thy youth shall be renewed as the eagle’s.” ( [Ps. ciii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005) <span id="v.xiii-p41.1"></span> .)
But it is \[the work of\] repentance, when those who have been made new,
have afterwards become old through sins, to set them free from this old
age, and to make them strong.  <span
id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876) To bring them to that former
brightness however, is not possible; for there the whole was Grace.

<span id="v.xiii-p43"></span>\[6.\] “Crucifying to themselves,” he says,
“the Son of God afresh, and putting Him to an open shame.” What he means
is this. Baptism is a Cross, and “our old man was crucified with
\[Him\]” ( [Rom. vi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006) <span
id="v.xiii-p43.1"></span> ), for we were “made conformable to the
likeness of His death” ( [Rom. 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005),
[Phil. 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010)<span
id="v.xiii-p43.2"></span> ), and again, “we were buried therefore with
Him by baptism into death.” ( [Rom. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004) <span id="v.xiii-p43.3"></span> .)
Wherefore, as it is not possible that Christ should be crucified a
second time, for that is to “put Him to an open shame.”  <span
id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877) For “if death shall no more have
dominion over Him” ( [Rom. vi. 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009) <span
id="v.xiii-p44.6"></span> ), if He rose again, by His resurrection
becoming superior to death; if by death He wrestled with and overcame
death, and then is crucified again, all those things become a fable and
a mockery.  <span id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878) He <span
id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span id="v.xiii-Page_411"></span> then that
baptizeth  <span id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879) a second time,
crucifies Him again.

<span id="v.xiii-p47"></span> But what is “crucifying afresh”? \[It is\]
crucifying over again. For as Christ died on the cross, so do we in
baptism, not as to the flesh, but as to sin. Behold two deaths. He died
as to the flesh; in our case the old man was buried, and the new man
arose, made conformable to the likeness of His death. If therefore it is
necessary to be baptized \[again  <span
id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880) \], it is necessary that this same
\[Christ\] should die again. For baptism is nothing else than the
putting to death of the baptized, and his rising again.

<span id="v.xiii-p49"></span> And he well said, “crucifying afresh unto
themselves.” For he that does this, as having forgotten the former
grace,  <span id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881) and ordering his own
life carelessly, acts in all respects as if there were another baptism.
It behooves us therefore to take heed and to make ourselves safe.

<span id="v.xiii-p51"></span>\[7.\] What is, “having tasted of the
heavenly gift”? it is, “of the remission of sins”: for this is of God
alone to bestow, and the grace is a grace once for all. “What then?
shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Far from it!” ( [Rom.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)<span id="v.xiii-p51.1"></span> .)
But if we should be always going to be saved by grace we shall never be
good. For where there is but one grace, and we are yet so indolent,
should we then cease sinning if we knew that it is possible again to
have our sins washed away? For my part I think not.

<span id="v.xiii-p52"></span>He here shows that the gifts are many: and
to explain it, Ye were counted worthy (he says) of so great forgiveness;
for he that was sitting in darkness, he that was at enmity, he that was
at open war, that was alienated, that was hated of God, that was lost,
he having been suddenly enlightened, counted worthy of the Spirit, of
the heavenly gift, of adoption as a son, of the kingdom of heaven, of
those other good things, the unspeakable mysteries; and who does not
even thus become better, but while indeed worthy of perdition, obtained
salvation and honor, as if he had successfully accomplished great
things; how could he be again baptized?

<span id="v.xiii-p53"></span> On two grounds then he said that the thing
was impossible, and he put the stronger last: first, because he who has
been deemed worthy of such \[blessings\], and who has betrayed all that
was granted to him, is not worthy to be again renewed; neither  <span
id="fr_2882"></span>[2883](#fn_2882) is it possible that \[Christ\]
should again be crucified afresh: for this is to “put Him to an open
shame.”

<span id="v.xiii-p55"></span>There is not then any second laver: there
is not \[indeed\]. And if there is, there is also a third, and a fourth;
for the former one is continually disannulled by the later, and this
continually by another, and so on without end.

<span id="v.xiii-p56"></span>“And tasted,” he says, “the good word of
God”; and he does not unfold it; “and the powers of the world to come,”
for to live as Angels and to have no need of earthly things, to know
that this is the means of our introduction to the enjoyment of the
worlds to come; this may we learn through the Spirit, and enter into
those sacred recesses.

<span id="v.xiii-p57"></span> What are “the powers of the world to
come”?  Life eternal, angelic conversation. Of these we have already
received the earnest through our Faith from the Spirit. Tell me then, if
after having been introduced into a palace, and entrusted with all
things therein, thou hadst then betrayed all, wouldest thou have been
entrusted with them again?  <span id="fr_2883"></span>[2884](#fn_2883)

<span id="v.xiii-p59"></span>\[8.\] What then (you say)? Is there no
repentance? There is repentance, but there is no second baptism: but
repentance there is, and it has great force, and is able to set free
from the burden of his sins, if he will, even him that hath been
baptized much in sins, and to establish in safety him who is in danger,
even though he should have come unto the very depth of wickedness. And
this is evident from many places. “For,” says one, “doth not he that
falleth rise again? or he that turneth away, doth not he turn back to
\[God\]?” ( [Jer. viii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004) <span
id="v.xiii-p59.1"></span> .) It is possible, if we will, that Christ
should be formed in us again: for hear Paul saying, “My little children
of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be formed in you.” (
[Gal. iv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019) <span
id="v.xiii-p59.2"></span> .) Only let us lay hold on repentance.

<span id="v.xiii-p60"></span>For behold the love of God to man! We ought
on every ground to have been punished at the first; in that having
received the natural law, and enjoyed innumerable blessings, we have not
acknowledged our Master, and have lived an unclean life. Yet He not only
has not punished us, but has even made us partakers of countless
blessings, just as if we had accomplished great things. Again we fell
away, and not even so does He punish us, but has given medicine of
repentance, which is sufficient to put away and blot out all our sins;
only if we knew the nature of the medicine, and how we ought to apply
it.

<span id="v.xiii-p61"></span> What then is the medicine of Repentance
and how is it made up? First, of the condemnation of our own sins;
 <span id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884) “For” (it is said) “mine
iniquity have I not hid” ( [Ps. xxxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005) <span id="v.xiii-p62.5"></span> );
and <span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span id="v.xiii-Page_412"></span>
again, “I will confess against myself my lawlessness unto the Lord, and
Thou forgavest the iniquity of my heart.” And “Declare thou at the first
thy sins, that thou mayest be justified.” ( [Isa. xliii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026) <span id="v.xiii-p62.6"></span> .)
And, “The righteous man is an accuser of himself at the first speaking.”
( [Prov. xviii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017) <span
id="v.xiii-p62.7"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiii-p63"></span> Secondly, of great humbleness of mind: For
it is like a golden chain; if one have hold of the beginning, all will
follow. Because if thou confess thy sin as one ought to confess, the
soul is humbled. For conscience turning it on itself  <span
id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885) causeth it to be subdued.

<span id="v.xiii-p65"></span>Other things too must be added to
humbleness of mind if it be such as the blessed David knew, when he
said, “A broken and a contrite heart God will not despise.” ( [Ps. li.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017) <span id="v.xiii-p65.1"></span> .)
For that which is broken does not rise up, does not strike, but is ready
to be ill-treated and itself riseth not up. Such is contrition of heart:
though it be insulted, though it be evil entreated, it is quiet, and is
not eager for vengeance.

<span id="v.xiii-p66"></span>And after humbleness of mind, there is need
of intense prayers, of many tears, tears by day, and tears by night:
for, he says, “every night, will I wash my bed, I will water my couch
with my tears. I am weary with my groaning.” ( [Ps. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006) <span id="v.xiii-p66.1"></span> .)
And again, “For I have eaten ashes as it were bread, and mingled my
drink with weeping.” ( [Ps. cii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)
<span id="v.xiii-p66.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiii-p67"></span>And after prayer thus intense, there is
need of much almsgiving: for this it is which especially gives strength
to the medicine of repentance. And as there is a medicine among the
physicians’ helps which receives many herbs, but one is the essential,
so also in case of repentance this is the essential herb, yea, it may be
everything. For hear what the Divine Scripture says, “Give alms, and all
things shall be clean.” ( [Luke xi. 41](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#041)
<span id="v.xiii-p67.1"></span> .)  And again, “By alms-giving and acts
of faithfulness  <span id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886) sins are
purged away.” ( [Prov. xvi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#006) <span
id="v.xiii-p68.13"></span> .) And, “Water will quench a flaming fire,
and alms will do away with great sins.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
3.30](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#030)<span id="v.xiii-p68.14"></span>
.)

<span id="v.xiii-p69"></span>Next not being angry with any one, not
bearing malice; the forgiving all their trespasses. For, it is said,
“Man retaineth wrath against man, and yet seeketh healing from the
Lord.” ( [Ecclesiasticus 28.3](../../../bib/apo/sir028.htm#003)<span
id="v.xiii-p69.1"></span> .) “Forgive that ye may be forgiven.” ( [Mark
xi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#025) <span id="v.xiii-p69.2"></span>
.)

<span id="v.xiii-p70"></span> Also, the converting our brethren from
their wandering. For, it is said,  <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887) “Go thou, and convert thy brethren,
that thy sins may be forgiven thee.” And from one’s being in close
relations with  <span id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888) the priests,
“and if,” it is said, “a man hath committed sins it shall be forgiven
him.” ( [Jas. v. 15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015) <span
id="v.xiii-p72.3"></span> .) To stand forward in defense of those who
are wronged. Not to retain anger: to bear all things meekly.

<span id="v.xiii-p73"></span>\[9.\] Now then, before you learned that it
is possible to have our sins washed away by means of repentance, were ye
not in an agony, because there is no second laver, and were ye not in
despair of yourselves? But now that we have learned by what means
repentance and remission is brought to a successful issue, and that we
shall be able entirely to escape, if we be willing to use it aright,
what forgiveness can we possibly obtain, if we do not even enter on the
thought of our sins? since if this were done, all would be accomplished.

<span id="v.xiii-p74"></span> For as he who enters the door, is within;
so he who reckons up his own evils will also certainly come to get them
cured. But should he say, I am a sinner, without reckoning them up
specifically,  <span id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889) and saying,
This and this sin have I committed, he will never leave off, confessing
indeed continually, but never caring in earnest for amendment. For
should he have laid down a beginning, all the rest will unquestionably
follow too, if only in one point  <span
id="fr_2890"></span>[2891](#fn_2890) he have shown a beginning: for in
every case the beginning and the preliminaries are difficult. This then
let us lay as a foundation, and all will be smooth and easy.

<span id="v.xiii-p77"></span> Let us begin therefore, I entreat you, one
with making his prayers intense: another with continual weeping: another
with downcast  <span id="fr_2891"></span>[2892](#fn_2891) countenance.
For not even is this, which is so small, unprofitable: for “I saw” (it
is said) “that he was grieved and went downcast, and I healed his ways.”
( [Isa. 57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#018)<span id="v.xiii-p78.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xiii-p79"></span>But let us all humble our own souls by
alms-giving and forgiving our neighbors their trespasses, by not
remembering injuries, nor avenging ourselves. If we continually reflect
on our sins, no external circumstances can make us elated: neither
riches, nor power, nor authority, nor honor; nay, even should we sit in
the imperial chariot itself, we shall sigh bitterly: Since even the
blessed David was a King, and yet he said, “Every night I will wash my
bed,” \[&c.\] ( [Ps. vi. 6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006) <span
id="v.xiii-p79.1"></span> ): and he was not at all hurt by the purple
robe and the diadem: he was not puffed up; for he knew himself to be a
man, and inasmuch as his heart had been made contrite, he went mourning.

<span id="v.xiii-p80"></span>\[10.\] For what are all things human?
Ashes and dust, and as it were spray before the wind; a smoke and a
shadow, and a leaf driven here and there; and a flower; a dream, and a
tale, and a fable, wind and air vainly puffed out and <span
id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span id="v.xiii-Page_413"></span> wasting
away; a feather that hath no stay, a stream flowing by, or if there be
aught of more nothingness than these.

<span id="v.xiii-p81"></span>For, tell me, what dost thou esteem great?
What dignity thinkest thou to be great? is it that of the Consul? For
the many think no greater dignity than that. He who is not Consul is not
a whit inferior to him who is in so great splendor, who is so greatly
admired. Both one and the other are of the same dignity; both of them
alike, after a little while, are no more.

<span id="v.xiii-p82"></span>When was he made \[Consul\]? For how long a
time? tell me: for two days? Nay, this takes place even in dreams. But
that is \[only\] a dream, you say. And what is this?  For (tell me) what
is by day, is it \[therefore\] not a dream? Why do we not rather call
these things a dream? For as dreams when the day comes on are proved to
be nothing: so these things also, when the night comes on, are proved to
be nothing. For night and day have received each an equal portion of
time, and have equally divided all duration. Therefore as in the day a
person rejoices not in what happened at night, so neither in the night
is it possible for him to reap the fruit of what is done in the day.
Thou hast been made Consul? So was I in the night; only I in the night,
thou in the day. And what of this? Not even so hast thou any advantage
over me, except haply its being said, Such an one is Consul, and the
pleasure that springs from the words, gives him the advantage.

<span id="v.xiii-p83"></span>I mean something of this kind, for I will
express it more plainly: if I say “Such an one is Consul,” and bestow on
him the name, is it not gone as soon as it is spoken? So also are the
things themselves; no sooner doth the Consul appear, than he is no more.
But let us suppose \[that he is Consul\] for a year, or two years, or
three or four years. Where are they who were ten times Consul? Nowhere.

<span id="v.xiii-p84"></span>But Paul is not so. For he was, and also is
living continually: he did not live one day, nor two, nor ten, and
twenty, nor thirty; nor ten and twenty, nor yet thirty years—and die.
Even the four hundredth year is now past, and still even yet is he
illustrious, yea much more illustrious than when he was alive. And these
things indeed \[are\] on earth; but the glory of the saints in heaven
what word could set forth?

<span id="v.xiii-p85"></span>Wherefore I entreat you, let us seek this
glory; let us pursue after it, that we may attain it. For this is the
true glory. Let us henceforth stand aloof from the things of this life,
that we may find grace and mercy in Christ Jesus our Lord: with whom to
the Father, together with the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor and
worship, now and for ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2862"></span>[408:2863](1140107.htm#fr_2862) <span
id="v.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p4.1"></span>τὸν λόγον τῆς ἀρχῆς τοῦ Χριστοῦ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p4.2"></span>. Literally,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p4.3"></span>the discourse of the
beginning of Christ</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p4.4"></span>; but presently St. Chrys. substitutes for
this,</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p4.5"></span>ἡ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p4.6"></span>ἀρχὴ τοῦ λόγου</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p4.7"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p4.8"></span>the beginning of the
doctrine,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p4.9"></span>as
the words are translated in our version.</span>

<span id="fn_2863"></span>[408:2864](1140107.htm#fr_2863) <span
id="v.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p6.1"></span>τὰ στοιχεῖα τῆς ἀρχῆς</span>

<span id="fn_2864"></span>[409:2865](1140107.htm#fr_2864) <span
id="v.xiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p13.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p13.2"></span>νεδοευόντων αὐτοὺς</span>

<span id="fn_2865"></span>[409:2866](1140107.htm#fr_2865) <span
id="v.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p16.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p16.2"></span>ἀρχὴ τοῦ λόγου</span>

<span id="fn_2866"></span>[409:2867](1140107.htm#fr_2866) <span
id="v.xiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.1"></span>The Faith;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.2"></span>πίστις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.3"></span>with the article in this place and a little
below means the Creed; as we say</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.4"></span>the Belief.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.5"></span> \[Yet it would be impossible to substitute the
word</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.6"></span>Creed</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.7"></span>—</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p18.8"></span>Creed in the resurrection.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p18.9"></span>&c. What is meant is that
Christian belief which finds expression in the Creed, as well as
elsewhere.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2867"></span>[409:2868](1140107.htm#fr_2867) <span
id="v.xiii-p18.10"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p19.1"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p19.2"></span>the letters.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[409:2869](1140107.htm#fr_2868) <span
id="v.xiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p22.1"></span>τὸ ἄλφα</span>

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[410:2870](1140107.htm#fr_2869) <span
id="v.xiii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p26.1"></span>δεῖξαι</span>

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[410:2871](1140107.htm#fr_2870) <span
id="v.xiii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p28.1"></span>That is, the Apostle repudiates the teaching of
more than one baptism.</span>

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[410:2872](1140107.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="v.xiii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p29.2"></span>ξ ἀρχῆς</span>

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[410:2873](1140107.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="v.xiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p33.1"></span>νήψατε</span>

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[410:2874](1140107.htm#fr_2873) <span
id="v.xiii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p36.1"></span>St. Chrys.’s exposition requires this literal
translation of the participle. He gives two explanations of it,</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p36.2"></span>to renew them by
crucifying afresh,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p36.3"></span>and</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p36.4"></span>seeing they crucify afresh.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[410:2875](1140107.htm#fr_2874) <span
id="v.xiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p38.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p38.2"></span>ντρεπτικῶς</span>

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[410:2876](1140107.htm#fr_2875) <span
id="v.xiii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p40.1"></span>διὰ λουτροῦ</span>

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[410:2877](1140107.htm#fr_2876) <span
id="v.xiii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p42.1"></span>στερροὺς καινοὺς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p42.2"></span>, Sav. Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[410:2878](1140107.htm#fr_2877) <span
id="v.xiii-p43.4"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p44.1"></span>The common editions add</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p44.2"></span>οὕτως οὐδὲ
βαπτισθῆναι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p44.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p44.4"></span>so neither \[is it possible\] to be baptized
\[a second time\].</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p44.5"></span> The apodosis is wanting in the older text, as
it is in several other places.</span>

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[410:2879](1140107.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="v.xiii-p44.7"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p45.1"></span>\[The original has a *paronomasia* hardly to be
reproduced in English. The word is,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p45.2"></span>παραδειγματισμός</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p45.3"></span>, of which the</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p45.4"></span>παραδειγματίσαι</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p45.5"></span>=</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p45.6"></span>put to an open
shame,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p45.7"></span>above
is the verb.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[411:2880](1140107.htm#fr_2879) <span
id="v.xiii-p45.8"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p46.1"></span>The later texts add</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p46.2"></span>ἑ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p46.3"></span>αυτὸν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p46.4"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p46.5"></span>that baptizeth
himself.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p46.6"></span>
St. Chrys. however is speaking of a bishop who repeats baptism.</span>

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[411:2881](1140107.htm#fr_2880) <span
id="v.xiii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p48.1"></span>S. B. add</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p48.2"></span>πάλιν</span>

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[411:2882](1140107.htm#fr_2881) <span
id="v.xiii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p50.1"></span>χάρις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p50.2"></span>. The word is used throughout this passage in
the sense of remission, as explained in the next clause.</span>

<span id="fn_2882"></span>[411:2883](1140107.htm#fr_2882) <span
id="v.xiii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p54.1"></span>The longer text in Sav. and Ben. adds,</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p54.2"></span>δευτέρῳ δὲ ὅτι
οὐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p54.3"></span>,</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p54.4"></span>and secondly because
it is not,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p54.5"></span>&c.: the shorter text has only</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p54.6"></span>οὐδὲ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p54.7"></span>, omitting</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p54.8"></span>secondly.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p54.9"></span> There are many other
instances of a similar negligence of style in the genuine text, as also
in other works of St. Chrys.</span>

<span id="fn_2883"></span>[411:2884](1140107.htm#fr_2883) <span
id="v.xiii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p58.1"></span>The common texts add</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p58.2"></span>τὰ ἐκεῖ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p58.3"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p58.4"></span>the things in
heaven.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p58.5"></span> But
St. Chrys. is speaking of present privileges here on earth.</span>

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[411:2885](1140107.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="v.xiii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p62.1"></span>The common texts add</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p62.2"></span>καὶ ἀπὸ ἐξαγορεύσεως</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p62.3"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p62.4"></span>and \[of\] from
confession.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[412:2886](1140107.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="v.xiii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p64.1"></span>συστρέφον</span>

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[412:2887](1140107.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="v.xiii-p67.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p68.1"></span>καὶ πίστεσιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p68.2"></span>. \[These same two words,</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p68.3"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p68.4"></span>λεημοσύναι καί
πίστεις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p68.5"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p68.6"></span>almsgiving and acts of faithfulness,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p68.7"></span>are used by the
Septuagint to translate</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p68.8"></span>mercy and truth</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p68.9"></span>in [Prov. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003)<span id="v.xiii-p68.10"></span>
also, as if</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p68.11"></span>πίστεις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p68.12"></span>were the distinct *acts of faithfulness* which
go to make up *truth* , comp. *true of heart* throughout the
Psalms.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[412:2888](1140107.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="v.xiii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p71.1"></span>This seems to be an expression of the doctrine
of</span> <span id="v.xiii-p71.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p71.3"></span>[Jas. 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#020)<span
id="v.xiii-p71.4"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p71.5"></span>, partially in the language of our Lord,</span>
<span id="v.xiii-p71.6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p71.7"></span>[Luke xxii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#033)<span
id="v.xiii-p71.8"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p71.9"></span>. \[Cf.</span> <span id="v.xiii-p71.10"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xiii-p71.11"></span>[Acts iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019)<span
id="v.xiii-p71.12"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p71.13"></span>.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[412:2889](1140107.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="v.xiii-p71.14"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p72.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p72.2"></span>χειν οἰκείως</span>

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[412:2890](1140107.htm#fr_2889) <span
id="v.xiii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p75"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p75.1"></span>κατ̓ εἶδος</span>

<span id="fn_2890"></span>[412:2891](1140107.htm#fr_2890) <span
id="v.xiii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p76"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p76.1"></span>εἰς ἓν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p76.2"></span>, or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p76.3"></span>once for all.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2891"></span>[412:2892](1140107.htm#fr_2891) <span
id="v.xiii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="v.xiii-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p78.1"></span>κατηφεῖν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p78.2"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xiii-p78.3"></span>seriousness.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily X](1140108)
