[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140078)  [Next](1140080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxvi"></span> <span id="iv.lxxvi-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span id="iv.lxxvi-Page_269"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxvi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxvi-p2.2"></span>[John
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="iv.lxxvi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p3"></span> *“Philip saith unto Him, Lord, show us
the Father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus saith unto him, Have I been so
long time with you, and yet hast thou not known Me, Philip? He who hath
seen Me, hath seen the Father.”*  <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126)

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p5.1"></span>The</span> Prophet said to the Jews, “Thou
hadst the countenance of a harlot, thou wert shameless towards all men.”
( [Jer. iii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p5.2"></span> , LXX.) Now it seems fitting to use this
expression not only against that city,  <span
id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) but against all who shamelessly set
their faces against the truth. For when Philip said to Christ, “Show us
the Father,” He replied, “Have I been so long time with you, and hast
thou not known Me, Philip?” And yet there are some Who even after these
words separate the Father from the Son. What proximity dost thou require
closer than this? Indeed from this very saying some have fallen into the
malady of Sabellius. But let us, leaving both these and those as
involved in directly opposite error, consider the exact meaning of the
words. “Have I been so long time with you, and hast thou not known Me,
Philip?” He saith. What then? replieth Philip, “Art thou the Father
after whom I enquire?” “No,” He saith. On this account He said not,
“hast thou not known Him,” but, “hast thou not known Me,” declaring
nothing else but this, that the Son is no other than what the Father is,
yet continuing to be a Son. But how came Philip to ask this question?
Christ had said, “If ye had known Me, ye should have known My Father
also” ( [John 14.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007)<span
id="iv.lxxvi-p6.2"></span> ), and He had often said the same to the
Jews. Since then Peter and the Jews had often asked Him, “Who is the
Father?” since Thomas had asked Him, and no one had learnt anything
clear, but His words were still not understood; Philip, in order that He
might not seem to be importunate and to trouble Him by asking in his
turn after the Jews, “Show us the Father,” added, “and it sufficeth us,”
“we seek no more.” Yet Christ had said, “If ye had known Me, ye should
have known My Father also,” and by Himself He declared the Father. But
Philip reversed the order, and said, “Show us the Father,” as though
knowing Christ exactly. But Christ endureth him not, but putteth him in
the right way, persuading him to gain the knowledge of the Father
through Himself, while Philip desired to see Him with these bodily eyes,
having perhaps heard concerning the Prophets, that they “saw God.” But
those cases, Philip, were acts of condescension. Wherefore Christ said,
“No man hath seen God at any time” ( [John
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p6.3"></span>
); and again, “Every man that hath heard and hath learned from God
cometh unto Me.” ( [John 6.45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span
id="iv.lxxvi-p6.4"></span> .) “Ye have neither heard His voice at any
time, nor seen His shape.” ( [John
5.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p6.5"></span>
.) And in the Old Testament, “No man shall see My face, and live.” (
[Ex. xxxiii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p6.6"></span> .) What saith Christ? Very reprovingly He
saith, “Have I been so long time with you, and hast thou not known Me,
Philip?” He said not, “hast thou not seen,” but, “hast thou not known
Me.” “Why,” Philip might say, “do I wish to learn concerning Thee? At
present I seek to see Thy Father, and Thou sayest unto me, hast thou not
known Me?” What connection then hath this with the question? Surely a
very close one; for if He is that which the Father is, yet continuing a
Son, with reason He showeth in Himself Him who begat Him. Then to
distinguish the Persons He saith, “He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father,” lest any one should assert that the same is Father, the same
Son. For had He been the Father, He would not have said, “He that hath
seen Me hath seen Him.” Why then did He not reply, “thou askest things
impossible, and not allowed to man; to Me alone is this possible”?
Because Philip had said, “it sufficeth us,” as though knowing Christ, He
showeth that he had not even seen Him. For assuredly he would have known
the Father, had he been able to know the Son.  <span
id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) Wherefore He saith, “He that hath
seen Me, hath seen the Father.” “If any one hath seen Me, he shall also
behold Him.” What He saith is of this kind: “It is not possible to see
either Me or Him.” For Philip sought the knowledge which is by sight,
and since he thought that he had so seen Christ, he desired in like
manner to see the Father; but Jesus showeth him that he had not even
seen Himself. And if any one here call knowledge, sight, I do not
contradict him, for, “he that hath known Me,” saith Christ, “hath known
the Father.” Yet He did not say this, but desiring to establish the
Consubstantiality, declared, “he that knoweth My Essence, knoweth that
of the Father also.” “And what is this?” saith some one; “for he who is
acquainted with creation knoweth also God.” Yet all are acquainted with
creation, and have seen it, but all do not know God. Besides, let us
consider what Philip <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="iv.lxxvi-Page_270"></span> seeks to see. Is it the wisdom of the
Father? Is it His goodness? Not so, but the very whatever God is, the
very Essence. To this therefore Christ answereth, “He that hath seen
Me.” Now he that hath seen the creation, hath not also seen the Essence
of God. “If any one hath seen Me, he hath seen the Father,” He saith.
Now had He been of a different Essence, He would not have spoken thus.
But to make use of a grosser argument, no man that knows not what gold
is, can discern the substance of gold in silver. For one nature is not
shown by another. Wherefore He rightly rebuked him, saying, “Am I so
long with you?” Hast thou enjoyed such teaching, hast thou seen miracles
wrought with authority, and all belonging to the Godhead, which the
Father alone worketh, sins forgiven, secrets published, death
retreating, a creation wrought from earth,  <span
id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) and hast thou not known Me? Because
He was clothed with flesh, therefore He said, “Hast thou not known Me?”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p9"></span>\[2.\] Thou hast seen the Father; seek not
to see more; for in Him thou hast seen Me. If thou hast seen Me, be not
over-curious; for thou hast also in Me known Him.

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p10"></span> [John
14.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p10.1"></span>
. “Believest thou not that I am in the Father?”  <span
id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130)

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p12"></span>That is, “I am seen in that Essence.”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p13"></span>“The words that I speak, I speak not of
Myself,”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p14"></span>Seest thou the exceeding nearness, and
the proof of the one Essence?

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p15"></span>“The Father that dwelleth in Me, He doeth
the works.”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p16"></span> How, beginning with words, doth He come
to works? for that which naturally followed was, that He should say,
“the Father speaketh the words.” But He putteth two things here, both
concerning doctrine and miracles. Or it may have been because the words
also were works. How then doeth He  <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) them? In another place He saith,
“If I do not the works of My Father, believe Me not.” ( [John
10.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p17.2"></span>
.) How then saith He here that the Father doeth them? To show this same
thing, that there is no interval between the Father and the Son. What He
saith is this: “The Father would not act in one way, and I in another.”
Indeed in another place both He and the Father work; “My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work” ( [John
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p17.3"></span>
); showing in the first passage the unvaryingness of the works,  <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) in the second the identity. And if
the obvious meaning of the words denotes humility, marvel not; for after
having first said, “Believest thou not?” He then spake thus, showing
that He so modeled His words to bring him to the faith; for He walked in
their hearts.

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p19"></span> [John
14.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p19.1"></span>
. “Believe  <span id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133) that I am in the
Father and the Father in Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p21"></span> “Ye ought not, when ye hear of ‘Father’
and ‘Son,’ to seek anything else to the establishing of the relationship
 <span id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134) as to Essence, but if this
is not sufficient to prove to you the Condignity and Consubstantiality,
ye may learn it even from the works.” Had the, “he that hath seen Me,
hath seen My Father,” been used with respect to works, He would not
afterwards have said,

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p23"></span>“Or else believe Me for the very works’
sake.” And then to show that He is not only able to do these things, but
also other much greater than these, He putteth them with excess. For He
saith not, “I can do greater things than these,” but, what was much more
wonderful, “I can give to others also to do greater things than these.”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p24"></span> [John
14.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p24.1"></span>
. “Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on Me, the works
that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do,
because I go to the Father.”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p25"></span>That is, “it now remaineth for you to
work miracles, for I go away.” Then when He had accomplished what His
argument intended, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p26"></span> [John
14.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p26.1"></span>
. “Whatsoever ye shall ask in My Name, that will I do, that the Father
may be glorified in Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p27"></span>Seest thou again that it is He who doeth
it? “I,” saith He, “will do it”; not, “I will ask of the Father,” but,
“that the Father may be glorified in Me.” In another place He said, “God
shall glorify Him in Himself” ( [John
13.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#032)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p27.1"></span>
), but here, “He shall glorify the Father”; for when the Son shall
appear with great power, He who begat shall be glorified. But what is,
“in My Name”? That which the Apostles said, “In the Name of Jesus
Christ, arise and walk.” ( [Acts iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006) <span id="iv.lxxvi-p27.2"></span> .)
For all the miracles which they did He wrought in them, and “the hand of
the Lord was with them.” ( [Acts xi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#021) <span id="iv.lxxvi-p27.3"></span>
.)

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p28"></span> [John
14.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#014)<span id="iv.lxxvi-p28.1"></span>
. “I will do  <span id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135) it,” He saith.

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p30"></span>Seest thou His authority? The things done
by means of others Himself doeth; hath He no power for the things done
by Himself, except as being wrought in by the Father? And who could say
this? But why doth He put it second? To confirm His own words, and to
show that the former sayings were of condescension. But the, “I go to
the Father,” is this: “I shall not perish, but remain in My own proper
Dignity, and Am in Heaven.” All this He said, comforting them. For since
it was likely that they, not yet understanding His discourses concerning
the Resurrection, would imagine something dismal, He in other discourses
promiseth that He will give them such things, soothing them in <span
id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span id="iv.lxxvi-Page_271"></span> every
way, and showing that He abideth continually; and not only abideth, but
that He will even show forth greater power.

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p31"></span>\[3.\] Let us then follow Him, and take
up the Cross. For though persecution be not present, yet the season for
another kind of death is with us. “Mortify,” it saith, “your members
which are upon earth.” ( [Col. iii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)
<span id="iv.lxxvi-p31.1"></span> .) Let us then quench concupiscence,
slay anger, abolish envy. This is a “living sacrifice.” ( [Rom. xii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001) <span id="iv.lxxvi-p31.2"></span> .)
This sacrifice ends not in ashes, is not dispersed in smoke, wants
neither wood, nor fire, nor knife. For it hath both fire and a knife,
even the Holy Spirit. Using this knife, circumcise the superfluous and
alien portion of thy heart; open the closedness of thine ears, for vices
 <span id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136) and evil desires are wont to
stop the way against the entrance of the word. The desire of money, when
it is set before one, permits not to hear the word concerning
almsgiving; and malice when it is present raises a wall against the
teaching concerning love; and some other malady falling on in its turn,
makes the soul yet more dull to all things. Let us then do away these
wicked desires; it is enough to have willed, and all are quenched. For
let us not, I entreat, look to this, that the love of wealth is a
tyrannical thing, but that the tyranny is that of our own
slackmindedness. Many indeed say that they do not even know what money
is. For this desire is not a natural one; such as are natural were
implanted in us from the first, from the beginning, but as for gold and
silver, for a long time not even what it is was known. Whence then grew
this desire? From vainglory and extreme slackmindedness. For of desires
some are necessary, some natural, some neither the one nor the other.
For example, those which if not gratified destroy the creature are both
natural and necessary, as the desire of meat and drink and sleep; carnal
desire is natural indeed but not necessary, for many have got the better
of it, and have not died. But the desire of wealth is neither natural
nor necessary, but superfluous; and if we choose we need not admit its
beginning. At any rate, Christ speaking of virginity saith, “He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it.” ( [Matt. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012) <span id="iv.lxxvi-p32.3"></span>
.)  But concerning riches not so, but how? “Except a man forsake all
that he hath, he is not worthy of Me.” ( [Luke xiv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#033) <span id="iv.lxxvi-p32.4"></span>
.) What was easy He recommended, but what goes beyond the many He
leaveth to choice. Why then do we deprive ourselves of all excuse? The
man who is made captive by some more tyrannical passion shall not suffer
a heavy punishment, but he who is subdued by a weak one is deprived of
all defense. For what shall we reply when He saith, “Ye saw Me hungry
and fed Me not”? ( [Matt. xxv. 42](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#042)
<span id="iv.lxxvi-p32.5"></span> ); what excuse shall we have? We shall
certainly plead poverty; yet we are not poorer than that widow, who by
throwing in two mites overshot all the rest. For God requireth not the
quantity of the offering, but the measure of the mind; and that He doth
so, comes from His tender care. Let us then, admiring His
lovingkindness, contribute what is in our power, that having both in
this life and in that which is to come obtained in abundance the
lovingkindness of God, we may be able to enjoy the good things promised
to us, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[269:2127](1140079.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p4.1"></span>And how sayest thou then, Show us the
Father?</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvi-p4.2"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[269:2128](1140079.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p6.1"></span>i.e. Jerusalem.</span>

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[269:2129](1140079.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p6.7"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p7.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p7.2"></span>to do this.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[270:2130](1140079.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p8.1"></span>i.e. eyes given by means of the clay.</span>

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[270:2131](1140079.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p11"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p11.1"></span>and the Father in Me?</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvi-p11.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[270:2132](1140079.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p17.1"></span>the Father.</span>

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[270:2133](1140079.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p17.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p18.1"></span>i.e. those of the Father and the Son.</span>

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[270:2134](1140079.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p20"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p20.1"></span>Believe Me,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvi-p20.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[270:2135](1140079.htm#fr_2134) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p22.1"></span>τῆς κατὰ τὴν οὐσίαν συγγενείας</span>

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[270:2136](1140079.htm#fr_2135) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p29"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p29.1"></span>If ye shall ask anything in My Name,
I,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvi-p29.2"></span>&c.,
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[271:2137](1140079.htm#fr_2136) <span
id="iv.lxxvi-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p32.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvi-p32.2"></span>maladies.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 14.15–17](1140080)
