[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140125)  [Next](1140127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxxii"></span> <span id="v.xxxii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xxxii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXVIII.</span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xxxii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxxii-p2.2"></span>[Heb.
11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#038)<span
id="v.xxxii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p3"></span> *“They wandered about in sheep-skins, and
goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented (of whom this*  <span
id="fr_3336"></span>[3337](#fn_3336) *world was not worthy); wandering
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth.”*

<span id="v.xxxii-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxxii-p5.1"></span>At</span> all times indeed, but especially then
when I reflect upon the achievements of the saints, it comes over me to
feel despondency concerning my own condition,  <span
id="fr_3337"></span>[3338](#fn_3337) because we have not even in dreams
experienced the things among which those men spent their whole lives,
not paying the penalty of sins, but always doing rightly and yet always
afflicted.

<span id="v.xxxii-p7"></span>For consider, I beseech you, Elijah, to
whom our discourse has come round to-day, for he speaks of him in this
passage, and in him his examples end: which \[example\] was appropriate
to their case. And having spoken of what befell the Apostles, that “they
were slain with the sword, were stoned,” he goes back again to Elijah,
who suffered the same things with them. (See [2 Kings i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#008) <span id="v.xxxii-p7.1"></span> .)
For since it was probable that they would not as yet hold the Apostles
in so great estimation, he brings his exhortation and consolation from
him who had been taken up \[into Heaven\] and who was held in special
admiration.

<span id="v.xxxii-p8"></span> For “they wandered about” (he says) “in
sheep-skins, and goat-skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented,
 <span id="fr_3338"></span>[3339](#fn_3338) of whom this world was not
worthy.”

<span id="v.xxxii-p10"></span>They had not even raiment, he says,
through the excess of affliction, no city, no house, no lodging-place;
the same which Christ said, “but the Son of Man hath not where to lay
His head.” ( [Matt. viii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020) <span
id="v.xxxii-p10.1"></span> .) Why do I say “no lodging-place”? No
standing-place: for not even when they had gained the wilderness, were
they at rest. For he said not, They sat down in the wilderness, but even
when they were there, they fled, and were driven thence, not out of the
inhabited world only, but even out of that which was uninhabitable. And
he reminds them of the places where they were set, and of things which
there befell \[them\].

<span id="v.xxxii-p11"></span>Then next, he says, they bring accusations
against you for Christ’s sake. What accusation had they against Elijah,
when they drove him out, and persecuted him, and compelled him to
struggle with famine? Which these \[Hebrews\] were then suffering. At
least, the brethren, it is said, decided to send \[relief\] to those of
the disciples who were afflicted. “Every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief unto <span id="page_492">p. 492</span> <span
id="v.xxxii-Page_492"></span> the brethren that dwelt in Judea” ( [Acts
xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029) <span
id="v.xxxii-p11.1"></span> ), which was \[the case\] of these also.

<span id="v.xxxii-p12"></span>“Tormented” \[or “ill-treated”\], he says;
that is, suffering distress, in journeyings, in dangers.

<span id="v.xxxii-p13"></span>But “They wandered about,” what is this?
“Wandering,” he says, “in deserts and in mountains and in dens and caves
of the earth,” like exiles and outcasts, as persons taken in the basest
\[of crimes\], as those not worthy to see the sun, they found no refuge
from the wilderness, but must always be flying, must be seeking
hiding-places, must bury themselves alive in the earth, always be in
terror.

<span id="v.xxxii-p14"></span> \[2.\] What then is the reward of so
great a change?  <span id="fr_3339"></span>[3340](#fn_3339) What is the
recompense?

<span id="v.xxxii-p16"></span>They have not yet received it, but are
still waiting; and after thus dying in so great tribulation, they have
not yet received it. They gained their victory so many ages ago, and
have not yet received \[their reward\]. And you who are yet in the
conflict, are you vexed?

<span id="v.xxxii-p17"></span>Do you also consider what a thing it is,
and how great, that Abraham should be sitting, and the Apostle Paul,
waiting till thou hast been perfected, that then they may be able to
receive their reward. For the Saviour has told them before that unless
we also are present, He will not give it them. As an affectionate father
might say to sons who were well approved, and had accomplished their
work, that he would not give them to eat, unless their brethren came.
And art thou vexed, that thou hast not yet received the reward? What
then shall Abel do, who was victor before all, and is sitting uncrowned?
And what Noah? And what, they who lived in those \[early\] times: seeing
that they wait for thee and those after thee?

<span id="v.xxxii-p18"></span>Dost thou see that we have the advantage
of them? For “God” (he says) “has provided some better thing for us.” In
order that they might not seem to have the advantage of us from being
crowned before us, He appointed one time of crowning for all; and he
that gained the victory so many years before, receives his crown with
thee. Seest thou His tender carefulness?

<span id="v.xxxii-p19"></span>And he did not say, “that they without us
might not be crowned,” but “that they without us might not be made
perfect”; so that at that time they appear perfect also. They were
before us as regards the conflicts, but are not before us as regards the
crowns. He wronged not them, but He honored us. For they also wait for
the brethren. For if we are “all one body,” the pleasure becomes greater
to this body, when it is crowned altogether, and not part by part. For
the righteous are also worthy of admiration in this, that they rejoice
in the welfare of their brethren, as in their own. So that for
themselves also, this is according to their wish, to be crowned along
with their own members. To be glorified all together, is a great
delight.

<span id="v.xxxii-p20"></span>\[3.\] ( [Heb.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001)<span id="v.xxxii-p20.1"></span> )
“Wherefore” (he says) “we also being compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses.” In many places the Scripture derives its
consolation in evils from corresponding things. As when the prophet
says, “From burning heat, and from storm, and rain.” ( [Isa. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006) <span id="v.xxxii-p20.2"></span> .)
This at least he says here also, that the memory of those holy men,
reestablishes and recovers the soul which had been weighed down by woes,
as a cloud does him who is burnt by the too hot rays \[of the sun.\]

<span id="v.xxxii-p21"></span>And he did not say, “lifted on high above
us,” but, “compassing us about,” which was more than the other; so that
we are in greater security.

<span id="v.xxxii-p22"></span> What sort of “cloud”? “A load of
witnesses.”  <span id="fr_3340"></span>[3341](#fn_3340) With good reason
he calls not those in the New \[Testament\] only, but those in the Old
also, “witnesses” \[or “martyrs”\]. For they also were witnesses to the
greatness of God, as for instance, the Three Children, those with
Elijah, all the prophets.

<span id="v.xxxii-p24"></span>“Laying aside all things.” “All”: what?
That is, slumber, indifference, mean reasonings, all human things.

<span id="v.xxxii-p25"></span>“And the sin which doth \[so\] easily
beset us”; <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p25.1"></span>εὐπερίστατον</span> , that is either, “which
easily circumvents us,” or “what can easily be circumvented,”  <span
id="fr_3341"></span>[3342](#fn_3341) but rather this latter. For it is
easy, if we will, to overcome sin.

<span id="v.xxxii-p27"></span>“Let us run with patience” (he says) “the
race that is set before us.” He did not say, Let us contend as boxers,
nor, Let us wrestle, nor, Let us do battle: but, what was lightest of
all, the \[contest\] of the foot-race, this has he brought forward. Nor
yet did he say, Let us add to the length of the course; but, Let us
continue patiently in this, let us not faint. “Let us run” (he says)
“the race that is set before us.”

<span id="v.xxxii-p28"></span>\[4.\] In the next place as the sum and
substance of his exhortation, which he puts both first and last, even
Christ. ( [Heb. 12.2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002)<span
id="v.xxxii-p28.1"></span> ) “Looking” (he says) “unto <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xxxii-p28.2"></span>Jesus</span> the Author and
Finisher of our Faith”; The very thing which Christ Himself also
continually said to His disciples, “If they have called the Master of
the house <span id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span
id="v.xxxii-Page_493"></span> Beelzebub, how much more them of His
household?” ( [Matt. x. 25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025) <span
id="v.xxxii-p28.3"></span> .) And again, “The disciple is not above his
Master, nor the servant above his Lord.” ( [Matt. x.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024) <span id="v.xxxii-p28.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxxii-p29"></span>“Looking” (he says), that is, that we may
learn to run. For as in all arts and games, we impress the art upon our
mind by looking to our masters, receiving certain rules through our
sight, so here also, if we wish to run, and to learn to run well, let us
look to Christ, even to Jesus “the author and finisher of our faith.”
What is this? He has put the Faith within us. For He said to His
disciples, “Ye have not chosen Me, but I have chosen you” ( [John xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016) <span id="v.xxxii-p29.1"></span> );
and Paul too says, “But then shall I know, even as also I have been
known.”  <span id="fr_3342"></span>[3343](#fn_3342) ( [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012) <span id="v.xxxii-p30.3"></span> .)
He put the Beginning into us, He will also put on the End.

<span id="v.xxxii-p31"></span>“Who,” he says, “for the joy that was set
before Him, endured the Cross, despising the shame.” That is, it was in
His power not to suffer at all, if He so willed. For “He did no sin,
neither was guile found in His mouth” ( [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022) <span id="v.xxxii-p31.1"></span> );
as He also says in the Gospels, “The Prince of the world cometh and hath
nothing in Me.” ( [John xiv. 30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030) <span
id="v.xxxii-p31.2"></span> .) It lay then in His power, if so He willed,
not to come to the Cross. For, “I have power,” He says, “to lay down My
life; and I have power to take it again.” ( [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018) <span id="v.xxxii-p31.3"></span> .)
If then He who was under no necessity of being crucified, was crucified
for our sake, how much more is it right that we should endure all things
nobly!

<span id="v.xxxii-p32"></span> “Who for the joy that was set before Him”
(he says) “endured the cross, despising the shame.” But what is,
“Despising the shame”? He chose, he means, that ignominious death. For
suppose that He died. Why \[should He\] also \[die\] ignominiously? For
no other reason, but to teach us to make no account of glory from men.
Therefore though under no obligation He chose it, teaching us to be bold
against it, and to set it at nought. Why did he say not “pain,” but
“shame”? Because it was not with pain  <span
id="fr_3343"></span>[3344](#fn_3343) that He bore these things.

<span id="v.xxxii-p34"></span> What then is the end? “He is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God.” Seest thou the prize which Paul
also says in an epistle, “Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him,
and given Him a Name which is above every name, that at the Name of
<span class="c11"><span id="v.xxxii-p34.1"></span>Jesus</span> Christ
every knee should bow.” ( [Phil. 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="v.xxxii-p34.2"></span> .)
He speaks in respect to the flesh.  <span
id="fr_3344"></span>[3345](#fn_3344) Well then, even if there were no
prize, the example would suffice to persuade us to accept all \[such\]
things. But now prizes also are set before us, and these no common ones,
but great and unspeakable.

<span id="v.xxxii-p36"></span>\[5.\] Wherefore let us also, whenever we
suffer anything of this kind, before the Apostles consider Christ. Why?
His whole life was full of insults. For He continually heard Himself
called mad, and a deceiver, and a sorcerer; and at one time the Jews
said, “Nay,” (it says) “but He deceiveth the people.” ( [John vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012) <span id="v.xxxii-p36.1"></span> .)
And again, “That deceiver said while He was yet alive, after three days
I will rise again.” ( [Matt. xxvii. 63](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#063)
<span id="v.xxxii-p36.2"></span> .) As to sorcery too they calumniated
Him, saying, “He casteth out the devils by Beelzebub.” ( [Matt. xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#024) <span id="v.xxxii-p36.3"></span> .)
And that “He is mad and hath a devil.” ( [John x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#020) <span id="v.xxxii-p36.4"></span> .)
“Said we not well” (it says) “that He hath a devil and is mad?” ( [John
viii. 48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048) <span
id="v.xxxii-p36.5"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxxii-p37"></span>And these things He heard from them, when
doing them good, performing miracles, showing forth the works of God.
For indeed, if He had been so spoken of, when He did nothing, it would
not have been so wonderful: But \[it is wonderful\] that when He was
teaching what pertained to Truth He was called “a deceiver,” and when He
cast out devils, was said to “have a devil,” and when He was
overthrowing all that was opposed \[to God\], was called a sorcerer. For
these things they were continually alleging against Him.

<span id="v.xxxii-p38"></span> And if thou wouldst know both the scoffs
 <span id="fr_3345"></span>[3346](#fn_3345) and the ironical jeerings,
 <span id="fr_3346"></span>[3347](#fn_3346) which they made against Him
(what particularly wounds our souls), hear first those from His kindred.
“Is not this” (it says) “the carpenter’s son, whose father and mother we
know? Are not his brethren all with us?” ( [Matt.
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055), [Mark
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003), [John
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#042)<span id="v.xxxii-p40.2"></span>
.) Also scoffing at Him from His country, they said He was “of
Nazareth.” And again, “search,” it says, “and see, for out of Galilee
hath no prophet arisen.” ( [John vii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052) <span id="v.xxxii-p40.3"></span> .)
And He endured being so greatly calumniated. And again they said, “Doth
not the Scripture say, that Christ cometh from the town of Bethlehem?” (
[John vii. 42](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#042) <span
id="v.xxxii-p40.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxxii-p41"></span>Wouldst thou see also the ironical
jeerings they made? Coming, it says, to the very cross they worshiped
Him; and they struck Him and buffeted Him, and said, “Tell us who it is
that smote Thee” ( [Matt. xxvi. 68](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#068)
<span id="v.xxxii-p41.1"></span> ); and they brought vinegar to Him, and
said, “If Thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross.” ( [Matt.
xxvii. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040) <span
id="v.xxxii-p41.2"></span> .) And again, the servant of the High Priest
struck Him with the palm of his hand; and He says, “If I have spoken
evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smiteth thou Me?” (
[John xviii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023) <span
id="v.xxxii-p41.3"></span> .) And in derision they put a robe about Him;
and they spat in His face; and they were continually applying their
tests, tempting Him.

<span id="v.xxxii-p42"></span>Wouldest thou see also the accusations,
some secret, some open, some from disciples? “Will ye <span
id="page_494">p. 494</span> <span id="v.xxxii-Page_494"></span> also go
away?” ( [John vi. 67](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#067) <span
id="v.xxxii-p42.1"></span> ) He says. And that saying, “Thou hast a
devil” ( [John 8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048), [John
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020)<span id="v.xxxii-p42.2"></span>
), was uttered by those who already believed. Was He not continually a
fugitive, sometimes in Galilee, and sometimes in Judea? Was not His
trial great, even from the swaddling clothes? When He was yet a young
child, did not His mother take Him and go down into Egypt? For all these
reasons he says, “Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our
Faith who for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of
God.”

<span id="v.xxxii-p43"></span> To Him then let us look, also to the
\[sufferings  <span id="fr_3347"></span>[3348](#fn_3347) \] of His
disciples, reading the \[writings  <span
id="fr_3348"></span>[3349](#fn_3348) \] of Paul, and hearing him say,
“In much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in persecutions,
 <span id="fr_3349"></span>[3350](#fn_3349) in distresses, in stripes,
in imprisonments.” ( [2 Cor. 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#005)<span id="v.xxxii-p46.5"></span> .)
And again, “Even to this present hour, we both hunger, and thirst, and
are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place, and
labor, working with our own hands. Being reviled, we bless; being
persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat.” ( [1 Cor. iv.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011) <span id="v.xxxii-p46.6"></span>
.) Has any one \[of us\] suffered the smallest part of these things? 
For, he says, \[we are\] “As deceivers, as dishonored, as having
nothing.” ( [2 Cor. 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010)<span id="v.xxxii-p46.7"></span> .)
And again, “Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one;
thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, a night and a day have
I been in the deep; in journeyings often, in tribulations, in distress,
in hunger.” ( [2 Cor. xi. 24-26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024) <span
id="v.xxxii-p46.8"></span> .) And that these things seem good to God,
hear him saying, “For this I besought the Lord thrice, and He said to
me, My Grace is sufficient for thee; for My strength is made perfect in
weakness.” ( [2 Cor. xii. 8-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008) <span
id="v.xxxii-p46.9"></span> .) “Wherefore,” he says, “I take pleasure in
infirmities, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes,
in imprisonments, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.” Moreover,
hear Christ Himself saying, “In the world ye shall have tribulation.” (
[John xvi. 33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033) <span
id="v.xxxii-p46.10"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxxii-p47"></span>\[6.\] [Heb.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003)<span id="v.xxxii-p47.1"></span> .
“For consider,” saith he, “Him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against Himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds.”
For if the sufferings of those near us arouse us, what earnestness will
not those of our Master give us! What will they not work in us!

<span id="v.xxxii-p48"></span>And passing by all \[else\], he expressed
the whole by the \[word\] “Contradiction”; and by adding “such.” For the
blows upon the cheek, the laughter, the insults, the reproaches, the
mockeries, all these he indicated by “contradiction.” And not these
only, but also the things which befell Him during His whole life, of
teaching.

<span id="v.xxxii-p49"></span>For a great, a truly great consolation are
both the sufferings of Christ, and those of the Apostles. For He so well
knew that this is the better way of virtue, as even to go that way
Himself, not having need thereof: He knew so well that tribulation is
expedient for us, and that it becomes rather a foundation for repose.
For hear Him saying, “If a man take not his cross, and follow after Me,
he is not worthy of Me.” ( [Matt. x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038) <span id="v.xxxii-p49.1"></span> .)
If thou art a disciple, He means, imitate the Master; for this is \[to
be\] a disciple. But if while He went by \[the path of\] affliction,
thou \[goest\] by that of ease, thou no longer treadest the same path,
which He trod, but another. How then dost thou follow, when thou
followest not? How shalt thou be a disciple, not going after the Master?
This Paul also says, “We are weak, but ye are strong; we are despised,
but ye are honored.” ( [1 Cor. iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#010)
<span id="v.xxxii-p49.2"></span> .) How is it reasonable, he means, that
we should be striving after opposite things, and yet that you should be
disciples and we teachers?

<span id="v.xxxii-p50"></span>\[7.\] Affliction then is a great thing,
beloved, for it accomplishes two great things; It wipes out sins, and it
makes men strong.

<span id="v.xxxii-p51"></span>What then, you say, if it overthrow and
destroy? Affliction does not do this, but our own slothfulness. How (you
say)? If we are sober and watchful, if we beseech God that He would not
“suffer us to be tempted above that we are able” ( [1 Cor. x.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013) <span id="v.xxxii-p51.1"></span> ),
if we always hold fast to Him, we shall stand nobly, and set ourselves
against our enemy. So long as we have Him for our helper, though
temptations blow more violently than all the winds, they will be to us
as chaff and a leaf borne lightly along. Hear Paul saying, “In all these
things” (are his words) “we are more than conquerors.” ( [Rom. viii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#037) <span id="v.xxxii-p51.2"></span> .)
And again, “For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.”
( [Rom. viii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018) <span
id="v.xxxii-p51.3"></span> .) And again, “For the light affliction which
is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory.” ( [2 Cor. iv. 17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)
<span id="v.xxxii-p51.4"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxxii-p52"></span> Consider what great dangers, shipwrecks,
afflictions one upon another, and other such things, he calls “light”;
and emulate this inflexible one, who wore this body simply and
heedlessly.  <span id="fr_3350"></span>[3351](#fn_3350) Thou art in
poverty? But not in such as Paul, who was tried by hunger, and thirst,
and nakedness. For he suffered this not for one day, but endured it
continually. Whence does this appear? Hear himself saying, “Even unto
this present hour we both hunger and thirst and are naked.” ( [1 Cor.
iv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011) <span
id="v.xxxii-p53.3"></span> .) Oh! <span id="page_495">p. 495</span>
<span id="v.xxxii-Page_495"></span> How great glory did he already have
in preaching, when he was undergoing so great \[afflictions\]! Having
now \[reached\] the twentieth year \[thereof\], at the time when he
wrote this. For he says, “I knew a man fourteen years ago, whether in
the body, or out of the body, I know not.” ( [2 Cor. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002) <span id="v.xxxii-p53.4"></span> .)
And again, “After three years” (he says) “I went up to Jerusalem.” (
[Gal. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018) <span
id="v.xxxii-p53.5"></span> .) And again hear him saying, “It were better
for me to die, than that any man should make my glorying void.” ( [1
Cor. ix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#015) <span
id="v.xxxii-p53.6"></span> .) And not only this, but again also in
writing he said, “We are become as the filth of the world.” ( [1 Cor.
iv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013) <span
id="v.xxxii-p53.7"></span> .) What is more difficult to endure than
hunger? What than freezing cold? What than plottings made by brethren
whom he afterwards calls “false brethren”? ( [2 Cor. xi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026) <span id="v.xxxii-p53.8"></span> .)
Was he not called the pest of the world? An Impostor? A subverter? Was
he not cut with scourging?

<span id="v.xxxii-p54"></span>\[8.\] These things let us take into our
mind, beloved, let us consider them, let us hold them in remembrance,
and then we shall never faint, though we be wronged, though we be
plundered, though we suffer innumerable evils. Let it be granted us to
be approved in Heaven, and all things \[are\] endurable. Let it be
granted us to fare well there, and things here are of no account. These
things are a shadow, and a dream; whatever they may be, they are nothing
either in nature or in duration, while those are hoped for and expected.

<span id="v.xxxii-p55"></span>For what wouldst thou that we should
compare with those fearful things? What with the unquenchable fire? With
the never-dying worm? Which of the things here canst thou name in
comparison with the “gnashing of teeth,” with the “chains,” and the
“outer darkness,” with the “wrath,” the “tribulation,” the “anguish”?
But as to duration? Why, what are ten thousand years to ages boundless
and without end? Not so much as a little drop to the boundless ocean.

<span id="v.xxxii-p56"></span>But what about the good things? There, the
superiority is still greater. “Eye hath not seen,” (it is said,) “ear
hath not heard, neither have, entered into the heart of man” ( [1 Cor.
ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009) <span id="v.xxxii-p56.1"></span>
), and these things again shall be during boundless ages. For the sake
of these then were it not well to be cut \[by scourging\] times out of
number, to be slain, to be burned, to undergo ten thousand deaths, to
endure everything whatsoever that is dreadful both in word and deed? For
even if it were possible for one to live when burning in the fire, ought
one not to endure all for the sake of attaining to those good things
promised?

<span id="v.xxxii-p57"></span>\[9.\] But why do I trifle in saying these
things to men who do not even choose to disregard riches, but hold fast
to them as though they were immortal? And if they give a little out of
much, think they have done all? This is not Almsgiving. For Almsgiving
is that of the Widow who emptied out “all her living.” ( [Mark xii.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#044) <span id="v.xxxii-p57.1"></span> .)
But if thou dost not go on to contribute so much as the widow, yet at
least contribute the whole of thy superfluity: keep what is sufficient,
not what is superfluous.

<span id="v.xxxii-p58"></span> But there is no one who contributes even
his superabundance. For so long as thou hast many servants,  <span
id="fr_3351"></span>[3352](#fn_3351) and garments of silk, these things
are all superfluities. Nothing is indispensable or necessary, without
which we are able to live; these things are superfluous, and are simply
superadded.  <span id="fr_3352"></span>[3353](#fn_3352) Let us then see,
if you please, what we cannot live without. If we have only two
servants, we can live. For whereas some live without servants, what
excuse have we, if we are not content with two? We can also have a house
built of brick of three rooms;  <span
id="fr_3353"></span>[3354](#fn_3353) and this were sufficient for us.
For are there not some with children and wife who have but one room?
 <span id="fr_3354"></span>[3355](#fn_3354) Let there be also, if you
will, two serving boys.

<span id="v.xxxii-p63"></span> \[10.\] And how is it not a shame (you
say) that a gentlewoman  <span id="fr_3355"></span>[3356](#fn_3355)
should walk out with \[only\] two servants? It is no shame, that a
gentlewoman should walk abroad with two servants, but it is a shame that
she should go forth with many. Perhaps you laugh when you hear this.
Believe me it *is* a shame. Do you think it a great matter to go out
with many servants, like dealers in sheep, or dealers in slaves? This is
pride and vainglory, the other is philosophy and respectability. For a
gentlewoman ought not to be known from the multitude of her attendants.
For what virtue is it to have many slaves? This belongs not to the soul,
and whatever is not of the soul does not show gentility. When she is
content with a few things, then is she a gentlewoman indeed; but when
she needs many, she is a servant and inferior to slaves. Tell me, do not
the angels go to and fro about the world alone, and need not any one to
follow them? Are they then on this account inferior to us? They who need
no \[attendants\] to us who need them? If then not needing an attendant
at all, is angelic, who comes nearer to the angelic life, she who needs
many \[attendants\], or she who \[needs\] few? Is not this a shame? For
a shame it is to do anything out of place.

<span id="v.xxxii-p65"></span> Tell me who attracts the attention of
those who are in the public places,  <span
id="fr_3356"></span>[3357](#fn_3356) she who brings many in her train,
or she who \[brings but\] few? And is not she who is alone, less
conspicuous even than she who is attended by few? Seest thou that this
\[first-named conduct\] is a shame? Who attracts the attention of those
in the public <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="v.xxxii-Page_496"></span> places, she who wears beautiful garments,
or she who is dressed simply and artlessly? Again who attracts those in
the public places, she who is borne on mules, and with trappings
ornamented with gold, or she who walks out simply, and as it may be,
with propriety? Or we do not even look at this latter, if we even see
her; but the multitudes not only force their way to see the other, but
also ask, Who is she, and Where from? And I do not say how great envy is
hereby produced. What then (tell me), is it disgraceful to be looked at
or not to be looked at? When is the shame greater, when all stare at
her, or when no one \[does\]? When they inform themselves about her, or
when they do not even care? Seest thou that we do everything, not for
modesty’s sake but for vainglory?

<span id="v.xxxii-p67"></span>However, since it is impossible to draw
you away from that, I am content for the present that you should learn
that this \[conduct\] is no disgrace. Sin alone is a disgrace, which no
one thinks to be a disgrace. Sin alone is a disgrace, which no one
thinks to be a disgrace, but everything rather than this.

<span id="v.xxxii-p68"></span> \[11.\] Let your dress be such as is
needful, not superfluous. However, that we may not shut you up too
narrowly, this I assure you, that we have no need of ornaments of gold,
or of lace.  <span id="fr_3357"></span>[3358](#fn_3357) And it is not I
who say this. For that the words are not mine, hear the blessed Paul
saying, and solemnly charging women “to adorn themselves, not with
plaitings \[of the hair\], or gold, or pearls, or costly apparel.” ( [1
Tim. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009) <span
id="v.xxxii-p69.2"></span> .) But with what kind, O Paul, wouldest thou
tell us? For perhaps they will say, that only golden things are costly;
and that silks are not costly. Tell us with what kind thou wouldest?
“But having food and raiment,  <span
id="fr_3358"></span>[3359](#fn_3358) let us therewith” (he says) “be
content.”  <span id="fr_3359"></span>[3360](#fn_3359) ( [1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008) <span id="v.xxxii-p71.3"></span> .)
Let our garment be such as merely to cover us. For God hath given them
to us for this reason, that we may cover our nakedness; and this any
sort of garment can do, though but of trifling cost. Perhaps ye laugh,
who wear dresses of silk; for in truth one may well laugh, considering
what Paul enjoined and what we practice!

<span id="v.xxxii-p72"></span>But my discourse is not addressed to women
only, but also to men. For the rest of the things which we have are all
superfluous; only the poor possess no superfluities; and perhaps they
too from necessity: since, if it had been in their power, even they
would not have abstained \[from them\]. Nevertheless, “whether in
pretense or in truth” ( [Philip. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)
<span id="v.xxxii-p72.1"></span> ), so far they have no superfluities.

<span id="v.xxxii-p73"></span> \[12.\] Let us then wear such clothes as
are sufficient for our need. For what does much gold mean? To those on
the stage these things are fitting, this apparel belongs to them, to
harlots, to those who do everything to be looked at. Let her beautify
herself, who is on the stage or the dancing platform. For she wishes to
attract all to her. But a woman who professes godliness, let her not
beautify herself thus, but in a different way. Thou hast a means of
beautifying thyself far better than that. Thou also hast a theater:
 <span id="fr_3360"></span>[3361](#fn_3360) for that theater make
thyself beautiful: clothe thyself with those ornaments. What is thy
theater? Heaven, the company of Angels. I speak not of Virgins only, but
also of those in the world. All as many as believe in Christ have that
theater. Let us speak such things that we may please those spectators.
Put on such garments that thou mayest gratify them.

<span id="v.xxxii-p75"></span>For tell me, if a harlot putting aside her
golden ornaments, and her robes, and her laughter, and her witty and
unchaste talk, clothe herself with a cheap garment, and having dressed
herself simply come \[on the stage\], and utter religious words, and
discourse of chastity, and say nothing indelicate, will not all rise up?
Will not this theater be dispersed? Will they not cast her out, as one
who does not know how to suit herself to the crowd, and speaks things
foreign to that Satanic theater? So thou also, if thou enter into the
Theater of Heaven clad with her garments, the spectators will cast thee
out. For there, there is no need of these garments of gold, but of
different ones. Of what kind? Of such as the prophet names, “clothed in
fringed work of gold, and in varied colors” ( [Ps. xlv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013) <span id="v.xxxii-p75.1"></span> ),
not so as to make the body white and glistering, but so as to beautify
the soul. For the soul it is, which is contending and wrestling in that
Theater. “All the glory of the King’s daughter is from within” ( [Ps.
xlv. 13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013) <span
id="v.xxxii-p75.2"></span> ), it says. With these do thou clothe
thyself; for \[so\] thou both deliverest thyself from other evils
innumerable, and thy husband from anxiety and thyself from care.

<span id="v.xxxii-p76"></span> For so thou wilt be respected by thy
husband, when thou needest not many things. For every man is wont to be
shy towards those who make requests of him; but when he sees that they
have no need of him, then he lets down his pride, and converses with
them as equals. When thy husband sees that thou hast no need of him in
anything, that thou thinkest lightly of the presents which come from
him, then, even though he be very arrogant,  <span
id="fr_3361"></span>[3362](#fn_3361) he will respect thee more, than if
thou wert clad in golden ornaments; and thou wilt no longer be his
slave. For those of whom we stand in need, we are compelled to stoop to.
But if we restrain ourselves we shall no longer be regarded as
criminals,  <span id="fr_3362"></span>[3363](#fn_3362) but he knows that
we pay him obedience from the fear of God, not for what is given by him.
For now, when that he confers great favors on us, whatever <span
id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span id="v.xxxii-Page_497"></span> honor he
receives, he thinks he has not received all \[that is due to him\]: but
then, though he obtain but a little, he will account it a favor he does
not reproach, nor will he be himself compelled to overreach on thy
account.

<span id="v.xxxii-p79"></span>\[13.\] For what is more unreasonable,
than to provide golden ornaments, to be worn in baths, and in market
places? However, in baths and in market places it is perhaps no wonder,
but that a woman should come into Church so decked out is very
ridiculous. For, for what possible reason does she come in here wearing
golden ornaments, she who ought to come in that she may hear \[the
precept\] “that they adorn not themselves with gold, nor pearls, nor
costly array”? ( [1 Tim. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009) <span
id="v.xxxii-p79.1"></span> .) With what object then, O woman, dost thou
come? Is it indeed to fight with Paul, and show that even if he repeat
these things ten thousand times thou regardest them not? Or is it as
wishing to put us your teachers to shame as discoursing on these
subjects in vain? For tell me; if any heathen and unbeliever, after he
has heard the passage read where the blessed Paul says these things,
having a believing wife, sees that she makes much account of beautifying
herself, and puts on ornaments of gold, that she may come into Church
and hear Paul charging \[the women\] that they adorn themselves, neither
with “gold” ( [1 Tim. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009) <span
id="v.xxxii-p79.2"></span> ), nor with “pearls,” nor with “costly
array,” will he not indeed say to himself, when he sees her in her
little room,  <span id="fr_3363"></span>[3364](#fn_3363) putting on
these things, and arranging them beautifully, “Why is my wife staying
within in her little room? Why is she so slow? Why is she putting on her
golden ornaments? Where has she to go to? Into the Church? For what
purpose? To hear? ‘not with costly array’;” will he not smile, will he
not burst out into laughter? will he not think our religion  <span
id="fr_3364"></span>[3365](#fn_3364) a mockery and a deceit? Wherefore,
I beseech \[you\], let us leave golden ornaments to processions, to
theaters, to signs on the shops.  <span
id="fr_3365"></span>[3366](#fn_3365) But let not the image of God be
decked out with these things: let the gentlewoman be adorned with
gentility, and gentility is the absence of pride, and of boastful
display.

<span id="v.xxxii-p83"></span>Nay even if thou wish to obtain glory from
men, thou wilt obtain it thus. For we shall not wonder so much that the
wife of a rich man wears gold and silk (for this is the common practice
of them all), as when she is dressed in a plain and simple garment made
merely of wool. This all will admire, this they will applaud. For in
that adorning indeed of ornaments of gold and of costly apparel, she has
many to share with her. And if she surpass one, she is surpassed by
another. Yea, even if she surpass all, she must yield the palm to the
Empress herself. But in the other case, she outdoes all, even the
Emperor’s wife herself. For she alone in wealth, has chosen the
\[dress\] of the poor. So that even if we desire glory, here too the
glory is greater.

<span id="v.xxxii-p84"></span>\[14.\] I say this not only to widows, and
to the rich; for here the necessity of widowhood seems to cause this:
but to those also who have a husband.

<span id="v.xxxii-p85"></span> But, you say, I do not please my husband
\[if I dress plainly\]. It is not thy husband thou wishest to please,
but the multitude of poor women; or rather not to please them, but to
make them pine \[with envy\], and to give them pain, and make their
poverty greater. How many blasphemies are uttered because of thee! ‘Let
there be no poverty’ (say they). ‘God hates the poor.’ ‘God loves not
those in poverty.’ For that it is not thy husband whom thou wishest to
please, and for this reason thou deckest thyself out, thou makest plain
to all by what thou thyself doest. For as soon as thou hast passed over
the threshold of thy chamber,  <span
id="fr_3366"></span>[3367](#fn_3366) thou immediately puttest off all,
both the robes, and the golden ornaments, and the pearls; and at home of
all places thou dost not wear them.

<span id="v.xxxii-p87"></span> But if thou really wishest to please thy
husband, there are ways of pleasing him, by gentleness, by meekness, by
propriety. For believe me, O woman, even if thy husband be infinitely
debased,  <span id="fr_3367"></span>[3368](#fn_3367) these are the
things which will more effectually win him, gentleness, propriety,
freedom from pride and expensiveness and extravagance. For even if thou
devise ten thousand such things, thou wilt not restrain the profligate.
And this they know who have had such husbands. For however thou mayest
beautify thyself, he being a profligate will go off to a courtesan;
while \[the husband\] that is chaste and regular thou wilt gain not by
these means, but by the opposite: yea by these thou even causest him
pain, clothing thyself with the reputation of a lover of the world. For
what if thy husband out of respect, and that as a sober-minded man, does
not speak, yet inwardly he will condemn thee, and will not conceal
 <span id="fr_3368"></span>[3369](#fn_3368) ill-will  <span
id="fr_3369"></span>[3370](#fn_3369) and jealousy. Wilt thou not drive
away all pleasure for the future, by exciting ill-will against thyself?

<span id="v.xxxii-p91"></span>\[15.\] Possibly you are annoyed at
hearing what is said, and are indignant, saying, ‘He irritates husbands
still more against their wives.’ I say this, not to irritate your
husbands, but I wish that these things should be done by you willingly,
for your own sakes, not for theirs; not to free them from envy but to
free you from the parade of this life.

<span id="v.xxxii-p92"></span>Dost thou wish to appear beautiful? I also
wish it, but with beauty which God seeks, which <span id="page_498">p.
498</span> <span id="v.xxxii-Page_498"></span> “the King desires.”
 <span id="fr_3370"></span>[3371](#fn_3370) ( [Ps. xlv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011) <span id="v.xxxii-p93.2"></span> .)
Whom wouldst thou have as a Lover? God or men? Shouldest thou be
beautiful with that beauty, God will “desire thy beauty”; but if with
the other apart from this, He will abominate thee, and thy lovers will
be profligates. For no man who loves a married woman is good. Consider
this even in regard to the adorning that is external. For the other
adorning, I mean that of the soul, attracts God; but this again,
profligates. Seest thou that I care for you, that I am anxious for you,
that ye may be beautiful, really beautiful, splendid, really splendid,
that instead of profligate men, ye may have for your Lover God the Lord
of all? And she who has Him for her Lover, to whom will she be like? She
has her place among the choirs of Angels. For if one who is beloved of a
king is accounted happy above all, what will her dignity be who is
beloved of God with much love? Though thou put the whole world \[in the
balance against it\], there is nothing equivalent to that beauty.

<span id="v.xxxii-p94"></span> This beauty then let us cultivate; with
these embellishments let us adorn ourselves, that we may pass into the
Heavens, into the spiritual chambers, into the nuptial chamber that is
undefiled. For this beauty is liable to be destroyed by anything; and
when it lasts well, and neither disease nor anxiety impair it (which is
impossible), it does not last twenty years. But the other is ever
blooming, ever in its prime. *There* , there is no change to fear; no
old age coming brings a wrinkle, no undermining disease withers it; no
desponding anxiety disfigures it; but it is far above all these things.
But this \[earthly beauty\] takes flight before it appears, and if it
appears it has not many admirers. For those of well-ordered minds do not
admire it; and those who do admire it, admire with wantonness.

<span id="v.xxxii-p95"></span>\[16.\] Let us not therefore cultivate
this \[beauty\], but the other: let us have that, so that with bright
torches we may pass into the bridal chamber. For not to virgins only has
this been promised, but to virgin souls. For had it belonged merely to
virgins, those five would not have been shut out. This then belongs to
all who are virgins in soul, who are freed from worldly imaginations:
for these imaginations corrupt our souls. If therefore we remain
unpolluted, we shall depart thither, and shall be accepted. “For I have
espoused you,” he says, “to one husband, to present you a chaste virgin
unto Christ.” ( [2 Cor. xi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002) <span
id="v.xxxii-p95.1"></span> .) These things he said, not with reference
to Virgins, but to the whole body of the entire Church. For the
uncorrupt soul is a virgin, though she have a husband: she is a virgin
as to that which is Virginity indeed, that which is worthy of
admiration. For this of the body is but the accompaniment and shadow of
the other: while that is the True Virginity. This let us cultivate, and
so shall we be able with cheerful countenance to behold the Bridegroom,
to enter in with bright torches, if the oil do not fail us, if by
melting down our golden ornaments we procure such oil as makes our lamps
bright. And this oil is lovingkindness.

<span id="v.xxxii-p96"></span>If we impart what we have to others, if we
make oil therefrom, then it will protect us, and we shall not say at
that time, “Give us oil, for our lamps are going out” ( [Matt. xxv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#008) <span id="v.xxxii-p96.1"></span> ),
nor shall we beg of others, nor shall we be shut out when we are gone to
them that sell, nor shall we hear that fearful and terrible voice, while
we are knocking at the doors, “I know you not.” ( [Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012) <span id="v.xxxii-p96.2"></span> .)
But He will acknowledge us, and we shall go in with the Bridegroom, and
having entered into the spiritual Bride-chamber we shall enjoy good
things innumerable.

<span id="v.xxxii-p97"></span> For if here the bride-chamber is so
bright, the rooms so splendid, that none is weary of observing them,
much more there. Heaven is the chamber,  <span
id="fr_3371"></span>[3372](#fn_3371) and the bride-chamber  <span
id="fr_3372"></span>[3373](#fn_3372) better than Heaven; then we shall
enter. But if the Bride-chamber is so beautiful, what will the
Bridegroom be?

<span id="v.xxxii-p100"></span>And why do I say, ‘Let us put away our
golden ornaments, and give to the needy’? For if ye ought even to sell
yourselves, if ye ought to become slaves instead of free women, that so
ye might be able to be with that Bridegroom, to enjoy that Beauty,
\[nay\] merely to look on that Countenance, ought you not with ready
mind to welcome all things? We look at and admire a king upon the earth,
but when \[we see\] a king and a bridegroom both, much more ought we to
welcome him with readiness. Truly these things are a shadow, while those
are a reality. And a King and a Bridegroom in Heaven! To be counted
worthy also to go before Him with torches, and to be near Him, and to be
ever with Him, what ought we not to do? What should we not perform? What
should we not endure? I entreat you, let us conceive some desire for
those blessings, let us long for that Bridegroom, let us be virgins as
to the true Virginity. For the Lord seeks after the virginity of the
soul. With this let us enter into Heaven, “not having spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing” ( [Eph. v. 27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027) <span
id="v.xxxii-p100.1"></span> ); that we may attain also to the good
things promised, of which may we all be partakers through the grace and
mercy of Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom to the Father together with
the Holy Ghost, be glory, power, honor, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3336"></span>[491:3337](1140126.htm#fr_3336) <span
id="v.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p4.1"></span>οὗτος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p4.2"></span>. Mr. F. observes that St. Chrys. more usually
cites the text without</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p4.3"></span>οὗτος</span>

<span id="fn_3337"></span>[491:3338](1140126.htm#fr_3337) <span
id="v.xxxii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p6.2"></span>παγορεύειν τὰ καθ̓ ἑ</span>

<span id="fn_3338"></span>[491:3339](1140126.htm#fr_3338) <span
id="v.xxxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p9"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p9.1"></span>ill-treated,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p9.2"></span>κακουχούμενοι</span>

<span id="fn_3339"></span>[492:3340](1140126.htm#fr_3339) <span
id="v.xxxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p15.2"></span>μοιβῆς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p15.3"></span>, i.e. the accepting sufferings instead of an
easy life.</span>

<span id="fn_3340"></span>[492:3341](1140126.htm#fr_3340) <span
id="v.xxxii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.1"></span>μαρτύρων ὄγκον</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p23.2"></span>. St. Chrys.
connects</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.3"></span>ὄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.4"></span>γκον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.5"></span>with</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.6"></span>μαρτύρων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.7"></span>and takes</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.8"></span>πάντα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.9"></span>as a neuter plural; the words of the
Apostle,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.10"></span>τοσοῦτον ἔχοντες περικείμενον ἡμῖν νέφος,
μαρτύρων ὄγκον, ἀποθέμενοι πάντα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.11"></span>, he would understand thus,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p23.12"></span>Seeing we are compassed
about with so great a cloud, a load of witnesses, let us lay aside all
things,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.13"></span>&c. \[But previously he has connected
with</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.14"></span>γέφος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p23.15"></span>, so that the present. connection with</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p23.16"></span>ὄ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p23.17"></span>γκον</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p23.18"></span>was probably an
afterthought on the spur of the moment.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3341"></span>[492:3342](1140126.htm#fr_3341) <span
id="v.xxxii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p26.1"></span>περίστασιν παθεῖν</span>

<span id="fn_3342"></span>[493:3343](1140126.htm#fr_3342) <span
id="v.xxxii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p30.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p30.2"></span>πεγνώσθην</span>

<span id="fn_3343"></span>[493:3344](1140126.htm#fr_3343) <span
id="v.xxxii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p33.1"></span>λύπης</span>

<span id="fn_3344"></span>[493:3345](1140126.htm#fr_3344) <span
id="v.xxxii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p35.1"></span>the human nature.</span>

<span id="fn_3345"></span>[493:3346](1140126.htm#fr_3345) <span
id="v.xxxii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p39.1"></span>σκώμματα</span>

<span id="fn_3346"></span>[493:3347](1140126.htm#fr_3346) <span
id="v.xxxii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p40.1"></span>εἰρωνείας</span>

<span id="fn_3347"></span>[494:3348](1140126.htm#fr_3347) <span
id="v.xxxii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p44.1"></span>τὰ</span>

<span id="fn_3348"></span>[494:3349](1140126.htm#fr_3348) <span
id="v.xxxii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p45.1"></span>τὰ</span>

<span id="fn_3349"></span>[494:3350](1140126.htm#fr_3349) <span
id="v.xxxii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p46.1"></span>\[The insertion of</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p46.2"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p46.3"></span>νδιωγμοῖς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxxii-p46.4"></span>here appears to be
entirely without authority, and was probably a slip of
memory.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3350"></span>[494:3351](1140126.htm#fr_3350) <span
id="v.xxxii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p53.1"></span>ἁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p53.2"></span>πλῶς καὶ εἰκῆ</span>

<span id="fn_3351"></span>[495:3352](1140126.htm#fr_3351) <span
id="v.xxxii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p59.1"></span>i.e. slaves.</span>

<span id="fn_3352"></span>[495:3353](1140126.htm#fr_3352) <span
id="v.xxxii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p60.1"></span>ἁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p60.2"></span>πλῶς ἕξω πρόσκειται</span>

<span id="fn_3353"></span>[495:3354](1140126.htm#fr_3353) <span
id="v.xxxii-p60.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p61.1"></span>οἱκημάτων</span>

<span id="fn_3354"></span>[495:3355](1140126.htm#fr_3354) <span
id="v.xxxii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p62.1"></span>οἶκον</span>

<span id="fn_3355"></span>[495:3356](1140126.htm#fr_3355) <span
id="v.xxxii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p64.1"></span>τὴν ἐλευθέραν</span>

<span id="fn_3356"></span>[495:3357](1140126.htm#fr_3356) <span
id="v.xxxii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p66.1"></span>the open spaces of the streets where idlers
gathered.</span>

<span id="fn_3357"></span>[496:3358](1140126.htm#fr_3357) <span
id="v.xxxii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p69.1"></span>λεπτῶν ὀθονίων</span>

<span id="fn_3358"></span>[496:3359](1140126.htm#fr_3358) <span
id="v.xxxii-p69.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p70.1"></span>σκεπάσματα</span>

<span id="fn_3359"></span>[496:3360](1140126.htm#fr_3359) <span
id="v.xxxii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p71.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p71.2"></span>ρκεσθηόμεθα</span>

<span id="fn_3360"></span>[496:3361](1140126.htm#fr_3360) <span
id="v.xxxii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p74"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p74.1"></span>body of spectators.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3361"></span>[496:3362](1140126.htm#fr_3361) <span
id="v.xxxii-p76.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p77"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p77.1"></span>φρονηματιῶν</span>

<span id="fn_3362"></span>[496:3363](1140126.htm#fr_3362) <span
id="v.xxxii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p78"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p78.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p78.2"></span>πόδικοι</span>

<span id="fn_3363"></span>[497:3364](1140126.htm#fr_3363) <span
id="v.xxxii-p79.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p80"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p80.1"></span>κοιτωνίσκῳ</span>

<span id="fn_3364"></span>[497:3365](1140126.htm#fr_3364) <span
id="v.xxxii-p80.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p81.1"></span>τὰ ἡμέτερο</span>

<span id="fn_3365"></span>[497:3366](1140126.htm#fr_3365) <span
id="v.xxxii-p81.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p82"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p82.1"></span>ταῖς προθήκαις ταῖς ἐπὶ τῶν ἐργαστηρίων</span>

<span id="fn_3366"></span>[497:3367](1140126.htm#fr_3366) <span
id="v.xxxii-p85.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p86"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p86.1"></span>θαλάμου</span>

<span id="fn_3367"></span>[497:3368](1140126.htm#fr_3367) <span
id="v.xxxii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p88"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p88.1"></span>κατωφερὴς</span>

<span id="fn_3368"></span>[497:3369](1140126.htm#fr_3368) <span
id="v.xxxii-p88.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p89"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p89.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p89.2"></span>conceal,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p89.3"></span>περιστελεῖται</span>

<span id="fn_3369"></span>[497:3370](1140126.htm#fr_3369) <span
id="v.xxxii-p89.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p90"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p90.1"></span>φθόνους</span>

<span id="fn_3370"></span>[498:3371](1140126.htm#fr_3370) <span
id="v.xxxii-p92.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p93"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p93.1"></span>See Hom. xiv. \[8.\] pp. 436, 437.</span>

<span id="fn_3371"></span>[498:3372](1140126.htm#fr_3371) <span
id="v.xxxii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p98"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p98.1"></span>θάλαμος</span>

<span id="fn_3372"></span>[498:3373](1140126.htm#fr_3372) <span
id="v.xxxii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxxii-p99"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxxii-p99.1"></span>νυμφὼν</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIX](1140127)
