[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140077)  [Next](1140079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxv"></span> <span id="iv.lxxv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXIII.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxv-p2.2"></span>[John xiii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036)<span
id="iv.lxxv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p3"></span>“Simon Peter said unto Him, Lord, whither
goest thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go thou canst not follow Me
now, but thou shalt follow Me afterwards.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p4"></span> \[1.\] A <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p4.1"></span>great</span> thing  <span
id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) is love, and stronger than fire
itself, and it goeth up to the very heaven; there is  <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086) no hindrance which can restrain its
tearing  <span id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087) force. And so the
most fervent Peter, when he hears, “Whither I go ye cannot come,” what
saith he? “Lord, whither goest thou?” and this he said, not so much from
wish to learn, as from desire to follow. To say openly, “I go,” he dared
not yet, but, “Whither goest thou?” Christ answered, not to his words,
but to his thoughts. For that this was his wish, is clear from what
Christ said, “Whither I go thou canst not follow Me now.” Seest thou
that he longed for the following Him, and therefore asked the question?
And when he heard, “thou shalt follow Me afterwards,” not even so did he
restrain his longing, and, though he had gained good hopes, he is so
eager as to say,

<span id="iv.lxxv-p8"></span> [John
13.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037)<span id="iv.lxxv-p8.1"></span> .
“Why cannot I follow Thee now? I will lay down my life for Thee.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p9"></span> When he had shaken off the dread of being
the traitor, and was shown to be one of His own,  <span
id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) he afterwards asked boldly himself,
while the others held their peace. “What sayest thou, Peter? He said,
‘thou canst not,’ and thou sayest, ‘I can’? Therefore thou shalt know
from this temptation that thy love is nothing without the presence of
the impulse  <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) from above.”
Whence it is clear that in care for him He allowed even that fall. He
desired indeed to teach him even by the first words, but when he
continued in his vehemence, He did not indeed throw or force him into
the denial, but left him alone, that he might learn his own weakness.
Christ had said that He must be betrayed; Peter replied, “Be it far from
Thee, Lord; this shall not happen unto Thee.” ( [Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022) <span id="iv.lxxv-p11.3"></span> .)
He was rebuked, but not instructed. On the contrary, when Christ desired
to wash his feet, he said, “Thou shalt never wash my feet.”  <span
id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090) ( [John
13.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008)<span id="iv.lxxv-p12.3"></span>
.) Again, when he hears, “Thou canst not follow Me now,” he saith,
“Though all deny Thee, I will not deny Thee.” Since then it was likely
that he would be lifted up to folly by his <span id="page_266">p.
266</span> <span id="iv.lxxv-Page_266"></span> practice of
contradiction, Jesus next teacheth him not to oppose Him. This too Luke
implies, when he telleth us that Christ said, “And I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not” ( [Luke xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032) <span id="iv.lxxv-p12.4"></span> );
that is, “that thou be not finally lost.” In every way teaching him
humility, and proving that human nature by itself is nothing. But, since
great love made him apt for contradiction, He now sobereth him, that he
might not in after times be subject to this, when he should have
received the stewardship of the world, but remembering what he had
suffered, might know himself. And look at the violence of his fall; it
did not happen to him once or twice, but he was so beside himself, that
in a short time thrice did he utter the words of denial, that he might
learn that he did not so love as he was loved. And yet, to one who had
so fallen He saith again, “Lovest thou Me more than these?” So that the
denial was caused not by the cooling of his love, but from his having
been stripped of aid from above. He accepteth then Peter’s love, but
cutteth off the spirit of contradiction engendered by it. “For if thou
lovest, thou oughtest to obey Him who is beloved. I said  <span
id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) to thee and to those with thee,
‘Thou canst not’; why art thou contentious? Knowest thou what a thing it
is to contradict God? But since thou wilt not learn in this way that it
is impossible that what I say should not come to pass, thou shalt learn
 <span id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) it in the denial.” And yet
this appeared to thee to be much more incredible. For this thou did not
even understand, but of that thou hadst the knowledge  <span
id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093) in thy heart. Yet still that came
to pass which was not even  <span id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094)
expected.

<span id="iv.lxxv-p17"></span> “I will lay down my life for Thee.” For
since he had heard, “Greater love than this hath, no man,”  <span
id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) he straightway sprang forward,
insatiably eager and desirous to reach even to the highest pitch of
virtue. But Christ, to show that it belonged to Himself alone to promise
these things with authority, saith,

<span id="iv.lxxv-p19"></span> [John
13.38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#038)<span id="iv.lxxv-p19.1"></span>
. “Before the cock crow.”  <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096)

<span id="iv.lxxv-p21"></span>That is, “now”; there was but a little
interval. He spake when it was late at night, and the first and second
watch was past.

<span id="iv.lxxv-p22"></span> [John
14.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)<span id="iv.lxxv-p22.1"></span> .
“Let not your heart be troubled.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p23"></span>This He saith, because it was probable
that when they heard they would be troubled. For if the leader of their
band, one so entirely fervent, was told that before the cock crew he
should thrice deny his Master, it was likely that they would expect to
have to undergo some great reverse, sufficient to bend even souls of
adamant. Since then it was probable that they considering these things
would be astounded, see how He comforteth them, saying, “Let not your
heart be troubled.” By this first word showing the power of His Godhead,
because, what they had in their hearts He knew and brought to light.

<span id="iv.lxxv-p24"></span>“Ye believe in God, believe also in Me.”
That is, “All dangers shall pass you by, for faith in Me and in My
Father is more powerful than the things which come upon you, and will
permit no evil thing to prevail against you.” Then He addeth,

<span id="iv.lxxv-p25"></span> [John
14.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002)<span id="iv.lxxv-p25.1"></span> .
“In My Father’s house are many mansions.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p26"></span> As He comforteth Peter when bewildered
 <span id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) by saying, “but thou shalt
follow afterwards,” so also He gives this glimpse of hope to the others.
For lest they should think that the promise was given to him alone, He
saith, “In My Father’s house are many mansions.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p28"></span> “If it were not so I would have said to
you, I go  <span id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) to prepare a place
for you.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p30"></span>That is, “The same place which receiveth
Peter shall receive you.” For a great abundance of dwellings is there,
and it may not be said that they need preparation. When He said, “Ye
cannot follow Me now,” that they might not deem that they were finally
cut off, He added,

<span id="iv.lxxv-p31"></span> [John
14.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003)<span id="iv.lxxv-p31.1"></span> .
 <span id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) “That where I am, there ye
may be also.” “So earnest have I been concerning this matter,  <span
id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) that I should already have been
given up to it,  <span id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) had not
preparation been made long ago for you.” Showing them that they ought to
be very bold and confident. Then that He may not seem to speak as though
enticing them, but that they may believe the thing to be so, He addeth,

<span id="iv.lxxv-p35"></span>\[2.\] [John
14.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#004)<span id="iv.lxxv-p35.1"></span> .
“And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p36"></span> Seest thou that He giveth them proof that
these things were not said without a meaning? And He used these words,
because He knew in Himself that their souls now desired to learn this.
For Peter said what he said, not in order to learn, but that he might
follow. But when Peter had been rebuked, and Christ had declared  <span
id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) that to be possible which for the
time seemed impossible,  <span id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) and
when the apparent impossibility led him to desire to know the matter
exactly, therefore He saith to the others, “And the way ye know.” For as
when He hath said, “Thou shalt deny Me,” before any one spake a word,
searching into their hearts, He said, “Be <span id="page_267">p.
267</span> <span id="iv.lxxv-Page_267"></span> not troubled,” so here
also by saying “Ye know,” He disclosed the desire which was in their
heart, and Himself giveth them an excuse for questioning. Now the,
“Whither goest Thou?” Peter used from a very loving affection, Thomas
from cowardice.

<span id="iv.lxxv-p39"></span> [John
14.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#005)<span id="iv.lxxv-p39.1"></span> .
“Lord,  <span id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) we know not whither
Thou goest.”  <span id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105)

<span id="iv.lxxv-p42"></span>“The place,” he saith, “we know not, and
how shall we know the way leading thither?” And observe with what
submissiveness he speaks; he saith not, “tell us the place,” but, “we
know not whither Thou goest”; for all had long yearned to hear this. If
the Jews questioned among themselves when they heard (of His departure),
although desirous to be rid of Him, much more would those desire to
learn, who wished never to be separated from Him. They feared therefore
to ask Him, but yet they asked Him, from their great love and anxiety.
What then saith Christ?

<span id="iv.lxxv-p43"></span> [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iv.lxxv-p43.1"></span> .
“I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life; no man cometh unto the
Father, but by Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxv-p44"></span> “Why then, when He was asked by Peter,
‘Whither goest Thou,’ did He not say directly, ‘I go to the Father, but
ye cannot come now’? Why did He put in a circuit of so many words,
placing together questions and answers? With good reason He told not
this to the Jews; but why not to these?” He had indeed said both to
these and to the Jews, that He came forth from God, and was going to
God, now He saith the same thing more clearly than before.  Besides, to
the Jews He spake not so clearly; for had He said, “Ye cannot come to
the Father but by Me,” they would straightway have deemed the matter
mere boasting; but now by concealing this, He threw them  <span
id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) into perplexity. “But why,” saith
some one, “did He speak thus both to the disciples and to Peter?” He
knew his great forwardness, and that he would by reason of this  <span
id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) the more press on and trouble Him;
in order therefore to lead him away, He hideth the matter. Having then
succeeded in what He wished by the obscurity and by veiling His speech,
He again discloseth the matter. After saying, “Where I am, no man can
come,” He addeth, “In My Father’s house are many mansions”; and again,
“No man cometh to the Father but by Me.” This He would not tell them at
first, in order not to throw them into greater despondency, but, now
that He hath soothed them, He telleth them. For by Peter’s rebuke He
cast out  <span id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) much of their
despondency; and dreading lest they should be addressed in the same way,
they were the more restrained. “I am the Way.” This is the proof of the,
“No man cometh to the Father but by Me”;  <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) and, “the Truth, and the Life,” of
this, “that these things shall surely be.” “There is then no falsehood
with Me, if I am ‘the Truth’; if I am ‘Life’ also, not even death shall
be able to hinder you from coming to Me. Besides; if I am ‘the Way,’ ye
will need none to lead you by the hand; if I am also ‘the Truth,’ My
words are no falsehoods; if I am also ‘Life,’ though ye die ye shall
obtain what I have told you.” Now His being “the Way,” they both
understood and allowed, but the rest they knew not. They did not indeed
venture to say what they knew not. Still they gained great consolation
from His being “the Way.” “If,” saith He, “I have sole authority to
bring  <span id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) to the Father, ye
shall surely come thither; for neither is it possible to come by any
other way.” But by saying before, “No man can come to Me except the
Father draw him”; and again, “If I be lifted up from the earth, I shall
draw all men unto Me” ( [John
12.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)<span id="iv.lxxv-p49.2"></span>
); and again, “No man cometh to the Father but by Me” ( [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iv.lxxv-p49.3"></span>
); He showeth Himself equal to Him who begat Him. But how after saying,
“Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know,” hath He added,

<span id="iv.lxxv-p50"></span> [John
14.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#007)<span id="iv.lxxv-p50.1"></span> .
“If ye had known Me, ye should have known My Father also; and from
henceforth ye know Him, and have seen Him”?

<span id="iv.lxxv-p51"></span> He doth not contradict Himself; they knew
Him indeed, but not so as they ought. God they knew, but the Father not
yet. For afterwards, the Spirit having come upon them wrought  <span
id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) in them all knowledge. What He
saith is of this kind. “Had ye known My Essence and My Dignity, ye would
have known that of the Father also; and henceforth ye shall know Him,
and have seen Him,” (the one belonging to the future, the other to the
present,) that is, “by Me.” By “sight,” He meaneth knowledge by
intellectual perception. For those who are seen we may see and not know;
but those who are known we cannot know and not know. Wherefore He saith,
“and ye have seen Him”; just as it saith, “was seen also of Angels.” (
[1 Tim. iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p52.2"></span> .) Yet the very Essence was not seen; yet it
saith that He “was seen,” that is, as far as it was possible for them to
see. These words are used, that thou mayest learn that  <span
id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112) the man who hath seen Him  <span
id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) knoweth Him who begat Him. But they
beheld Him not in His unveiled Essence, but clothed with flesh. He is
wont elsewhere to put “sight” for “knowledge”; as when He saith,
“Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.” ( [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008) <span id="iv.lxxv-p54.2"></span> .)
By “pure,” He meaneth not those who are free <span id="page_268">p.
268</span> <span id="iv.lxxv-Page_268"></span> from fornication only,
but from all sins. For every sin brings filth upon the soul.

<span id="iv.lxxv-p55"></span> \[3.\] Let us then use every means to
wipe off the filthiness. But first the font cleanseth, afterwards other
ways also, many and of all kinds. For God, being merciful, hath even
after this  <span id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) given to us
various ways of  <span id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115)
reconciliation, of all which the first is that by alms-doing. “By
alms-deeds,” it saith, “and deeds of faith sins are cleansed away.” (
[Ecclesiasticus 3.30](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#030)<span
id="iv.lxxv-p57.3"></span> .) By alms-doing I do not mean that which is
maintained by injustice, for this is not alms-doing, but savageness and
inhumanity. What profits it to strip one man and clothe another? For we
ought to begin the action with mercy, but this is inhumanity. If we give
away everything that we have got from other people, it is no gain to us.
And this Zacchæus shows, who on that occasion said, that he propitiated
God by giving four times as much as he had taken. ( [Luke xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008) <span id="iv.lxxv-p57.4"></span> .)
But we, when we plunder unboundedly, and give but little, think that we
make God propitious, whereas we do rather  <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) exasperate Him. For tell me, if
thou shouldest drag a dead and rotten ass from the waysides and lanes,
and bring it to the altar, would not all stone thee as accursed and
polluted?  <span id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117) Well then, if I
prove that a sacrifice procured by plunder is more polluted than this,
what defense shall we obtain? Let us suppose that some article has been
obtained by plunder, is it not of fouler scent than a dead ass? Wouldest
thou learn how great is the rottenness of sin? Hear the Prophet saying,
“My wounds stank, and were corrupt.” ( [Ps. xxxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005) <span id="iv.lxxv-p59.3"></span> ,
LXX.) And dost thou in words entreat God to forget thy misdeeds, and
dost thou by what thou thyself doest, robbing and grasping, and placing
thy sin upon the altar, cause Him to remember them continually? But now,
this is not the only sin, but there is one more grievous than this, that
thou defilest the souls of the saints.  <span
id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) For the altar is but a stone, and
is consecrated, but they ever bear with them Christ Himself; and darest
thou to send thither any of such impurity? “No,” saith one, “not the
same money, but other.” Mockery this, and trifling. Knowest thou not,
that if one drop of injustice fall on a great quantity of wealth, the
whole is defiled? And just as a man by casting dung into a pure fountain
makes it all unclean, so also in the case of riches, anything ill-gotten
entering in makes them to be tainted with the ill savor from itself.
Then we wash our hands when we enter into church, but our hearts not so.
Why, do our hands send forth a voice? It is the soul that utters  <span
id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119) the words: to that God looketh;
cleanness of the body is of no use, while that is defiled. What profits
it, if thou wipe clean thine outward hands, while thou hast those within
impure? For the terrible thing and that which subverts all good is this,
that while we are fearful about trifles, we care not for important
matters. To pray with unwashed hands is a matter indifferent; but to do
it with an unwashed mind, this is the extreme of all evils. Hear what
was said to the Jews who busied themselves about such outward
impurities. “Wash thine heart from wickedness, how long shall there be
in thee thoughts of thy labors?”  <span
id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) ( [Jer. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014) <span id="iv.lxxv-p62.3"></span> .)
Let us also wash ourselves, not with mire, but with fair water, with
alms-doing, not with covetousness. First get free from rapine, and then
show forth alms-deeds. Let us “decline from evil, and do good.” ( [Ps.
xxxvii. 27](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#027) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p62.4"></span> .) Stay thy hands from covetousness, and so
bring them to alms-giving. But if with the same hands we strip one set
of persons,  <span id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) though we may
not clothe the others with what has been taken  <span
id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) from them, yet we shall not thus
escape punishment. For that which is the groundwork  <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) of the propitiation is made the
groundwork of all wickedness. Better not show mercy, than show it thus;
since for Cain also it had been better not to have  <span
id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) brought his offering at all. Now if
he who brought too little angered God, when one gives what is another’s,
how shall not he anger Him? “I commanded thee,” He will say, “not to
steal, and honorest thou Me from that thou hast stolen? What thinkest
thou? That I am pleased with these things?” Then shall He say to thee,
“Thou thoughtest wickedly that I am even such an one as thyself; I will
rebuke thee, and set before thy face thy sins.” ( [Ps. l.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#021) <span id="iv.lxxv-p66.3"></span> ,
LXX.) But may it not come to pass that any one of us hear this voice,
but having wrought pure alms-deeds, and having our lamps burning, so may
we enter into the bride-chamber by the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost  <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[265:2086](1140078.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p5.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p5.2"></span>a great good.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[265:2087](1140078.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p6.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p6.2"></span>whence neither shall there be.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[265:2088](1140078.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p7.1"></span>ῥ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p7.2"></span>αγδαῖον</span>

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[265:2089](1140078.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p10.1"></span>τῶν γνησἰων</span>

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[265:2090](1140078.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p11.1"></span>ῥ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p11.2"></span>οπῆς</span>

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[265:2091](1140078.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p11.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p12.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p12.2"></span>Thou shalt never do this thing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[266:2092](1140078.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p12.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p13.1"></span>in the Greek,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxv-p13.2"></span>He said.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[266:2093](1140078.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p14.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p14.2"></span>shalt know.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[266:2094](1140078.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p15.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p15.2"></span>the consciousness.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[266:2095](1140078.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p16.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p16.2"></span>was not.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[266:2096](1140078.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p18.1"></span>the words occur later,</span> [John
15.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.lxxv-p18.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p18.3"></span></span>

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[266:2097](1140078.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p20"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p20.1"></span>Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy
life for Me? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, the cock shall not crow
till thou hast denied Me thrice.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p20.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[266:2098](1140078.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p27.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p27.2"></span>λύοντα</span>

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[266:2099](1140078.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p29.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p29.2"></span>shall go.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[266:2100](1140078.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p32"></span> [John
14.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003)<span
id="iv.lxxv-p32.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p32.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p32.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p32.4"></span>And if I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again, and receive you unto Myself; that where,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxv-p32.5"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[266:2101](1140078.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p32.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p33.1"></span>i.e. the preparing a place for
disciples.</span>

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[266:2102](1140078.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p34.1"></span>ἤ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p34.2"></span>δη ἄν τούτου ἐγενόμην</span>

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[266:2103](1140078.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p37.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p37.2"></span>had showed.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[266:2104](1140078.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p38.1"></span>i.e. that the disciples should follow.</span>

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[267:2105](1140078.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p40"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p40.1"></span>Thomas saith unto Him, Lord,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxv-p40.2"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[267:2106](1140078.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p41"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p41.1"></span>and how shall we know the way?</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxv-p41.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[267:2107](1140078.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p45.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p45.2"></span>these</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p45.3"></span>(the disciples).</span>

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[267:2108](1140078.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p45.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p46.1"></span>i.e. if He had so spoken.</span>

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[267:2109](1140078.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p47.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p47.2"></span>cast off.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[267:2110](1140078.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p48.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p48.2"></span>that is, that ye come by Me.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[267:2111](1140078.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p49.1"></span>Κύριος εἰμὶ τοῦ ἄγειν</span>

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[267:2112](1140078.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p52.1"></span>κατεσκεύασεν</span>

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[267:2113](1140078.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p53.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p53.2"></span>showing that.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[267:2114](1140078.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p54.1"></span>the Son.</span>

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[268:2115](1140078.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p56.1"></span>after baptism.</span>

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[268:2116](1140078.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p57.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p57.2"></span>ways of various.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[268:2117](1140078.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p57.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p58.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p58.2"></span>not knowing that we.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[268:2118](1140078.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p59.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p59.2"></span>abominable.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[268:2119](1140078.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p59.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p60.1"></span>i.e. of communicants.</span>

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[268:2120](1140078.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p61.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p61.2"></span>offers.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[268:2121](1140078.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p62.1"></span>E.V.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p62.2"></span>How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within
thee?</span> ”

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[268:2122](1140078.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p62.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p63.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p63.2"></span>the poor.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[268:2123](1140078.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p63.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p64.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p64.2"></span>given.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[268:2124](1140078.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p65.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p65.2"></span>πόθεσις</span>

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[268:2125](1140078.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p66.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p66.2"></span>Cain would have been better if he had
not.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[268:2126](1140078.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="iv.lxxv-p66.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxv-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p67.1"></span>Ben. omits,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxv-p67.2"></span>with the Father and the Holy Ghost.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 14.8,9](1140079)
