[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140085)  [Next](1140087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxxiii"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxiii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXI.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxiii-p2.1"></span>
<span class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p2.2"></span>[John xvii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p3"></span>“I have manifested Thy Name unto the men
which Thou gavest Me out of the world; Thine they were, and Thou gavest
them Me, and they have kept Thy word.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p4"></span> \[1.\] “‘ <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p4.1"></span>Messenger’</span> of great counsel” ( [Isa.
ix. 6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p4.2"></span> , LXX.), the Son of God is called, because
of the other things which He taught, and principally because He
announced the Father to men, as also now He saith, “I have manifested
Thy Name unto the men.” For after having said, “I have finished Thy
work,” He next explaineth it in detail, telling what sort of work. Now
the Name indeed was well known. For Esaias said, “Ye shall swear  <span
id="fr_2319"></span>[2320](#fn_2319.md) by the true God.” ( [Isa. lxv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016.md) <span id="iv.lxxxiii-p5.5"></span>
.) But what I have often told you I tell you now, that though it was
known, yet it was so only to Jews, and not to all of these: but now He
speaketh concerning the Gentiles. Nor doth He declare this merely, but
also that they knew Him as the Father. For it is not the same thing to
learn that He is Creator, and that He hath a Son. But He “manifested His
 <span id="fr_2320"></span>[2321](#fn_2320.md) Name” both by words and
actions.

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p7"></span>“Whom Thou gavest Me out of the world.”
As He saith above, “No man cometh unto Me except it be given him” (
[John 6.65](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#065.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p7.1"></span> ); and, “Except My Father  <span
id="fr_2321"></span>[2322](#fn_2321.md) draw him” ( [John
6.64](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#064.md)<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p8.3"></span>
); so here too, “Whom thou gavest Me.” ( [John
14.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p8.4"></span>
.) Now He calleth Himself “the Way”; whence it is clear that He
establisheth two things by what is said here, that He is not opposed to
the Father, and that it is the Father’s will to entrust them to the Son.

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p9"></span> “Thine they were, and Thou gavest them
Me.” Here He desireth to teach  <span
id="fr_2322"></span>[2323](#fn_2322.md) that He is greatly loved by the
Father. For that He needed not to receive them, is clear from this, He
made them, He careth for them continually. How then did He receive them?
This, as I said before, showeth His unanimity with the Father. Now if a
man choose to enquire into the matter in a human manner, and as the
words are spoken, they  <span id="fr_2323"></span>[2324](#fn_2323.md) will
no longer belong to the Father. For if when the Father had them, the Son
had them not, it is evident that when He gave them to the Son, He
withdrew from His dominion over them. And again, there is a yet more
unseemly conclusion; for they will be found to have been imperfect while
they yet were with the Father, but to have become perfect when they came
to the Son. But it is mockery even to speak thus. What then doth He
declare by this?  <span id="fr_2324"></span>[2325](#fn_2324.md) “That it
hath seemed good to the Father also that they should believe on the
Son.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p13"></span>“And they have kept Thy word.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p14"></span> [John
17.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p14.1"></span> . “Now they have known that all things
whatsoever Thou hast given Me are of Thee.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p15"></span>How did they “keep Thy word”? “By
believing in Me, and giving no heed to the Jews. For he that believeth
in Him, it saith, ‘hath set <span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-Page_298"></span> to his seal that God is true.’” ( [John
3.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p15.1"></span> .) Some read, “Now I know that all things
whatsoever Thou hast given Me are of Thee.” But this would have no
reason; for how would the Son be ignorant of the things of the Father?
No the words are spoken of the disciples. “From the time,” He saith,
“that I told them these things, they have learnt that all that Thou hast
given Me is from Thee; nothing is alien, nothing peculiar to Me, with
Thee.”  <span id="fr_2325"></span>[2326](#fn_2325.md) (For whatever is
peculiar, puts most things in the condition of being alien.  <span
id="fr_2326"></span>[2327](#fn_2326.md) “They therefore have known that all
things, whatsoever I teach, are Thy doctrines and teachings.” “And
whence have they learnt it?” From My words;  <span
id="fr_2327"></span>[2328](#fn_2327.md) for so have I taught them. And not
only this have I taught them, but also that “I came out from Thee.” For
this He was anxious to prove through all the Gospel.

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p19"></span> [John
17.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p19.1"></span> . “I pray for them.”  <span
id="fr_2328"></span>[2329](#fn_2328.md)

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p21"></span>“What sayest Thou?” “Dost Thou teach
the Father, as though He were ignorant? Dost Thou speak to Him as to a
man who knoweth not?” “What then meaneth this distinction?” Seest thou
that the prayer is for nothing else than that they may understand the
love which He hath towards them? For He who not only giveth what He hath
of His own, but also calleth on Another to do the same, showeth greater
love. What then is, “I pray for them”? “Not for all the world,” He
saith, but “for them whom Thou hast given Me.” He continually putteth
the “hast given,” that they might learn that this seemeth good to the
Father. Then, because He had said continually, “they are Thine,” and,
“Thou gavest them unto Me,” to remove any evil suspicion, and lest any
one should think that His authority was recent, and that He had but now
received them, what saith He?

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p22"></span>\[2.\] [John
17.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p22.1"></span> . “All Mine are Thine, and Thine are Mine;
and I am glorified in them.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p23"></span> Seest thou the equality of honor? For
lest on hearing, “Thou hast given them Me,” thou shouldest deem that
they were alienated from the authority of the Father, or before this
from that of the Son, He removed both difficulties by speaking as He
did. It was as though He said, “Do not when thou hearest that ‘Thou hast
given them to Me,’ deem that they are alienated from the Father, for
what is Mine is His; nor when thou hearest, ‘Thine they were,’ think
that they were aliens from Me, for what is His is Mine.” So that the,
“Thou hast given,” is said only for condescension; for what the Father
hath is the Son’s, and what the Son hath is the Father’s. But this
cannot even be said of a son after the manner of man, but because They
 <span id="fr_2329"></span>[2330](#fn_2329.md) are upon a greater Equality
of honor.  <span id="fr_2330"></span>[2331](#fn_2330.md) For that what
belongs to the less, belongs to the greater also, is clear to every one,
but the reverse not so; but here He converteth  <span
id="fr_2331"></span>[2332](#fn_2331.md) these terms, and the conversion
declares  <span id="fr_2332"></span>[2333](#fn_2332.md) Equality. And in
another place, declaring this, He said, “All things that the Father hath
are Mine,” speaking of knowledge. And the “hast given Me,” and the like
expressions, are to show that He did not come as an alien and draw them
to Him, but received them as His own. Then He putteth the cause and the
proof, saying, “And I am glorified in them,” that is, either that “I
have power over them,” or, that “they shall glorify Me, believing in
Thee and Me, and shall glorify Us alike.” But if He is not glorified
equally in them, what is the Father’s is no longer His. For no one is
glorified in those over whom he hath no authority. Yet how is He
glorified equally? All die for Him equally as for the Father; they
preach Him as they do the Father; and as they say that all things are
done in His Name, so also in the Name of the Son.

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p28"></span> [John
17.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p28.1"></span> . “And now I am no more in the world, but
these are in the world.”  <span id="fr_2333"></span>[2334](#fn_2333.md)

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p30"></span>That is, “Although I appear no longer
in the flesh, yet by these am I glorified.” But why doth He say
continuously, that, “I am not in the world”; and that, “because I leave
them I commit them to Thee”; and that, “when I was in the world I kept
them”? for if one should take these words in their simple sense, many
absurdities will follow. For how could it be reasonable to say, that He
is no longer in the world, and that when He departeth He committeth them
to another? since these are the words of a mere man parting from them
forever. Seest thou how He speaketh for the most part like a man, and in
a way adapted to their state of mind, because they thought that they had
a greater degree of safety from His presence? Wherefore He saith, “While
I was with them, I kept them.” ( [John
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p30.1"></span> .) Yet He telleth them, “I come to you”;
and, “I am with you till the end.” ( [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md) <span id="iv.lxxxiii-p30.2"></span>
.) How then  <span id="fr_2334"></span>[2335](#fn_2334.md) saith He these
words, as if about to be parted from them? He addresseth Himself, as I
said before, to their thoughts,  <span
id="fr_2335"></span>[2336](#fn_2335.md) that they may take breath a little
when <span id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-Page_299"></span> they hear Him speaking thus, and
delivering them over to the care of the Father. For since, after hearing
many exhortations from Him, they were not persuaded, He then holdeth
converse with the Father, manifesting His affection for them. As though
He had said, “Since Thou callest Me to Thyself, place these in safety;
for I come to Thee.” “What sayest Thou? Art Thou not able to keep
them?”  “Yea, I am able.” “Wherefore then speakest Thou thus?” “That
they may have My joy fulfilled”  <span
id="fr_2336"></span>[2337](#fn_2336.md) ( [John
17.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p33.3"></span> ); that is, “may not be confounded, as
being imperfect.” And by these words He showed that He had spoken all
these things so, to give them rest and joy. For the saying appears to be
contradictory. “Now I am no longer in the world, and these are in the
world.” This was what they were suspecting. For a while therefore He
condescendeth to them, because had He said, “I keep them,” they would
not have so well believed; wherefore He saith, “Holy Father, keep them
through Thine own Name”; that is, “by thy help.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p34"></span> [John
17.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p34.1"></span> . “While I was with them in the world, I
kept them in Thy Name.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p35"></span>Again He speaketh as a man and as a
Prophet, since nowhere doth He appear to have done anything by the Name
of God.

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p36"></span>“Those that Thou gavest Me I have kept,
and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition, that the Scripture
might be fulfilled.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p37"></span> And in another place He saith, “Of all
that Thou gavest Me, I will surely lose nothing.”  <span
id="fr_2337"></span>[2338](#fn_2337.md) ( [John
6.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p38.3"></span> .) Yet not only was he  <span
id="fr_2338"></span>[2339](#fn_2338.md) lost, but also many afterwards; how
then saith He, “I will in nowise lose”?  <span
id="fr_2339"></span>[2340](#fn_2339.md) “For My part, I will not lose.” So
in another place, declaring the matter was more clearly, He said, “I
will in nowise cast out.” ( [John
6.37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p40.2"></span> .) “Not through fault of Mine, not because
I either instigate or abandon them; but if they start away of
themselves, I draw them not by necessity.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p41"></span> [John
17.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p41.1"></span> . “But now I come to thee.”

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p42"></span> Seest thou that the discourse is
composed rather in a human manner? So that should any wish from these
words to lower the Son, he will lower the Father also. Observe, in proof
of this, how from the beginning He speaketh  <span
id="fr_2340"></span>[2341](#fn_2340.md) partly as though informing and
explaining to Him, partly as enjoining. Informing, as when He saith, “I
pray not for the world”; enjoining, as, “I have kept them until now,”
“and none of them is lost”; and, “do Thou therefore now keep them,” He
saith. And again, “Thine they were, and Thou hast given them unto Me”
and “While I was in the world I kept them.” But the solution of all is,
that the words were addressed to their infirmity.

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p44"></span> But after having said that “none of
them was lost but the son of perdition,” He added, “that the Scripture
might be fulfilled.” Of what Scripture doth He speak? That which
foretelleth many things concerning Him. Not that He perished on that
account, in order that the Scripture might be fulfilled. But we have
before spoken at length on this point, that this is the peculiar manner
of Scripture, which puts things which fall out in accordance with it, as
though they were caused by it.  <span
id="fr_2341"></span>[2342](#fn_2341.md) And it is needful to enquire
exactly into all, both the manner of the speaker, his argument, and the
laws of Scripture, if at least we are minded not to draw wrong
conclusions. For, “Brethren, be not children in your minds.” ( [1 Cor.
xiv. 20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p45.4"></span> .)

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p46"></span> \[3.\] This it is necessary to
consider well,  <span id="fr_2342"></span>[2343](#fn_2342.md) not only for
the understanding the Scriptures, but also for earnestness in one’s way
of life. For so little children do not desire great things, but are wont
to admire those which are worth nothing; they are pleased at seeing
chariots, and horses, and the muleteer, and wheels, all made out of
earthenware; but if they see a king sitting upon a chariot, and a pair
of white mules, and great magnificence, they do not even  <span
id="fr_2343"></span>[2344](#fn_2343.md) turn their heads. And they deck out
as brides dolls made of the same material, but the actual brides, real
and beautiful, they do not even notice; and this is their case in many
other matters. Now this many men also undergo at this time; for when
they hear of heavenly things, they do not even give heed to them, but
toward all the things of clay they are as eager as children, and
stupidly admire the wealth which is of earth, and honor the glory and
luxury of the present life. Yet these are just as much toys as those;
but the other are the causes of life, and glory, and repose. But as
children deprived of their playthings cry, and do not know how even to
desire the realities, so also are many of those who seem to be men.
Wherefore it saith, “Be not children in your minds.” ( [1 Cor. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020.md) <span id="iv.lxxxiii-p48.3"></span>
.) Desirest thou riches, tell me, and desirest thou not the wealth that
lasteth, but childish toys? If thou shouldest see a man admiring a
leaden coin, and stooping to pick it up, thou wouldest pronounce his
penury to be extreme; and dost thou, who collectest more worthless
things than this, number thyself among the rich? How can this consist
with reason? We will call him rich who despises all present things. For
no one, no one will choose to laugh at these little things, silver and
gold, and other things of show, unless he have the desire of greater
things; just as the man would <span id="page_300">p. 300</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-Page_300"></span> not despise the leaden coin,  <span
id="fr_2344"></span>[2345](#fn_2344.md) unless he possessed coins of gold.
Do thou, therefore, when thou seest a man running by all worldly things,
deem that he doth so from no other motive than because he looks to a
greater world. So the husbandman despises a few grains of wheat, when he
expects a larger harvest. But if, when the hope is uncertain, we despise
things which are, much more ought we to do so in a case where the
expectation is sure. Wherefore I pray and beseech you not to bring loss
on yourselves, nor, keeping hold of mire, rob yourselves of the
treasures which are above, bringing your vessel to port laden with straw
and chaff. Let each say what he will concerning us, let him be angry at
our continual admonitions, let him call us silly, tedious, tiresome,
still we will not desist from exhorting you on these matters
continually, and from continually repeating to you that of the Prophet,
“‘Break off thy sins by almsgiving, and thine iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor’ ( [Dan. iv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027.md)
<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p49.3"></span> ), and bind them upon thy neck.”
 <span id="fr_2345"></span>[2346](#fn_2345.md) Do not act in this way
to-day, and desist to-morrow. For even this body has need of daily food;
and so too hath the soul, or rather that much more; and if it give not,
 <span id="fr_2346"></span>[2347](#fn_2346.md) it becomes weaker and more
vile. Let us then not neglect it when it is perishing, choking. Many
wounds it receives each day, by being lustful, angry, slothful,
reviling, revengeful, envious. It is therefore necessary to prepare also
remedies for it, and no small remedy is that of almsgiving, which can be
placed on every wound. For, “Give alms,” it saith, “of such things as ye
have, and behold all things are clean unto you.” ( [Luke xi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#041.md) <span id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.7"></span>
.) “Alms,” not covetousness, for that which proceeds from covetousness
endures not, though thou give to those who need. For almsgiving is that
which is free from all injustice, “this” makes all things clean. This is
a thing better even than fasting, or lying on the ground; they may be
more painful and laborious, but this more profitable. It enlightens the
soul, makes it sleek,  <span id="fr_2347"></span>[2348](#fn_2347.md)
beautiful, and vigorous. Not so doth the fruit of the olive hold up the
athletes, as this oil recovers the combatants of piety. Let us then
anoint our hands, that we may lift them up well against our adversary.
He that practiceth showing mercy to him that needeth, will soon cease
from covetousness, he who continues in giving to the poor, will soon
cease from anger, and will never even be high-minded. For as the
physician continually tending wounded persons is easily sobered,
beholding human nature in the calamities of others; so we, if we enter
upon the work of aiding the poor, shall easily become truly wise, and
shall not admire riches, nor deem present things any great matter, but
despise them all, and soaring aloft to heaven, shall easily obtain the
eternal blessings, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2319"></span>[297:2320](1140086.htm#fr_2319.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p5.1"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p5.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p5.3"></span>μοῦνται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p5.4"></span>\] LXX.</span>

<span id="fn_2320"></span>[297:2321](1140086.htm#fr_2320.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p6.1"></span>i.e. the Father’s.</span>

<span id="fn_2321"></span>[297:2322](1140086.htm#fr_2321.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p8"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p8.1"></span>The Father which hath sent Me,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p8.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2322"></span>[297:2323](1140086.htm#fr_2322.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p10.1"></span>βούλεται διδάξαι</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p10.2"></span>, Ben. and <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p10.3"></span>mss.</span> Savile
omits</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p10.4"></span>βούλεται</span>

<span id="fn_2323"></span>[297:2324](1140086.htm#fr_2323.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p10.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p11.1"></span>i.e. those given.</span>

<span id="fn_2324"></span>[297:2325](1140086.htm#fr_2324.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p12.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p12.2"></span>by these words then He declareth.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2325"></span>[298:2326](1140086.htm#fr_2325.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.1"></span>παρὰ σοί</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.2"></span>, i.e. in the Godhead, or with God.
However, one Vatican <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.3"></span>ms.</span> and Catena favor Savile’s
conjecture,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.4"></span>παρά σε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.5"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.6"></span>beside Thee,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.7"></span>since the Father *is*
in a peculiar manner His own.</span>

<span id="fn_2326"></span>[298:2327](1140086.htm#fr_2326.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p16.8"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p17.1"></span>τὸ γὰρ ἴδιον ὡς ἐπ̓ ἀλλοτρίῳ τὰ πολλὰ
τίθησι</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p17.2"></span>,
i.e. when *one* thing is specified as peculiar to a person, it is
implied that *other* things not specified do not belong to him.</span>

<span id="fn_2327"></span>[298:2328](1140086.htm#fr_2327.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p18"></span> [John
17.8](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p18.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p18.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p18.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p18.4"></span>For I have given unto them the words which
Thou gavest Me; and they have received them, and have known surely that
I came out from thee, and they have believed that Thou didst send
Me.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2328"></span>[298:2329](1140086.htm#fr_2328.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p20"></span> [John
17.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#009.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p20.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p20.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p20.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p20.4"></span>I pray for them; I pray not for the world,
but for them which Thou hast given Me; for they are Thine.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2329"></span>[298:2330](1140086.htm#fr_2329.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p24.1"></span>i.e. the Father and the Son.</span>

<span id="fn_2330"></span>[298:2331](1140086.htm#fr_2330.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.1"></span>μείζονός εἰσιν ἰσοτιμίας</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.2"></span>. If this be the right
reading, the sense is, that the Father and the Son are more Equal in
honor than human father and son. Sav. reads</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.3"></span>μεῖζον</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.4"></span>. Ben.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.5"></span>μείζονός ἐστιν</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.6"></span>, omitting</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.7"></span>ἰ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.8"></span>σ</span>

<span id="fn_2331"></span>[298:2332](1140086.htm#fr_2331.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p25.9"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p26.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p26.2"></span>ντιστρέφει</span>

<span id="fn_2332"></span>[298:2333](1140086.htm#fr_2332.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p27.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p27.2"></span>shows.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2333"></span>[298:2334](1140086.htm#fr_2333.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p29"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p29.1"></span>in the world, and I come to Thee. Holy
Father, keep through Thine own Name those whom Thou hast given Me, that
they may be one as we are.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p29.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2334"></span>[298:2335](1140086.htm#fr_2334.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p31.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p31.2"></span>how now.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2335"></span>[298:2336](1140086.htm#fr_2335.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p32.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p32.2"></span>suspicion.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2336"></span>[299:2337](1140086.htm#fr_2336.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p33"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p33.1"></span>to Thee, and these things I speak in the
world, that they might have My joy fulfilled in themselves.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p33.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2337"></span>[299:2338](1140086.htm#fr_2337.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p38"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p38.1"></span>which He hath given,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p38.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2338"></span>[299:2339](1140086.htm#fr_2338.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p38.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p39.1"></span>i.e. the traitor.</span>

<span id="fn_2339"></span>[299:2340](1140086.htm#fr_2339.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p40.1"></span>οὐ μὴ ἀπ</span>

<span id="fn_2340"></span>[299:2341](1140086.htm#fr_2340.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p43.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p43.2"></span>is.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2341"></span>[299:2342](1140086.htm#fr_2341.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p45.1"></span>ὡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p45.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p45.3"></span>αἰτιολογίαν τιθεμένης τὰ ἐκ τῆς ἐκβάσεως
συμβαίνοντα</span>

<span id="fn_2342"></span>[299:2343](1140086.htm#fr_2342.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p47.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p47.2"></span>to read (and understand),</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p47.3"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p47.4"></span>ναγινώσκειν</span>

<span id="fn_2343"></span>[299:2344](1140086.htm#fr_2343.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p47.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p48.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p48.2"></span>not at all.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2344"></span>[300:2345](1140086.htm#fr_2344.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p48.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p49.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p49.2"></span>the lead.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2345"></span>[300:2346](1140086.htm#fr_2345.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p49.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p50.1"></span>not found in the Chald. or LXX.</span>

<span id="fn_2346"></span>[300:2347](1140086.htm#fr_2346.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.1"></span>κἂν μἡ καταβάλῃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.2"></span>. One <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.3"></span>ms.</span> </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.4"></span>καταλάβῃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.5"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.6"></span>if it get it
not.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2347"></span>[300:2348](1140086.htm#fr_2347.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p51.8"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxiii-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxiii-p52.1"></span>λιπαίνει</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 17.14](1140087.md)
