[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140120)  [Next](1140122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xxvii"></span> <span id="v.xxvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIII.</span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p2"></span> <span id="v.xxvii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xxvii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007)<span
id="v.xxvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p3"></span> *“By faith Noah, being warned of God*
 <span id="fr_3229"></span>[3230](#fn_3229) *of things not seen as yet,
moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the
which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which
is by Faith.”*

<span id="v.xxvii-p5"></span> \[1.\] “ <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxvii-p5.1"></span>By</span> faith” (he says) “Noah being warned
of God.” As the Son of God, speaking of His own coming, said, “In the
days of Noah they married and were given in marriage” ( [Luke
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#027)<span id="v.xxvii-p5.2"></span> ),
therefore the Apostle also recalled to their mind an appropriate image.
For the example of Enoch, was an example only of Faith; that of Noah, on
the other hand, of unbelief also. And this is a complete consolation and
exhortation, when not only believers are found approved, but also
unbelievers suffer the opposite.

<span id="v.xxvii-p6"></span> For what does he say? “By faith being
warned of God.”  <span id="fr_3230"></span>[3231](#fn_3230) What is
“being warned of God”? It is, “It having been foretold to him.” But why
is the expression “divine communication”  <span
id="fr_3231"></span>[3232](#fn_3231) ( [Luke ii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#026) <span id="v.xxvii-p8.2"></span> )
used? for in another place also it is said, “and it was communicated
 <span id="fr_3232"></span>[3233](#fn_3232) to him by the Spirit,” and
again, “and what saith the divine communication?”  <span
id="fr_3233"></span>[3234](#fn_3233) ( [Rom. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004) <span id="v.xxvii-p10.2"></span> .)
Seest thou the equal dignity of the Spirit? For as God reveals,  <span
id="fr_3234"></span>[3235](#fn_3234) so also does the Holy Spirit. But
why did he speak thus? The prophecy is called “a divine communication.”

<span id="v.xxvii-p12"></span>“Of things not seen as yet,” he says, that
is of the rain.

<span id="v.xxvii-p13"></span>“Moved with fear, prepared an ark.” Reason
indeed suggested nothing of this sort; For “they were marrying and being
given in marriage”; the air was clear, there were no signs \[of
change\]: but nevertheless he feared: “By faith” (he says) “Noah being
warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an
ark to the saving of his house.”

<span id="v.xxvii-p14"></span>How is it, “By the which he condemned the
world”? He showed them to be worthy of punishment, since they were not
brought to their senses even by the preparation.

<span id="v.xxvii-p15"></span>“And he became” (he says) “heir of the
righteousness which is by Faith”: that is, by his believing God he was
shown to be righteous. For this is the \[part\] of a soul sincerely
disposed towards Him and judging nothing more reliable than His words,
just as Unbelief is the very contrary.  Faith, it is manifest, works
righteousness. For as we have been warned of God respecting Hell, so was
he also: and yet at that time he was laughed at; he was reviled and
ridiculed; but he regarded none of these things.

<span id="v.xxvii-p16"></span>\[2.\] ( [Heb.
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#009)<span id="v.xxvii-p16.1"></span> )
“By faith Abraham when he was called to go out into a place which he
should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he went out not
knowing whither he went. By faith he sojourned in the land of promise,
as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles, with Isaac and Jacob,
the heirs with him of the same promise.” \[“By faith”\]: for (tell me)
whom did he see to emulate?  <span id="fr_3235"></span>[3236](#fn_3235)
He had for father a Gentile, and an idolater; he had heard no prophets;
he knew not whither he was going. For as they of the Hebrews who
believed, looked to these \[patriarchs\] as having enjoyed blessings
innumerable, he shows that none of them obtained anything as yet; all
are unrewarded; no one as yet received his reward. “He” escaped from his
country and his home, and “went out not knowing whither he went.”

<span id="v.xxvii-p18"></span> And what marvel, if he himself \[were
so\], when his seed also dwelt in this same way? For seeing the promise
disproved  <span id="fr_3236"></span>[3237](#fn_3236) (since He had
said, “To thee will I give this land, and to thy seed”— [Gen.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007), [Gen.
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015)<span id="v.xxvii-p19.3"></span>
), he saw his son dwelling there; and again his grandson saw himself
dwelling in a land not his own; yet was he nowise troubled. For the
affairs of Abraham happened as we might have expected, since the promise
was to be accomplished afterwards in his family (although it is said
even to himself, <span id="page_470">p. 470</span> <span
id="v.xxvii-Page_470"></span> “To thee, and to thy seed,” not, “to thee
through thy seed,” but “to thee and to thy seed”): still neither he, nor
Isaac, nor Jacob, enjoyed the promise. For one of them served for hire,
and the other was driven out: and he himself even was failing  <span
id="fr_3237"></span>[3238](#fn_3237) through fear: and while he took
some things indeed in war, others, unless he had had the aid of God,
would have been destroyed. On this account \[the Apostle\] says, “with
the heirs of the same promise”; not himself alone, he means; but the
heirs also.

<span id="v.xxvii-p21"></span>\[3.\] ( [Heb.
11.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)<span id="v.xxvii-p21.1"></span>
) “These all died in faith,” he says, “not having obtained  <span
id="fr_3238"></span>[3239](#fn_3238) the promises.” At this place it is
worth while to make two enquiries; how, after saying that \[God\]
“translated Enoch, and he was not found, so that he did not see death,”
does he say, “These all *died* in Faith.” And again, after saying, “they
not having obtained the promises,” he declares that Noah had received a
reward, “to the saving of his house,” and that Enoch had been
“translated,” and that Abel “yet speaks,” and that Abraham had gained a
hold on the land, and yet he says, “These all died in Faith, not having
obtained the promises.” What then is \[meant\]?

<span id="v.xxvii-p23"></span> It is necessary to solve the first
\[difficulty\], and then the second. “These all” (he says) “ *died* in
faith.” The word “all” is used here not because all had died, but
because with that one exception “all these had died,” whom we know to be
dead.

<span id="v.xxvii-p24"></span> And the \[statement\] “not having
obtained the promises,” is true: for surely the promise to Noah was not
to be this \[which is here spoken of\]. But further, of what kind of
“promises” is he speaking? For Isaac and Jacob received the promises of
the land; but as to Noah and Abel and Enoch, what kind of promises did
they receive? Either then he is speaking concerning these three; or if
concerning those others also, the promise was not this, that Abel should
be admired, nor that Enoch should be translated, nor that Noah should be
preserved;  <span id="fr_3239"></span>[3240](#fn_3239) but these things
came to them for their virtue’s sake, and were a sort of foretaste of
things to come. For God from the beginning, knowing that the human race
needs much condescension, bestows on us not only the things in the world
to come, but also those here; as for instance, Christ said even to the
disciples, “Whosoever hath left houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, shall receive an hundredfold and shall inherit
everlasting life.” ( [Matt. xix. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029)
<span id="v.xxvii-p25.6"></span> .) And again, “Seek ye the kingdom of
God, and all these things shall be added unto you.” ( [Matt. vi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033) <span id="v.xxvii-p25.7"></span> .)
Seest thou that these things are given by Him in the way of addition,
that we might not faint?  <span id="fr_3240"></span>[3241](#fn_3240) For
as the athletes have the benefit of careful attention, even when engaged
in the combat, but do not then enjoy entire ease, living under rules,
yet afterwards they enjoy it entire: so God also does not grant us here
to partake of “entire” ease. For even here He does give \[some\].

<span id="v.xxvii-p27"></span> \[4.\] “But having seen them afar off,”
he says,  <span id="fr_3241"></span>[3242](#fn_3241) “and embraced
them.” Here he hints at something mystical: that they received
beforehand all the things which have been spoken concerning things to
come; concerning the resurrection, concerning the Kingdom of Heaven,
concerning the other things, which Christ proclaimed when He came, for
these are “the promises” of which he speaks. Either then he means this,
or, that they did not indeed receive them, but died in confidence
respecting them, and they were \[thus\] confident through Faith only.

<span id="v.xxvii-p29"></span>“Having seen them afar off”: four
generations before; for after so many \[generations\], they went up out
of Egypt.

<span id="v.xxvii-p30"></span>“And embraced them,” saith he, and were
glad. They were so persuaded of them as even to “embrace \[or “salute”\]
them,” from the metaphor of persons on ship-board seeing from afar the
longed-for cities: which, before they enter them, they take and occupy
by words of greeting.

<span id="v.xxvii-p31"></span>( [Heb.
11.10](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#010)<span id="v.xxvii-p31.1"></span>
) “For they looked” (he says) “for the  <span
id="fr_3242"></span>[3243](#fn_3242) city which hath foundations, whose
builder and maker is God.” Seest thou that they received them in this
sense, in their already accepting them and being confident respecting
them. If then to be confident is to receive, it is in your power also to
receive. For these, although they enjoyed not those \[blessings\], yet
still saw them by their longing desire. Why now do these things happen?
That we might be put to shame, in that they indeed, when things on earth
were promised them, regarded them not, but sought the future “city”:
whereas God again and again speaks to us of the city  <span
id="fr_3243"></span>[3244](#fn_3243) which is above, and yet we seek
that which is here. He said to them, I will give you the things of the
present \[world\]. But when He saw, or rather, when they showed
themselves worthy of greater things, then He no longer suffers them to
receive these, but those greater ones; wishing to show us that they are
worthy <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="v.xxvii-Page_471"></span> of greater things, being unwilling to be
bound to these. As if one should promise playthings to an intelligent
child, not that he might receive them, but by way of exhibiting his
philosophy, when he asks for things more important. For this is to show,
that they held off from the land with so great earnestness, that they
did not even accept what was given. Wherefore their posterity receive it
on this account, for themselves were worthy of the land.

<span id="v.xxvii-p34"></span>What is, “the city which hath
foundations”? For are not these \[which are visible\] “foundations”? In
comparison of the other, they are not.

<span id="v.xxvii-p35"></span>“Whose Builder and Maker is God.” O! What
an encomium on that city!

<span id="v.xxvii-p36"></span>\[5.\] ( [Heb.
11.11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011)<span id="v.xxvii-p36.1"></span>
) “By faith also Sarah herself,” he says. Here he began \[speaking\] in
a way to put them to shame, in case, that is, they should show
themselves more faint-hearted than a woman. But possibly some one might
say, How “by faith,” when she laughed? Nay, while her laughter indeed
was from unbelief, her fear \[was\] from Faith, for to say, “I laughed
not” ( [Gen. xviii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#015) <span
id="v.xxvii-p36.2"></span> ), arose from Faith. From this then it
appears that when unbelief had been cleared out, Faith came in its
place.

<span id="v.xxvii-p37"></span> “By faith also Sarah received strength to
conceive seed even when she was past age.”  <span
id="fr_3244"></span>[3245](#fn_3244) What is, “to conceive seed”?  <span
id="fr_3245"></span>[3246](#fn_3245) She who was become dead, who was
barren, received power for the retaining of seed, for conception. For
her imperfection was two-fold; first from her time of life for she was
really old; secondly from nature, for she was barren.

<span id="v.xxvii-p40"></span>( [Heb.
11.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#012)<span id="v.xxvii-p40.1"></span>
) “Wherefore even from one they” all “sprang, as the stars of the sky,
and as the sand which is by the sea-shore.” “Wherefore” (he says) “even
from one they” all “sprang.” Here he not only says that she bare \[a
child\], but that she also became mother of so many as not even fruitful
wombs \[are mothers of\]. “As the stars,” He says. How then is it that
He often numbers them, although He said, “As the stars of the heaven
shall not be numbered, so neither shall your seed”? ( [Gen. xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005) <span id="v.xxvii-p40.2"></span> .)
He either means the excess, or else \[speaks of\] those who are
continually being born. For is it possible, tell me, to number their
forefathers of one family as, such an one son of such an one, and such
an one son of such an one? But here such are the promises of God, so
skillfully arranged are His undertakings.

<span id="v.xxvii-p41"></span> \[6.\] But if the things which He
promised as additional, are so admirable, so beyond expectation, so
magnificent, what will those be, to which these are an addition, to
which these are somewhat over and above? What then can be more blessed
than they who attain them? What more wretched than those who miss them?
For if a man when driven out from his native country, is pitied by all;
and when he has lost an inheritance is considered by all as an object of
compassion, with what tears ought he to be bewailed, who fails of
Heaven, and of the good things there stored up? Or rather, he is not
even to be wept for: for one is wept for, when he suffers something of
which he is not himself the cause; but when of his own choice he has
entangled himself in evil, he is not worthy  <span
id="fr_3246"></span>[3247](#fn_3246) of tears, but of wailings;  <span
id="fr_3247"></span>[3248](#fn_3247) or rather then of mourning;  <span
id="fr_3248"></span>[3249](#fn_3248) since even our Lord <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xxvii-p44.2"></span>Jesus</span> Christ mourned
and wept for Jerusalem, impious as it was. Truly we are worthy of
weepings innumerable, of wailings innumerable. If the whole world should
receive a voice, both stones, and wood, and trees, and wild beasts, and
birds, and fishes, and in a word, the whole world, if receiving a voice
it should bewail us who have failed of those good things, it would not
bewail and lament enough. For what language, what intellect, can
represent that blessedness and virtue, that pleasure, that glory, that
happiness, that splendor? “What eye hath not seen, and ear hath not
heard, and what hath not entered into the heart of man” ( [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009) <span id="v.xxvii-p44.3"></span> ),
(he did not say, that they simply surpass \[what we imagine\]; but none
hath ever conceived) “the things which God hath prepared for them that
love Him.” For of what kind are those good things likely to be, of which
God is the Preparer and Establisher? For if immediately after He had
made us, when we had not yet done anything, He freely bestowed so great
\[favors\], Paradise, familiar intercourse with Himself, promised us
immortality, a life happy and freed from cares; what will He not bestow
on those who have labored and struggled so greatly, and endured on His
behalf? For us He spared not His Only Begotten, for us when we were
enemies He gave up His own <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xxvii-p44.4"></span>Son</span> to death; of what will He not count
us worthy, having become His friends? what will He not impart to us,
having reconciled us to Himself?

<span id="v.xxvii-p45"></span>\[7.\] He both is abundantly and
infinitely rich; and He desires and earnestly endeavors to obtain our
friendship; we do not thus earnestly endeavor. What am I saying, ‘do not
earnestly endeavor’? We do not wish to obtain the good things as He
wishes it. And what He has done shows that He wishes it more \[than
we\]. For while, for our own sake, we with difficulty think lightly of a
little gold: He, for our sake, gave even the Son who was His own. Let us
make use of the love of God as we ought; let us reap the fruits of His
friendship. For “ye are <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="v.xxvii-Page_472"></span> My friends” (he says) “if ye do what I say
to you.” ( [John xv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#014) <span
id="v.xxvii-p45.1"></span> .) How wonderful! His enemies, who were at an
infinite distance from Him, whom in all respects He excels by an
incomparable superiority, these He has made His friends and calls them
friends. What then should not one choose to suffer for the sake of this
friendship? For the friendship of men we often incur danger, but for
that of God, we do not even give up money. Our \[condition\] does indeed
call for mourning, for mourning and tears and wailings, and loud
lamentation and beating of the breast. We have fallen from our hope, we
are humbled from our high estate, we have shown ourselves unworthy of
the honor of God; even after His benefits we are become unfeeling, and
ungrateful. The devil has stripped us of all our good things. We who
were counted worthy to be sons; we His brethren and fellow-heirs are
come to differ nothing from His enemies that insult Him.

<span id="v.xxvii-p46"></span>Henceforward, what consolation shall there
be for us? He called us to Heaven, and we have thrust ourselves down to
hell. “Swearing and lying and stealing and adultery, are poured out upon
the earth.” ( [Hos. iv. 2](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#002) <span
id="v.xxvii-p46.1"></span> .) Some “mingle blood upon blood”; and others
do deeds worse than blood-shedding. Many of those that are wronged, many
of those that are defrauded prefer ten thousand deaths to the suffering
such things: and except they had feared God, would even have killed
themselves, being so murderously disposed against themselves. Are not
these things then worse than blood-shedding?

<span id="v.xxvii-p47"></span>\[8.\] “Woe is me, my soul! For the godly
man is perished from the earth, and there is none upright among men” (
[Mic. 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002)<span id="v.xxvii-p47.1"></span> ,
LXX.); let us also now cry out, first about our own selves: but aid me
in my lamentation.

<span id="v.xxvii-p48"></span>Perhaps some are even disgusted and laugh.
For this very cause ought we to make our lamentations the more intense,
because we are so mad and beside ourselves, that we do not know that we
are mad, but laugh at things for which we ought to groan. O man! “There
is wrath revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men” ( [Rom. i. 18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)
<span id="v.xxvii-p48.1"></span> ); “God will come manifestly: a fire
will burn before Him, and round about Him will be a mighty tempest.” (
[Ps. l. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003) <span
id="v.xxvii-p48.2"></span> .) “A fire will burn before Him, and consume
His enemies on every side.” ( [Ps. xcvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003) <span id="v.xxvii-p48.3"></span> .)
“The day of the Lord is as a burning oven.” ( [Mal. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001) <span id="v.xxvii-p48.4"></span> .)
And no man lays up these things in his mind, but these tremendous and
fearful doctrines are more despised than fables, and are trodden under
foot. He that heareth,—there is no one: while they who laugh and make
sport are—all. What resource will there be for us? Whence shall we find
safety? “We are undone, we are utterly consumed” ( [Num. xvii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#012) <span id="v.xxvii-p48.5"></span> ),
we are become the laughingstock of our enemies, and a mockery for the
heathen and the Demons. Now is the devil greatly elated; he glories and
is glad. The angels to whom we had been entrusted are all ashamed and in
sadness: there is no man to convert \[you\]: all means have been used by
us in vain, and we seem to you as idle talkers. It is seasonable even
now to call on the heaven, because there is no man that heareth; to take
to witness the elements: “Hear, O heaven! and give ear, O earth! for the
Lord hath spoken.” ( [Isa. i. 2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002) <span
id="v.xxvii-p48.6"></span> .)

<span id="v.xxvii-p49"></span>Give a hand, stretch it forth, O ye who
have not yet been overwhelmed, to them who are undone through their
drunkenness: ye that are whole to them that are sick, ye that are
sober-minded to them that are mad, that are giddily whirling round.

<span id="v.xxvii-p50"></span>Let no man, I beseech you, prefer the
favor of his friend to his salvation; and let violence and rebuke look
to one thing only,—his benefit. When one has been seized by a fever,
even slaves lay hold of their Masters. For when that is pressing on him,
throwing his mind into confusion, and a swarm of slaves are standing by,
they recognize not the law of Master and Servant, in the calamity of the
Master.

<span id="v.xxvii-p51"></span>Let us collect ourselves, I exhort you:
there are daily wars, submersions \[of towns\], destructions innumerable
all around us, and on every side the wrath of God is enclosing us as in
a net. And we, as though we were well-pleasing to Him, are in security.
We all make our hands ready for unjust gains, none for helping others:
all for plundering, none for protecting: each one is in earnest as to
how he shall increase his possessions; no one as to how he shall aid the
needy: each one has much anxiety how he may add to his wealth; no one
how he may save his own soul. One fear possesses all, lest (you say) we
should become poor; no man is in anguish and trembling lest we should
fall into hell. These things call for lamentations, these call for
accusation, these call for reprobation.

<span id="v.xxvii-p52"></span>\[9.\] But I do not wish to speak of these
things, but I am constrained by my grief. Forgive me: I am forced by
sorrow to utter many things, even those which I do not wish. I see that
our wound is grievous, that our calamity is beyond comfort, that woes
have overtaken us greater than the consolation. We are undone. “O that
my head were waters and mine eyes a fountain of tears” ( [Jer. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001) <span id="v.xxvii-p52.1"></span> ),
that I might lament. Let us weep, beloved, let us weep, let us groan.

<span id="v.xxvii-p53"></span>Possibly there may be some here who say,
He talks to us of nothing but lamentation, nothing but tears. It was not
my wish, believe me, it was not my wish, but rather to go through a
<span id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span id="v.xxvii-Page_473"></span>
course of commendations and praises: but now it is not the season for
these. Beloved, it is not lamenting which is grievous, but the doing
things which call for lamentations. Sorrow is not the thing to shrink
from, but the committing things that call for sorrow. Do not thou be
punished, and I will not mourn. Do not die, and I will not weep. If the
body indeed lies dead, thou callest on all to grieve with thee, and
thinkest those without sympathy who do not mourn: And when the soul is
perishing, dost thou tell us not to mourn?

<span id="v.xxvii-p54"></span>But I cannot be a father, if I do not
weep. I am a father full of affection. Hear how Paul exclaims, “My
little children, of whom I travail in birth again” ( [Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019) <span id="v.xxvii-p54.1"></span> ):
what mother in child-birth utters cries so bitter as he! Would that it
were possible for thee to see the very fire that is in my heart, and
thou wouldest know, that I burn \[with grief\] more intense than any
woman, or gift that suffers untimely widowhood. She does not so mourn
over her husband, nor any father over his son, as I do over this
multitude that is here with us.

<span id="v.xxvii-p55"></span>I see no progress. Everything turns to
calumnies and accusations. No man makes it his business to please God;
but (he says) ‘let us speak evil of such an one or such an one.’ ‘Such
an one is unfit to be among the Clergy.’ ‘Such an one does not lead a
respectable life.’ When we ought to be grieving for our own evils, we
judge others, whereas we ought not to do this, even when we are pure
from sins. “For who maketh thee to differ” (he says) “and what hast thou
which thou didst not receive? But if thou hast received it, why dost
thou glory, as though thou hadst not received it?” ( [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007) <span id="v.xxvii-p55.1"></span> .)
“And thou, why dost thou judge thy brother” ( [Rom. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010) <span id="v.xxvii-p55.2"></span> ),
being thyself full of innumerable evils? When thou sayest, Such an one
is a bad man, and a spendthrift, and vicious, think of thyself, and
examine strictly thy own \[condition\], and thou wilt repent of what
thou hast said. For there is no, no not any, such powerful stimulus to
virtue, as the recollecting of our sins.

<span id="v.xxvii-p56"></span>If we turn over these two things in our
minds, we shall be enabled to attain the promised blessings, we shall be
enabled to cleanse ourselves and wipe away \[what is amiss\]. Only let
us take serious thought sometime; let us be anxious about the matter,
beloved. Let us grieve here in reflection, that we may not grieve yonder
in punishment, but may enjoy the everlasting blessings, where “pain and
sorrow and sighing are fled away” ( [Isa. xxxv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010) <span id="v.xxvii-p56.1"></span> ),
that we may attain to the good things which surpass man’s understanding,
in Christ Jesus our Lord, for to Him is glory and power for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3229"></span>[469:3230](1140121.htm#fr_3229) <span
id="v.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p4.1"></span>χρηματισθείς</span>

<span id="fn_3230"></span>[469:3231](1140121.htm#fr_3230) <span
id="v.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p7.1"></span>χρηματισθείς</span>

<span id="fn_3231"></span>[469:3232](1140121.htm#fr_3231) <span
id="v.xxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p8.1"></span>χρηματισμὸς</span>

<span id="fn_3232"></span>[469:3233](1140121.htm#fr_3232) <span
id="v.xxvii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p9.1"></span>ἦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p9.2"></span>ν κεχρηματισμένον</span>

<span id="fn_3233"></span>[469:3234](1140121.htm#fr_3233) <span
id="v.xxvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p10.1"></span>χρηματισμὸς</span>

<span id="fn_3234"></span>[469:3235](1140121.htm#fr_3234) <span
id="v.xxvii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p11.1"></span>χρᾷ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p11.2"></span>. This word is properly used of quasi-Divine
communications made through oracles: the words</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.3"></span>χρηματίζω</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.4"></span>and</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.5"></span>χρηματισμὸς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.6"></span>have the same meaning.
Hence the emphatic character of the words</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.7"></span>of God</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.8"></span>in our version of the
text,</span> <span id="v.xxvii-p11.9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p11.10"></span>[Rom. xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004)<span
id="v.xxvii-p11.11"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p11.12"></span>; and so in the other passage which St.
Chrys. cites (</span> <span id="v.xxvii-p11.13"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.14"></span>[Luke ii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#026)<span
id="v.xxvii-p11.15"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p11.16"></span>), the Divinity of the Holy Spirit (he says)
is implied in the use of the word</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p11.17"></span>ἦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p11.18"></span>ν κεχρηματισμένον ὑπὸ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.19"></span>(not</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.20"></span>διὰ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.21"></span>)</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.22"></span>τοῦ Πνεύματος</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.23"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p11.24"></span>a divine communication
was made by the Spirit.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3235"></span>[469:3236](1140121.htm#fr_3235) <span
id="v.xxvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p17"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p17.1"></span>To endeavor to imitate, or even
surpass.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3236"></span>[469:3237](1140121.htm#fr_3236) <span
id="v.xxvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p19.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p19.2"></span>λεγχομένην</span>

<span id="fn_3237"></span>[470:3238](1140121.htm#fr_3237) <span
id="v.xxvii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p20.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p20.2"></span>ξέπιπτε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p20.3"></span>: i.e.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p20.4"></span>τῆς ὑποσχέσεως</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p20.5"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p20.6"></span>of the promise,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p20.7"></span>is Mr. Field’s
interpretation; Mutianus has</span> *pœne exciderat*

<span id="fn_3238"></span>[470:3239](1140121.htm#fr_3238) <span
id="v.xxvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.1"></span>κομισάμενοι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.2"></span>. This word is used by St. Chrys. throughout
this passage without any variation of reading. The text of the Epistle
here has</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.3"></span>λαβόντες</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.4"></span>, but in</span> [Heb.
11.39](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#039)<span
id="v.xxvii-p22.5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.6"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.7"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.8"></span>οὐκ ἐκομίσαντο</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p22.9"></span>. \[St. Chrys. in another
work has the reading</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.10"></span>λαβόντες</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.11"></span>, but</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.12"></span>κομισάμενοι</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p22.13"></span>is generally adopted by the critical editors
as the true text in the Epistle.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3239"></span>[470:3240](1140121.htm#fr_3239) <span
id="v.xxvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p25.1"></span>We must probably understand also,</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p25.2"></span>nor that the
Patriarchs should live in Canaan</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p25.3"></span>: the argument seems to require this; besides,
in the statement of the difficulty, Abraham’s having</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p25.4"></span>got a hold on the
land</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p25.5"></span>is
mentioned together with the blessings bestowed on Abel, Enoch, and Noah,
as something already given them.</span>

<span id="fn_3240"></span>[470:3241](1140121.htm#fr_3240) <span
id="v.xxvii-p25.8"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p26.1"></span>See above, p. 408.</span>

<span id="fn_3241"></span>[470:3242](1140121.htm#fr_3241) <span
id="v.xxvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p28.1"></span>St. Chrys. does not cite nor yet refer to the
words</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p28.2"></span>καὶ
πεισθέντες</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p28.3"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p28.4"></span>and were persuaded of them.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p28.5"></span> They are found in the
common editions of the Epistle, but are not supposed to be a genuine
part of the Sacred Text. \[They are rejected by all critical editors,
and have very little support from the authorities for this
text.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3242"></span>[470:3243](1140121.htm#fr_3242) <span
id="v.xxvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p32.1"></span>τὴν πόλιν</span>

<span id="fn_3243"></span>[470:3244](1140121.htm#fr_3243) <span
id="v.xxvii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p33.1"></span>πόλιν</span>

<span id="fn_3244"></span>[471:3245](1140121.htm#fr_3244) <span
id="v.xxvii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p38.1"></span>καὶ παρὰ καιρὸν ἡλικίας</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xxvii-p38.2"></span>. The common texts of St.
Chrys. add here</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p38.3"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p38.4"></span>τεκεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p38.5"></span>, in accordance with the common editions of
the New Testament; but in neither case is it supposed to be genuine.
\[Field’s text omits it, and it is not in critical editions of the text
of Heb.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3245"></span>[471:3246](1140121.htm#fr_3245) <span
id="v.xxvii-p38.6"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p39.1"></span>εἰς καταβολὴν σπέρματος</span>

<span id="fn_3246"></span>[471:3247](1140121.htm#fr_3246) <span
id="v.xxvii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p42.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p42.2"></span>ξιος</span>

<span id="fn_3247"></span>[471:3248](1140121.htm#fr_3247) <span
id="v.xxvii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p43.1"></span>θρήνων</span>

<span id="fn_3248"></span>[471:3249](1140121.htm#fr_3248) <span
id="v.xxvii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.xxvii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xxvii-p44.1"></span>πενθους</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXIV](1140122)
