[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140113)  [Next](1140115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xx"></span> <span id="v.xx-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span id="v.xx-Page_443"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xx-p1.1"></span>Homily XVI.</span>

<span id="v.xx-p2"></span> <span id="v.xx-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xx-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews ix.
15-18](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015.md)<span
id="v.xx-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xx-p3"></span> *“And for this cause He is the Mediator of
the New Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the
transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of an eternal inheritance. For where a
testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the
testator.*  <span id="fr_3073"></span>[3074](#fn_3073.md) *For a testament
is of force after men are dead,*  <span
id="fr_3074"></span>[3075](#fn_3074.md) *otherwise it is of no strength at
all while the testator liveth. Whereupon*  <span
id="fr_3075"></span>[3076](#fn_3075.md) *neither the first \[testament\]
was dedicated*  <span id="fr_3076"></span>[3077](#fn_3076.md) *without
blood.”*

<span id="v.xx-p8"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xx-p8.1"></span>It</span> was probable that many of those who were
more weakly would especially distrust the promises of Christ because He
had died. Paul accordingly out of a superabundance introduced this
illustration,  <span id="fr_3077"></span>[3078](#fn_3077.md) deriving it
from common custom. Of what kind is it? He says, “indeed, on this very
account we ought to be of good courage.” On what account? Because
testaments are established and obtain their force when those who have
made them are not living, but dead. “And for this cause,” he says, “He
is the Mediator of the New Testament.” A Testament is made towards the
last day, \[the day\] of death.

<span id="v.xx-p10"></span>And a testament is of this character: It
makes some heirs, and some disinherited. So in this case also: “I will
that where I am,” Christ says, “they also may be.” ( [John xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024) <span id="v.xx-p10.1"></span> ..md)
And again of the disinherited, hear Him saying, “I pray not for” all,
“but for them that believe on Me through their word.” ( [John xvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020) <span id="v.xx-p10.2"></span> ..md)
Again, a testament has relation both to the testator, and to the
legatees; so that they have some things to receive, and some to do. So
also in this case. For after having made promises innumerable, He
demands also something from them, saying, “a new commandment I give unto
you.” ( [John xiii. 34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034.md) <span
id="v.xx-p10.3"></span> .) Again, a testament ought to have witnesses.
Hear Him again saying, “I am one that bear witness of Myself, and He
that sent Me beareth witness of Me.” ( [John viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#018) <span id="v.xx-p10.4"></span> ..md)
And again, “He shall testify of Me” ( [John xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026) <span id="v.xx-p10.5"></span> .md),
speaking of the Comforter. The twelve Apostles too He sent, saying,
“Bear ye witness before God.”  <span
id="fr_3078"></span>[3079](#fn_3078.md)

<span id="v.xx-p12"></span>\[2.\] “And for this cause” (he says) “He is
the Mediator of the New Testament.” What is a “Mediator”? A mediator is
not lord of the thing of which he is mediator, but the thing belongs to
one person, and the mediator is another: as for instance, the mediator
of a marriage is not the bridegroom, but one who aids him who is about
to be married. So then also here: The Son became Mediator between the
Father and us. The Father willed not to leave us this inheritance, but
was wroth against us, and was displeased \[with us\] as being estranged
\[from Him\]; He accordingly became Mediator between us and Him, and
prevailed with Him.

<span id="v.xx-p13"></span> And what then? How did He become Mediator?
He brought words from \[Him\] and brought \[them to us\], conveying over
 <span id="fr_3079"></span>[3080](#fn_3079.md) what came from the Father to
us, and adding His own death thereto. We had offended: we ought to have
died: He died for us and made us worthy of the Testament. By this is the
Testament secure, in that henceforward it is not made for the unworthy.
At the beginning indeed, He made His dispositions as a father for sons;
but after we had become unworthy, there was no longer need of a
testament, but of punishment.

<span id="v.xx-p15"></span> Why then (he would say) dost thou think upon
the law? For it placed us in a condition of so great sin, that we could
never have been saved, if our Lord had not died for us;  <span
id="fr_3080"></span>[3081](#fn_3080.md) the law would not have had power,
for it is weak.

<span id="v.xx-p17"></span>\[3.\] And he established this no longer from
common custom only, but also from what happened under the old
\[Testament\]: which especially influenced them. There was no one who
died there: how then could that \[Testament\] be firm? In the same way
(he says). How? For blood was there also, as there is blood here. And if
it was not the blood of the Christ, do not be surprised; for it was a
type. “Whereupon,” he says, “neither was the first \[Testament\]
dedicated without blood.”

<span id="v.xx-p18"></span>What is “was dedicated”? was confirmed, <span
id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span id="v.xx-Page_444"></span> was
ratified. The word “whereupon”  <span
id="fr_3081"></span>[3082](#fn_3081.md) means “for this cause.” It was
needful that the symbol of the Testament should be also that of death.

<span id="v.xx-p20"></span>For why (tell me) is the book of the
testament sprinkled? ( [Heb. 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#020)<span id="v.xx-p20.1"></span> .md)
“For” (he says) “when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people
according to the law, he took the blood of calves, with water, and
scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the
people, saying, This is the blood of the testament, which God hath
enjoined unto you.” Tell me then why is the book of the testament
sprinkled, and also the people, except on account of the precious blood,
figured from the first? Why “with hyssop”? It is close and retentive.
 <span id="fr_3082"></span>[3083](#fn_3082.md) And why the “water”? It
shows forth also the cleansing by water. And why the “wool”? this also
\[was used\], that the blood might be retained. In this place blood and
water show forth the same thing,  <span
id="fr_3083"></span>[3084](#fn_3083.md) for baptism is His passion.  <span
id="fr_3084"></span>[3085](#fn_3084.md)

<span id="v.xx-p24"></span>\[4.\] [Heb.
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#021.md),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022.md)<span id="v.xx-p24.1"></span> .
“Moreover he sprinkled with blood both the tabernacle and all the
vessels of the ministry. And almost  <span
id="fr_3085"></span>[3086](#fn_3085.md) all things are by the law purged
with blood, and without shedding of blood is no remission.” Why the
“almost”? why did he qualify it? Because those \[ordinances\] were not a
perfect purification, nor a perfect remission, but half-complete and in
a very small degree. But in this case He says, “This is the blood  <span
id="fr_3086"></span>[3087](#fn_3086.md) of the New Testament, which is shed
for you, for the remission of sins.” ( [Matt. xxvi.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028) <span id="v.xx-p26.8"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xx-p27"></span>Where then is “the book”? He purified their
minds. They themselves then were the books of the New Testament. But
where are “the vessels of the ministry”? They are themselves. And where
is “the tabernacle”? Again, they are; for “I will dwell in them,” He
says, “and walk in them.” ( [2 Cor. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016) <span id="v.xx-p27.1"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xx-p28"></span>\[5.\] But they were not sprinkled with
“scarlet wool,” nor yet “with hyssop.” Why was this? Because the
cleansing was not bodily but spiritual, and the blood was spiritual.
How? It flowed not from the body of irrational animals, but from the
Body prepared by the Spirit. With this blood not Moses but Christ
sprinkled us, through the word which was spoken; “This is the blood of
the New Testament, for the remission of sins.” This word, instead of
hyssop, having been dipped in the blood, sprinkles all. And there indeed
the body was cleansed outwardly, for the purifying was bodily; but here,
since the purifying is spiritual, it entereth into the soul, and
cleanseth it, not being simply sprinkled over, but gushing forth in our
souls. The initiated understand what is said. And in their case indeed
one sprinkled just the surface; but he who was sprinkled washed it off
again; for surely he did not go about continually stained with blood.
But in the case of the soul it is not so, but the blood is mixed with
its very substance, making it vigorous and pure, and leading it to the
very unapproachable beauty.

<span id="v.xx-p29"></span>\[6.\] Henceforward then he shows that His
death is the cause not only of confirmation, but also of purification.
For inasmuch as death was thought to be an odious thing, and especially
that of the cross, he says that it purified, even a precious
purification, and in regard to greater things. Therefore the sacrifices
preceded, because of this blood. Therefore the lambs; everything was for
this cause.

<span id="v.xx-p30"></span> [Heb.
9.23](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#023.md)<span id="v.xx-p30.1"></span> .
“It was therefore necessary that the Patterns”  <span
id="fr_3087"></span>[3088](#fn_3087) (he says.md) “of the things in the
heavens should be purified with these, but the heavenly things
themselves with better sacrifices than these.”

<span id="v.xx-p32"></span> And how are they “patterns  <span
id="fr_3088"></span>[3089](#fn_3088.md) of things in the heavens”? And what
does he mean now by “the things in the heavens”? Is it Heaven? Or is it
the Angels? None of these, but what is ours.  <span
id="fr_3089"></span>[3090](#fn_3089.md) It follows then that our things are
in Heaven, and heavenly things are ours, even though they be
accomplished on earth; since although angels are on earth, yet they are
called Heavenly. And the Cherubim appeared on earth, but yet are
heavenly. And why do I say “appeared”? nay rather they dwell on earth,
as indeed in Paradise: but this is nothing; for they are heavenly.
 <span id="fr_3090"></span>[3091](#fn_3090.md) And, “Our conversation is in
Heaven” ( [Philip. iii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020.md) <span
id="v.xx-p35.4"></span> ), and yet we live here.

<span id="v.xx-p36"></span> “But these are the heavenly things,” that
is, the philosophy which exists amongst us; those who have been called
thereto.  <span id="fr_3091"></span>[3092](#fn_3091.md)

<span id="v.xx-p38"></span>“With better sacrifices than these.” What is
“better” is better than something \[else\] that is good. Therefore “the
patterns also of things in the heavens” have become good; for not even
the patterns were evil: else the things whereof they are patterns would
also have been evil.

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span id="v.xx-Page_445"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p39"></span> \[7.\] If then we are heavenly, and have
obtained such a sacrifice,  <span id="fr_3092"></span>[3093](#fn_3092.md)
let us fear. Let us no longer continue on the earth; for even now it is
possible for him that wishes it, not to be on the earth. For to be and
not to be on the earth is the effect of moral disposition and choice.
For instance; God is said to be in Heaven. Wherefore? not because He is
confined by space,  <span id="fr_3093"></span>[3094](#fn_3093.md) far from
it, nor as having left the earth destitute of His presence, but by His
relation to and intimacy with  <span
id="fr_3094"></span>[3095](#fn_3094.md) the Angels. If then we also are
near to God, we are in Heaven. For what care I about Heaven when I see
the Lord of Heaven, when I myself am become a Heaven? “For,” He says,
“We will come,” I and the Father, “and will make our abode with him.” (
[John xiv. 23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md) <span
id="v.xx-p42.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.xx-p43"></span>Let us then make our soul a Heaven. The
heaven is naturally bright; for not even in a storm does it become
black, for it does not itself change its appearance, but the clouds run
together and cover it. Heaven has the Sun; we also have the Sun of
Righteousness. I said it is possible to become a Heaven; and I see that
it is possible to become even better than Heaven. How? when we have the
Lord of the Sun. Heaven is throughout pure and without spot; it changes
not either in a storm or in the night. Neither let us then be so
influenced either by tribulations or by “the wiles of the devil” ( [Eph.
vi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011.md) <span id="v.xx-p43.1"></span>
), but let us continue spotless and pure. Heaven is high and far from
the earth. Let us also effect this \[as regards ourselves\]; let us
withdraw ourselves from the earth, and exalt ourselves to that height,
and remove ourselves far from the earth. Heaven is higher than the rains
and the storms, and is reached by none of them. This we also can do, if
we will.

<span id="v.xx-p44"></span>It does appear to be, but is not really so
affected. Neither then let us be affected, even if we appear to be so.
For as in a storm, most men know not the beauty of \[heaven,\] but think
that it is changed, while philosophers know that it is not affected at
all, so with regard to ourselves also in afflictions; most men think
that we are changed with them, and that affliction has touched our very
heart, but philosophers know that it has not touched us.

<span id="v.xx-p45"></span>\[8.\] Let us then become heaven, let us
mount up to that height, and so we shall see men differing nothing from
ants. I do not speak of the poor only, nor the many, but even if there
be a general there, even if the emperor be there, we shall not
distinguish the emperor, nor the private person. We shall not know what
is gold, or what is silver, or what is silken or purple raiment: we
shall see all things as if they were flies, if we be seated in that
height. There is no tumult there, no disturbance, nor clamor.

<span id="v.xx-p46"></span>And how is it possible (one says) for him who
walks on the earth, to be raised up to that height? I do not tell it
thee in words, but I show thee in fact those who have attained to that
height. Who then are they?

<span id="v.xx-p47"></span>I mean such as Paul, who being on earth,
spent their lives in heaven. But why do I say “in heaven”? They were
higher than the Heaven, yea than the other heaven, and mounted up to God
Himself. For, “who” (he says) “shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?” ( [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035) <span id="v.xx-p47.1"></span> ..md)
And again, “while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen.” ( [2 Cor. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018) <span id="v.xx-p47.2"></span> ..md)
Seest thou that he did not even see the things here? But to show thee
that he was higher than the heavens, hear him saying himself, “For I am
persuaded that neither death, or life, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of Christ.” ( [Rom.
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038.md),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#039)<span id="v.xx-p47.3"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xx-p48"></span>Seest thou how thought, hurrying past all
things, made him higher not than this creation only, not than these
heavens, but even \[than any other also\] if any other there were? Hast
thou seen the elevation of his mind? Hast thou seen what the tent-maker
became, because he had the will, he who had spent his whole life in the
market-place?

<span id="v.xx-p49"></span>\[9.\] For there is no hindrance, no not any,
but that we may rise above all men, if we have the will. For if we are
so successful in arts that are beyond the reach of the generality, much
more in that which does not require so great labor.

<span id="v.xx-p50"></span> For, tell me, what is more difficult than to
walk along a tight rope, as if on level ground, and when walking on high
to dress and undress, as if sitting on a couch? Does not the performance
seem to us to be so frightful, that we are not even willing to look at
it, but are terrified and tremble at the very sight? And tell me, what
is more difficult than to hold a pole upon your face, and when you have
put up a child upon it, to perform innumerable feats and delight the
spectators? And what is more difficult than to play at ball  <span
id="fr_3095"></span>[3096](#fn_3095.md) with swords? And tell me what is
harder than thoroughly to search out the bottom of the sea? And one
might mention innumerable other arts.

<span id="v.xx-p52"></span> <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="v.xx-Page_446"></span> But easier than all these, if we have the
will, is virtue, and the going up into Heaven. For here it is only
necessary to have the will, and all \[the rest\] follows. For we may not
say, I am unable, neither accuse the Creator. For if He made us unable,
and then commands, it is an accusation against Himself.

<span id="v.xx-p53"></span>\[10.\] How is it then (some one says) that
many are not able? How is it then that many are not willing? For, if
they be willing, all will be able. Therefore also Paul says, “I would
that all men were even as I myself” ( [1 Cor. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007) <span id="v.xx-p53.1"></span> .md),
since he knew that all were able to be as himself. For he would not have
said this, if it had been impossible. Dost thou wish to become \[such\]?
only lay hold on the beginning.

<span id="v.xx-p54"></span> Tell me now, in the case of any arts, when
we wish to attain them, are we content with wishing, or do we also
engage with the things themselves?  <span
id="fr_3096"></span>[3097](#fn_3096.md) As for instance, one wishes to
become a pilot; he does not say, I wish, and content himself with that,
but he also puts his hand to the work. He wishes to become a merchant;
he does not merely say, I wish, but he also puts his hand to the work.
Again he wishes to travel abroad, and he does not say, I wish, but he
puts his hand to the work. In everything then, wishing alone is not
sufficient, but work must also be added; and when thou wishest to mount
up to heaven, dost thou merely say, “I wish”?

<span id="v.xx-p56"></span>How then (he says) saidst thou that willing
is sufficient? \[I meant\] willing joined with deeds, the laying hold on
the thing itself, the laboring. For we have God working with us, and
acting with us. Only let us make our choice, only let us apply ourselves
to the matter as to work, only let us think earnestly about it, only let
us lay it to heart, and all follows. But if we sleep on, and as we snore
expect to enter into heaven, how shall we be able to obtain the heavenly
inheritance?

<span id="v.xx-p57"></span>Let us therefore be willing, I exhort you,
let us be willing. Why do we carry on all our traffic with reference to
the present life, which to-morrow we shall leave? Let us choose then
that Virtue which will suffice us through all eternity: wherein we shall
be continually, and shall enjoy the everlasting good things; which may
we all attain, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom to the Father
together with the Holy Ghost be glory, power, honor, now and for ever
and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3073"></span>[443:3074](1140114.htm#fr_3073.md) <span
id="v.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p4.1"></span>of him that made it.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3074"></span>[443:3075](1140114.htm#fr_3074.md) <span
id="v.xx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p5"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p5.1"></span>in the case of the dead.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3075"></span>[443:3076](1140114.htm#fr_3075.md) <span
id="v.xx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p6"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p6.1"></span>whence.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3076"></span>[443:3077](1140114.htm#fr_3076.md) <span
id="v.xx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p7"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p7.1"></span>inaugurated.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p7.2"></span> \[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p7.3"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p7.4"></span>γκεκαίνισται</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p7.5"></span>. It cannot be denied that the word in the
classics bears both the closely related meanings of *inaugurate* and
*consecrate* . The English editor has adopted the former throughout this
homily; but as the common meaning in the LXX. is *consecrate* , and as
the common name of the festival of the dedication of the restored temple
was</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p7.6"></span>ἐ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p7.7"></span>γκαίνια</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p7.8"></span>, it seems better to keep to
the word adopted both by the A.V. and the Revision.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3077"></span>[443:3078](1140114.htm#fr_3077.md) <span
id="v.xx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p9.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p9.2"></span>πόδειγμα</span>

<span id="fn_3078"></span>[443:3079](1140114.htm#fr_3078.md) <span
id="v.xx-p10.6"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p11.1"></span>This is not a citation of any words of our Lord:
but probably</span> <span id="v.xx-p11.2"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p11.3"></span>[John xv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#027.md)<span id="v.xx-p11.4"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p11.5"></span>. which is
substantially equivalent, was the passage intended; the words are those
of</span> <span id="v.xx-p11.6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p11.7"></span>[1 Tim. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#021.md)<span id="v.xx-p11.8"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p11.9"></span>\[I charge thee before
God,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p11.10"></span>Διαμαρτύρομαι ἐνώπιον τοῦ Θεοῦ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p11.11"></span>\] thrown into the
imperative form.</span>

<span id="fn_3079"></span>[443:3080](1140114.htm#fr_3079.md) <span
id="v.xx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p14.1"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p14.2"></span>διαπορθμεύων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p14.3"></span>, see above, p 379, note 1.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3080"></span>[443:3081](1140114.htm#fr_3080.md) <span
id="v.xx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p16.1"></span>Mr. Field points the passage thus: </span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p16.2"></span>we could never have
been saved; if our Lord had not died for us, the Law would not have had
power,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p16.3"></span>&c. The
translation follows the Bened. pointing, as giving the meaning most in
accordance with St. Chrys.’s teaching. \[This pointing of the English
edition is allowed to stand as making the sense more obvious to the
English reader; but Mr. Field’s pointing gives essentially the same
sense and is more in St. Chrysostom’s style.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3081"></span>[444:3082](1140114.htm#fr_3081.md) <span
id="v.xx-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p19.1"></span>ὅ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p19.2"></span>θεν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p19.3"></span>. so Hom. v. 5, p. 69 on c. iii. 1.</span>

<span id="fn_3082"></span>[444:3083](1140114.htm#fr_3082.md) <span
id="v.xx-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p21.1"></span>κρατητικόν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p21.2"></span>. The common text, besides other additions, adds
the explanatory words</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p21.3"></span>τοῦ αἵματος</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p21.4"></span>of the blood.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3083"></span>[444:3084](1140114.htm#fr_3083.md) <span
id="v.xx-p21.5"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p22.1"></span>The common editions add</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p22.2"></span>ὄ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p22.3"></span>ν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p22.4"></span>, determining the meaning to
be</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p22.5"></span>he \[or
it\] shows that blood and water are the same thing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3084"></span>[444:3085](1140114.htm#fr_3084.md) <span
id="v.xx-p22.6"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p23.1"></span>See above on ch. vi. 6.</span>

<span id="fn_3085"></span>[444:3086](1140114.htm#fr_3085.md) <span
id="v.xx-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p25.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p25.2"></span>and we may almost say that according,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p25.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_3086"></span>[444:3087](1140114.htm#fr_3086.md) <span
id="v.xx-p25.4"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p26.1"></span>Or as the position of</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p26.2"></span>φησὶ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p26.3"></span>after</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p26.4"></span>αἷμα</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p26.5"></span>would seem to imply was the
interpretation of St. Chrys.: </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p26.6"></span>This blood is that of the New Testament,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p26.7"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_3087"></span>[444:3088](1140114.htm#fr_3087.md) <span
id="v.xx-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p31.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p31.2"></span>ποδείγματα</span>

<span id="fn_3088"></span>[444:3089](1140114.htm#fr_3088.md) <span
id="v.xx-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p33.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p33.2"></span>samples,</span> ” “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p33.3"></span>means of showing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_3089"></span>[444:3090](1140114.htm#fr_3089.md) <span
id="v.xx-p33.4"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p34.1"></span>The Greek is</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p34.2"></span>τὰ ἡμέτερα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p34.3"></span>, including all our sacraments, services,
relations, life and conversation. See Hom. xiv. \[3\]. \[S. Chrys. there
describes the heavenly things as</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p34.4"></span>spiritual,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p34.5"></span>and here, in accordance with the whole context,
he must refer more to the spiritual than to the outward and ceremonial
side of our religion.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3090"></span>[444:3091](1140114.htm#fr_3090.md) <span
id="v.xx-p34.6"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p35.1"></span>\[There is a paronomasia here which is difficult
of expression in English; lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p35.2"></span>our citizenship is in heaven, yet we live as
citizens here.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p35.3"></span>—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3091"></span>[444:3092](1140114.htm#fr_3091.md) <span
id="v.xx-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p37.1"></span>\[This passage is obscure; but the meaning seems
to be,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p37.2"></span>This
teaching, given above, is the philosophy of those Christians who are
called to such studies.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p37.3"></span>—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3092"></span>[445:3093](1140114.htm#fr_3092.md) <span
id="v.xx-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.1"></span>θυσίας</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.2"></span>. Mr. Field adopts the reading of the later <span
class="c11"><span id="v.xx-p40.3"></span>mss.</span> (and common
editions)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.4"></span>οὐσίας</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.5"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.6"></span>substance,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.7"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.8"></span>possession.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.9"></span> But the three <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xx-p40.10"></span>mss.</span> which he usually follows and the old
translation read</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.11"></span>θυσίας</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.12"></span>, which has been followed in the translation.
\[There are, however, as many <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xx-p40.13"></span>mss.</span> on the other side, and
whether</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.14"></span>οὐσίας</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.15"></span>be translated</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.16"></span>possession</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.17"></span>or</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.18"></span>reality,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p40.19"></span>it would give an excellent sense and one well in
accordance with the context.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_3093"></span>[445:3094](1140114.htm#fr_3093.md) <span
id="v.xx-p40.20"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p41.1"></span>τόπῳ ἀποκλειόμενος</span>

<span id="fn_3094"></span>[445:3095](1140114.htm#fr_3094.md) <span
id="v.xx-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p42.1"></span>σχέσει καὶ οἰκειώσει</span>

<span id="fn_3095"></span>[445:3096](1140114.htm#fr_3095.md) <span
id="v.xx-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p51.1"></span>σφαιρίζειν</span>

<span id="fn_3096"></span>[446:3097](1140114.htm#fr_3096.md) <span
id="v.xx-p54.1"></span>

<span id="v.xx-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p55.1"></span>ἁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xx-p55.2"></span>πτόμεθα τῶν πραγμάτων</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p55.3"></span>. The expression (</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p55.4"></span>τοῦ πράγματος
ἅπτεται</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.xx-p55.5"></span>) is
repeated in each of the three instances that follow: in the translation
it is varied.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVII](1140115.md)
