[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140079)  [Next](1140081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxvii"></span> <span id="iv.lxxvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXV.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxvii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p2.2"></span>[John xiv.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p3"></span> *“If ye love Me, keep My commandments.
And I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter,
that He may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the
world cannot receive, because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth Him.”*
 <span id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137.md)

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p5.1"></span>We</span> need everywhere works and actions,
not a mere show of words. For to say and to promise is easy for any one,
but to act is not equally easy. Why have I made these remarks? Because
there are many at this time who say that they fear and love God, but in
their works show the contrary; but God requireth that love which is
shown by works. Wherefore He said to the disciples, “If ye love Me, keep
My commandments.” For after He had told them, “Whatsoever ye shall ask,
 <span id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138.md) I will do it,” that they
might not deem the mere “asking” to be availing, He added, “If ye love
Me,” “then,” He saith, “I will do it.” And since it was likely that they
would be troubled when they heard that, “I go  <span
id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139.md) to the Father,” He telleth them “to
be troubled now is not to love, to love is to <span id="page_272">p.
272</span> <span id="iv.lxxvii-Page_272"></span> obey My words. I have
given you a commandment that ye love one another, that ye do so to each
other as I have done to you; this is love, to obey these My words, and
to yield to Him who is the object of your love.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p8"></span> “And I will ask the Father, and He shall
give you another Comforter.” Again His speech is one of condescension.
For since it was probable, that they not yet knowing Him would eagerly
seek His society, His discourse, His presence in the flesh, and would
admit of no consolation when He was absent, what saith He? “I will ask
the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter,” that is, “Another
like unto Me.” Let those be ashamed who have the disease of Sabellius,
 <span id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140.md) who hold not the fitting
opinion concerning the Spirit. For the marvel of this discourse is this,
that it hath stricken down contradictory heresies with the same blow.
For by saying “another,” He showeth the difference of Person, and by
“Paraclete,” the connection of Substance. But why said He, “I will ask
the Father”? Because had He said, “I will send Him,” they would not have
so much believed and now the object is that He should be believed. For
afterwards He declares that He Himself sendeth Him, saying, “Receive ye
the Holy Ghost” ( [John 20.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p9.2"></span> ); but in this place He telleth them that He
asketh the Father, so as to render His discourse credible to them. Since
John saith of Him, “Of His fullness have all we received” ( [John
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.lxxvii-p9.3"></span>
); but what He had, how receiveth He from another? And again, “He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire.” ( [Luke iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016.md) <span id="iv.lxxvii-p9.4"></span>
.) “But what had He more than the Apostles, if He was about to ask It of
His Father in order to give It to others, when they often even without
prayer appear to have done thus?” And how,  <span
id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141.md) if It is sent according to request
from the Father, doth It descend of Itself? And how is that which is
everywhere present sent by Another, that which “divideth to every man
severally as He will” ( [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011.md) <span id="iv.lxxvii-p10.2"></span>
), and which saith with authority, “Separate Me Paul and Barnabas”? (
[Acts xiii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p10.3"></span> .) Those ministers were ministering unto
God, yet still It called them authoritatively to Its own work; not that
It called them to any different work, but in order to show Its power.
“What then,” saith some one, “is, ‘I will ask the Father’?” (He saith
it) to show the time of Its coming. For when He had cleansed them by the
sacrifice,  <span id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142.md) then the Holy
Ghost lighted upon them. “And why, while He was with them, came it not?”
Because the sacrifice was not yet offered. But when afterwards sin had
been loosed, and they were being sent forth to dangers, and were
stripping themselves for the contest, then need was that the Anointer
 <span id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143.md) should come. “But why did
not the Spirit come immediately after the Resurrection?” In order that
being greatly desirous of It, they might receive It with great joy. For
as long as Christ was with them, they were not in tribulation; but when
He departed, being made defenseless and thrown into much fear, they
would receive It with much readiness.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p13"></span> “He remaineth with you.” This showeth
that even after death It departeth not. But lest when they heard of the
“Paraclete,” they should imagine a second Incarnation, and expect to see
It with their eyes, He setteth them right by saying, “Whom the world
cannot receive, because it seeth Him not.” “He will not be with you as I
have been, but will dwell in your very souls”; for this is the, “shall
be in you.”  <span id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144.md) He calleth it
the “Spirit of truth”; thus explaining the types in the Old Testament.
“That He may be  <span id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145.md) with you.”
What is, “may be with you”? That which He saith Himself, that “I am with
you.” ( [Matt. xxviii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p15.3"></span> .) Besides, He also implieth something
else, that “the case of the Spirit shall not be the same as Mine, He
shall never leave you.” “Whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth
Him not.” “Why, what is there belonging to the other Persons that is
visible?” Nothing; but He speaketh here of knowledge; at least He
addeth, “neither knoweth Him.” For He is wont, in the case of exact
knowledge, to call it “sight”; because sight is clearer than the other
senses, by this He always representeth exact knowledge.  By “world,” He
here speaketh of “the wicked,” thus too comforting the disciples by
giving to them a special gift. See in how many particulars He raised His
discourse concerning It. He said, “He is Another like unto Me”; He said,
“He will not leave you”; He said, “Unto you alone He cometh, as also did
I”; He said, that “He remaineth in you”; but not even so did He drive
out their despondency. For they still sought Him and His society. To
cure then this feeling, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p16"></span> [John
14.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p16.1"></span> . “I will not leave you orphans, I will
come unto you.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p17"></span>\[2.\] “Fear not,” He saith, “I said not
that I would send you another Comforter, as though I were Myself
withdrawing from you for ever; I said not that He remaineth with you, as
though I should see you no more. For I also Myself will come to you, I
will not leave you orphans.” Because when commencing He said, “Little
children,” therefore He saith also here, “I will not leave you orphans.”
At first then He told them, “Ye shall come whither I go”; and, “In <span
id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span id="iv.lxxvii-Page_273"></span> My
Father’s house there are many mansions”; but here, since that time was
long, He giveth them the Spirit; and when, not knowing what it could be
of which He spoke, they were not sufficiently comforted, “I will not
leave you orphans,” He saith; for this they chiefly required. But since
the, “I will come to you,” was the saying of one declaring a “presence,”
observe how in order that they might not again seek for the same kind of
presence as before, He did not clearly tell them this thing, but hinted
at it; for having said,

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p18"></span> [John
14.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p18.1"></span> . “Yet a little while, and the world seeth
Me not”; He added, “but ye see Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p19"></span>As though He had said, “I come indeed to
you, but not in the same way as before, ever being with you day by day.”
And lest they should say, “How then saidst Thou to the Jews, Henceforth
ye shall not see Me?” He solveth the contradiction by saying, “to you
alone”; for such also is the nature of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p20"></span>“Because I live, ye shall live also.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p21"></span>For the Cross doth not finally separate
us, but only hideth for a little moment; and by “life” He seemeth to me
to mean not the present only, but the future also.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p22"></span> [John
14.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p22.1"></span> . “At that day ye shall know that am in the
 <span id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146.md) Father, and you in Me, and I
in you.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p24"></span>With regard to the Father, these words
refer to Essence; with regard to the disciples, to agreement of mind and
help from God. “And how, tell me, is this reasonable?” saith some one.
And how, pray, is the contrary reasonable? For great and altogether
boundless is the interval between Christ and the disciples. And if the
same words are employed, marvel not; for the Scripture is often wont to
use in different senses the same words, when applied to God and to men.
Thus we are called “gods,” and “sons of God,” yet the word hath not the
same force when applied to us and to God. And the Son is called “Image,”
and “Glory”; so are we, but great is the interval between us. Again, “Ye
are Christ’s, and Christ is God’s” ( [1 Cor. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#023.md) <span id="iv.lxxvii-p24.1"></span>
), but not in like manner as Christ is God’s are we Christ’s. But what
is it that He saith? “When I am arisen,” He saith, “ye shall know that I
am not separated from the Father, but have the same power with Him, and
that I am with you continually, when facts proclaim the aid which cometh
to you from Me, when your enemies are kept down, and you speak boldly,
when dangers are removed from your path, when the preaching of the
Gospel flourisheth day by day, when all yield and give ground to the
word of true religion. “As the Father hath sent Me, so send I you.” (
[John 20.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p24.2"></span> .) Seest thou that here also the word hath
not the same force? for if we take it as though it had, the Apostles
will differ in nothing from Christ. But why saith He, “Then ye shall
know”? Because then they saw Him risen and conversing with them, then
they learnt the exact faith; for great was the power of the Spirit,
which taught them all things.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p25"></span>\[3.\] [John
14.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p25.1"></span> . “He that hath My commandments and keepeth
them, he it is that loveth Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p26"></span> It is not enough merely to have them,
we need also an exact keeping of them. But why doth He frequently say
the same thing to them? as, “If ye love Me, ye will keep  <span
id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147.md) My commandments” ( [John
14.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p27.3"></span> ); and, “He that hath My commandments and
keepeth them”; and, “If any one heareth My word and keepeth it, he it is
that loveth Me—he that heareth not My words, loveth Me not.” ( [John
14.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p27.4"></span> .) I think that He alluded to their
despondency; for since He had uttered many wise sayings to them
concerning death, saying, “He that hateth his life in this world shall
save it unto life eternal” ( [John
12.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p27.5"></span> ); and, “Unless a man take  <span
id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148.md) his cross and follow Me, he is not
worthy of Me” ( [Matt. x. 38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#038.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p28.3"></span> ); and is about to say other things
besides, rebuking them, He saith, “Think ye that ye suffer sorrow from
love? The not sorrowing would be a sign of love.” And because He wished
all along to establish this, as He went on He summed up His discourse in
this same point; “If ye loved Me,” He saith, “ye would have rejoiced,
because—I go to My Father” ( [John
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p28.4"></span> ), but now ye are in this state through
cowardice. To be thus disposed towards death is not for those who
remember My commandments; for you ought to be crucified, if you truly
loved Me, for My word exhorteth you not to be afraid of those that kill
the body. Those that are such both the Father loveth and I. “And I will
manifest Myself unto him.  <span id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149.md)
Then saith Judas,  <span id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150.md)

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p31"></span> [John
14.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p31.1"></span> . “How is it that Thou wilt manifest
Thyself unto us?”  <span id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151.md)

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p33"></span> Seest thou that their soul was close
pressed  <span id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152.md) with fear? For he
was confounded and troubled, and thought that as we see dead men in a
dream, so He also would be seen. In order therefore that they might not
imagine this, hear what He saith.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p35"></span> [John
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p35.1"></span> . “I and the Father will come unto him, and
make Our abode with him.”  <span id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153.md)

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p37"></span>All but saying, “As the Father revealeth
Himself, so also do I.” And not in this way only He removed the
suspicion, but also by saying, “We will make Our abode with him,” a
thing <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span
id="iv.lxxvii-Page_274"></span> which doth not belong to dreams. But
observe, I pray you, the disciple confounded, and not daring to say
plainly what he desired to say. For he said not, “Woe to us, that Thou
diest, and will come to us as the dead come”; he spake not thus; but,
“How is it that Thou wilt show Thyself to us, and not unto the world?”
Jesus then saith, that “I accept you, because ye keep My commandments.”
In order that they might not, when they should see Him afterwards,
 <span id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154.md) deem Him to be an
apparition, therefore He saith these things beforehand. And that they
might not deem that He would appear to them so as I have said, He
telleth them also the reason, “Because ye keep My commandments”; He
saith that the Spirit also will appear in like manner. Now if after
having companied with Him so long time, they cannot yet endure that
Essence, or rather cannot even imagine It, what would have been their
case had He appeared thus to them at the first? on this account also He
ate with them, that the action might not seem to be an illusion. For if
they thought this when they saw Him walking on the waters, although His
wonted form was seen by them, and He was not far distant, what would
they have imagined had they suddenly seen Him arisen whom they had seen
taken  <span id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155.md) and swathed? Wherefore
He continually telleth them that He will appear, and why He will appear,
and how, that they may not suppose Him to be an apparition.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p40"></span> [John
14.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#024.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p40.1"></span> . “He that loveth Me not keepeth not My
sayings; and the word which ye hear is not Mine, but the Father’s which
sent Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p41"></span>“So that he that heareth not these
sayings not only doth not love Me, but neither doth he love the Father.”
For if this is the sure proof of love, the hearing the commandments, and
these are of the Father, he that heareth them loveth not the Son only,
but the Father also. “And how is the word ‘thine’ and ‘not thine’?” This
means, “I speak not without the Father, nor say anything of Myself
contrary to what seemeth good to Him.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p42"></span> [John
14.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p42.1"></span> . “These things have I spoken unto you,
being yet present with you.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p43"></span>Since these sayings were not clear, and
since some they did not understand, and doubted about the greater
number, in order that they might not be again confused, and say, “What
commands?” He released them from all their perplexity, saying,

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p44"></span> [John
14.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p44.1"></span> . “The Comforter, whom the Father shall
send in My Name, He shall teach you.”  <span
id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156.md)

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p46"></span> “Perhaps these things are not clear to
you now, but ‘He’  <span id="fr_2157"></span>[2158](#fn_2157.md) is a clear
teacher of them.” And the, “remaineth with you” ( [John
14.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p47.3"></span> ), is the expression of One implying that
Himself will depart. Then that they may not be grieved, He saith, that
as long as He should remain with them and the Spirit should not come,
they would be unable to comprehend anything great or sublime. And this
He said to prepare them to bear nobly His departure, as that which was
to be the cause of great blessings to them. He continually calleth Him
“Comforter,” because of the afflictions which then possessed them. And
since even after hearing these things they were troubled, when they
thought of the sorrows, the wars, His departure, see how He calmeth them
again by saying,

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p48"></span> [John
14.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p48.1"></span> . “Peace I leave to you.”  <span
id="fr_2158"></span>[2159](#fn_2158.md)

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p50"></span> All but saying, “What are ye harmed by
the trouble of the world, provided ye be at peace with  <span
id="fr_2159"></span>[2160](#fn_2159.md) Me? For this peace is not of the
same kind as that. The one is external, is often mischievous and
unprofitable, and is no advantage to those who possess it; but I give
you peace of such a kind that ye be at peace with one another, which
thing rendereth you stronger.” And because He said again, “I leave,”
which was the expression of One departing, and enough to confound them,
therefore He again saith,

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p52"></span>“Let not your heart be troubled, neither
let it be afraid.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p53"></span>Seest thou that they were affected
partly by loving affection, partly by fear?

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p54"></span> [John
14.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p54.1"></span> . “Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go
away, and come again unto you. If ye loved Me, ye would rejoice because
I said, I go unto the Father; for My Father is greater than I.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p55"></span>\[4.\] And what joy would this bring to
them? What consolation? What then mean the words? They did not yet know
concerning the Resurrection, nor had they right opinion concerning Him;
(for how could they, who did not even know that He would rise again?)
but they thought that the Father was mighty. He saith then, that “If ye
are fearful for Me, as not able to defend Myself, and if ye are not
confident that I shall see you again after the Crucifixion, yet when ye
heard that I go to the Father, ye ought then to have rejoiced because I
go away to One that is greater, and able to undo all dangers.” “Ye have
heard how I said unto you.” Why hath He put this? Because, He saith, “I
am so firmly confident about the things which come to pass, that I even
foretell them, so far am I from fearing.”  This also is the meaning of
what follows.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p56"></span> [John
14.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p56.1"></span> . “And now I have told you before <span
id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span id="iv.lxxvii-Page_275"></span> it
come to pass, that when it is come to pass, ye might believe that I Am.”
 <span id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160.md) As though He had said, “Ye
would not have known, had I not told you. And I should not have told
you, had I not been confident.” Seest thou that the speech is one of
condescension? for when He saith, “Think ye that I cannot pray to the
Father, and He shall presently give Me more than twelve legions of
Angels” ( [Matt. xxvi. 53](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#053.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p57.4"></span> ), He speaketh to the secret thoughts of
the hearers; since no one, even in the height of madness, would say that
He was not able to help Himself, but needed Angels; but because they
thought of Him as a man, therefore He spoke of “twelve legions of
Angels.” Yet in truth He did but ask those who came to take Him a
question, and cast them backwards. ( [John
18.6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.lxxvii-p57.5"></span>
.) (If any one say that the Father is greater, inasmuch as  <span
id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161.md) He is the cause of the Son, we will
not contradict this. But this doth not by any means make the Son to be
of a different Essence.) But what He saith, is of this kind: “As long as
I am here, it is natural that you should deem that I am  <span
id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162.md) in danger; but when I am gone
‘there,’  <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163.md) be confident that I
am in safety; for Him none will be able to overcome.” All these words
were addressed to the weakness of the disciples, for, “I Myself am
confident, and care not for death.” On this account, He said, “I have
told you these things before they come to pass”; “but since,” He saith,
“ye are not yet able to receive the saying concerning them, I bring you
comfort even from the Father, whom ye entitle great.” Having thus
consoled them, He again telleth them sorrowful things,

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p61"></span> [John
14.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p61.1"></span> . “Hereafter I will not talk  <span
id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164.md) with you.” Wherefore? “For the
ruler of this world cometh, and hath nothing in Me.”

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p63"></span>By “ruler of this world,” He meaneth the
devil, calling wicked men also by the same name. For he ruleth not
heaven and earth, since he would have been subverted, and cast down all
things, but he ruleth over those who give themselves up to him.
Wherefore He calleth him, “the ruler of the darkness of this world,” in
this place again calling evil deeds, “darkness.” “What then, doth the
devil slay Thee?” By no means; “he hath nothing in Me.”  “How then do
they kill Thee?” Because I will it, and,

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p64"></span> [John
14.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p64.1"></span> . “‘That the world may know that I love the
Father.’”  <span id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165.md)

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p66"></span>“For being not subject,” He saith, “to
death, nor a debtor to it, I endure it through My love to the Father.”
This He saith, that He may again rouse their souls, and that they may
learn that not unwillingly but willingly He goeth to this thing, and
that He doth it despising the devil. It was not enough for Him to have
said, “Yet a little while I am with you” ( [John
7.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.lxxvii-p66.1"></span>
), but He continually handleth this painful subject, (with good reason,)
until He should make it acceptable to them, by weaving along with it
pleasant things. Wherefore at one time He saith, “I go, and I come
again”; and, “That where I there ye may be also”; and, “Ye cannot follow
Me now, but afterwards ye shall follow Me”; and, “I go to the Father”;
and, “The Father is greater than I”; and, “Before it come to pass, I
have told you”; and, “I do not suffer these things from constraint, but
from love for the Father.” So that they might consider, that the action
could not be destructive nor hurtful, if at least He who greatly loved
Him, and was greatly loved by Him, so willed. On this account, while
intermingling these pleasant words, He continually uttered the painful
ones also, practicing their minds. For both the, “remaineth with you” (
[John 16.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p66.2"></span> ), and, “My departure is expedient for
you,” were expressions of One giving comfort.  For this reason He spake
by anticipation ten thousand sayings concerning the Spirit,  <span
id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166.md) the, “Is in you,” and, “The world
cannot receive,” and, “He shall bring all things to your remembrance,”
and, “Spirit of truth,” and, “Holy Spirit,” and, “Comforter,” and that
“It is expedient for you,” in order that they might not despond, as
though there would be none to stand before and help them. “It is
expedient,” He saith, showing that It  <span
id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167.md) would make them spiritual.

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p69"></span>\[5.\] This at least, we see, was what
took place. For they who now trembled and feared, after they had
received the Spirit sprang into the midst of dangers, and stripped
themselves for the contest against steel, and fire, and wild beasts, and
seas, and every kind of punishment; and they, the unlettered and
ignorant, discoursed so boldly as to astonish their hearers. For the
Spirit made them men of iron instead of men of clay, gave them wings,
and allowed them to be cast down by nothing human. For such is that
grace; if it find despondency, it disperses it; if evil desires, it
consumes them; if cowardice, it casts it out, and doth not allow one who
has partaken of it to be afterwards mere man, but as it were removing
him to heaven itself, causes him to image to himself all that is there.
( [Acts 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md), [Acts
2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046.md)<span id="iv.lxxvii-p69.1"></span>
.) On this account no one said that any of the things that he possessed
was his own, but they continued in prayer, in praise, and in singleness
of heart. For this the Holy Spirit most requireth, for “the fruit of the
Spirit is joy, peace—faith, meek <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="iv.lxxvii-Page_276"></span> ness.” ( [Gal.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023.md)<span id="iv.lxxvii-p69.2"></span>
.) “And yet spiritual persons often grieve,” saith some one. But that
sorrow is sweeter than joy. Cain was sorrowful, but with the sorrow of
the world; Paul was sorrowful, but with godly sorrow. Everything that is
spiritual brings the greatest gain, just as everything that is worldly
the utmost loss. Let us then draw to us the invincible aid of the
Spirit, by keeping the commandments, and then we shall be nothing
inferior to the Angels. For neither are they therefore of this
character,  <span id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168.md) because they are
incorporeal, for were this the case, no incorporeal being would have
become wicked, but the will is in every case the cause of all. Wherefore
among incorporeal beings some have been found worse than men or things
irrational, and among those having bodies some better than the
incorporeal. All just men, for instance, whatever were their righteous
deeds, did them while dwelling on earth, and having bodies. For they
dwelt on earth as those who were pilgrims and strangers; but in heaven,
as citizens. Then say not thou either, “I am clothed with flesh, I
cannot get the mastery, nor undertake the toils  <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169.md) which are for the sake of virtue.”
Do not accuse the Creator. For if the wearing the flesh make virtue
impossible, then the fault is not ours. But that it does not make it
impossible, the band of saints has shown. A nature of flesh did not
prevent Paul from becoming what he was, nor Peter from receiving the
keys of heaven; and Enoch also, having worn flesh, was translated, and
not found. So also Elias was caught up with the flesh. Abraham also with
Isaac and his grandson shone brightly, having the flesh; and Joseph in
the flesh struggled against that abandoned woman. But why speak I of the
flesh? For though thou place a chain upon the flesh, no harm is done.
“Though I am bound,” saith Paul, yet “the word of God is not bound.” (
[2 Tim. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p71.3"></span> .) And why speak I of bonds and chains? Add
to these the prison,  <span id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170.md) and
bars, yet neither are these any hindrance to virtue; at least so Paul
hath instructed us. For the bond of the soul is not iron but cowardice,
and the desire of wealth, and the ten thousand passions. These bind us,
though our body be free. “But,” saith some one, “these have their origin
from the body.” An excuse this, and a false pretense. For had they been
produced from the body, all would have undergone them. For as we cannot
escape weariness, and sleep, and hunger, and thirst, since they belong
to our nature; so too these, if they were of the same kind, would not
allow any one to be exempt from their tyranny; but since many escape
them, it is clear that such things are the faults of a careless soul.
Let us then put a stop to this, and not accuse the body, but subdue it
to the soul, that having it under command, we may enjoy the everlasting
good things, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[271:2138](1140080.htm#fr_2137.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p4.1"></span>But ye know Him, for He dwelleth with you,
and shall be with you.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p4.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[271:2139](1140080.htm#fr_2138.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p6"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p6.1"></span>in My Name,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p6.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[271:2140](1140080.htm#fr_2139.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p7.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p7.2"></span>depart.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[272:2141](1140080.htm#fr_2140.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p9.1"></span>Sabellius was a bishop in Upper Egypt in the
third century. The heresy which bears his name denies the Personality of
the Son and the Holy Spirit, and holds that they are manifestations or
characters of the Godhead.</span>

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[272:2142](1140080.htm#fr_2141.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p10.1"></span>The objection is met by other
questions.</span>

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[272:2143](1140080.htm#fr_2142.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p11.1"></span>i.e. of Himself.</span>

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[272:2144](1140080.htm#fr_2143.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p12.2"></span>λείφοντα</span>

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[272:2145](1140080.htm#fr_2144.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p14.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p14.2"></span>remaineth in you.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[272:2146](1140080.htm#fr_2145.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p15"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p15.1"></span>may abide,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p15.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[273:2147](1140080.htm#fr_2146.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p23"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p23.1"></span>My,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p23.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[273:2148](1140080.htm#fr_2147.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p27"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p27.1"></span>If ye love Me, keep,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p27.2"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[273:2149](1140080.htm#fr_2148.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p27.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p28"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p28.1"></span>He that taketh not,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p28.2"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[273:2150](1140080.htm#fr_2149.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p28.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p29"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p29.1"></span>and he that loveth Me shall be loved of My
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p29.2"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[273:2151](1140080.htm#fr_2150.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p30"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p30.1"></span>not Iscariot,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p30.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[273:2152](1140080.htm#fr_2151.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p32"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p32.1"></span>and not unto the world,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p32.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[273:2153](1140080.htm#fr_2152.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p34.1"></span>πεπιλημένην</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p34.2"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p34.3"></span>crushed like felt.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[273:2154](1140080.htm#fr_2153.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p36"></span> [John
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p36.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p36.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p36.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p36.4"></span>Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man
love Me, he will keep My words; and My Father will love him, and We will
come,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p36.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[274:2155](1140080.htm#fr_2154.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p38.1"></span>i.e. after the Resurrection.</span>

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[274:2156](1140080.htm#fr_2155.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p39.1"></span>κατεχόμενου</span>

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[274:2157](1140080.htm#fr_2156.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p45"></span> [John
14.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p45.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p45.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p45.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p45.4"></span>But the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in My Name, He shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2157"></span>[274:2158](1140080.htm#fr_2157.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p47.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p47.2"></span>κεῖνος</span>

<span id="fn_2158"></span>[274:2159](1140080.htm#fr_2158.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p49"></span> [John
14.27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027.md)<span
id="iv.lxxvii-p49.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p49.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p49.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p49.4"></span>Peace I leave with you. My peace I give unto
you; not as the world giveth give I unto you,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p49.5"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2159"></span>[274:2160](1140080.htm#fr_2159.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p51.1"></span>πρὸς</span>

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[275:2161](1140080.htm#fr_2160.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p57.1"></span>The words</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p57.2"></span>that I Am</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p57.3"></span>are not read here, but in c. xiii.
19.</span>

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[275:2162](1140080.htm#fr_2161.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p57.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p58.1"></span>καθ̓ ὃ</span>

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[275:2163](1140080.htm#fr_2162.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p59.1"></span>Gr.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p59.2"></span>we are.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[275:2164](1140080.htm#fr_2163.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p59.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p60.1"></span>i.e. to the Father.</span>

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[275:2165](1140080.htm#fr_2164.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p62"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p62.1"></span>talk much,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p62.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[275:2166](1140080.htm#fr_2165.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p65"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p65.1"></span>And as the Father gave Me commandment, even
so I do.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxvii-p65.2"></span>
N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[275:2167](1140080.htm#fr_2166.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p66.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p67.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p67.2"></span>concerning It.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[275:2168](1140080.htm#fr_2167.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p68.1"></span>i.e. the Holy Spirit.</span>

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[276:2169](1140080.htm#fr_2168.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p69.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p70.1"></span>i.e. keeping God’s commands.</span>

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[276:2170](1140080.htm#fr_2169.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p71.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p71.2"></span>I cannot master the toils.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[276:2171](1140080.htm#fr_2170.md) <span
id="iv.lxxvii-p71.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxvii-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p72.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxvii-p72.2"></span>prisons.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 14.31; 15.1](1140081.md)
