[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140019)  [Next](1140021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xvii"></span> <span id="iv.xvii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>Homily XV.</span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xvii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xvii-p2.2"></span>[John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.xvii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p3"></span>“No man hath seen God at any time; the
Only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared
Him.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xvii-p4.1"></span>God</span> will not have us listen to the words
and sentences contained in the Scriptures carelessly, but with much
attention. This is why the blessed David hath prefixed in many places to
his Psalms the title “for understanding,”  <span
id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393) and hath said, “Open Thou mine eyes,
that I may behold wondrous things out of Thy Law.” ( [Ps.
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#042), [Ps.
119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018)<span id="iv.xvii-p5.5"></span>
.) And after him his son again shows that we ought to “seek out wisdom
as silver,  <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) and to make
merchandise of her rather than of gold.” ( [Prov.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004), [Prov.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014), [John
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039)<span id="iv.xvii-p6.2"></span> .)
And the Lord when He exhorts the Jews to “search the Scriptures,” the
more urges us to the enquiry, for He would not thus have spoken if it
were possible to comprehend them immediately at the first reading. No
one would ever search for what is obvious and at hand, but for that
which is wrapt in shadow, and which must be found after much enquiry;
and so to arouse us to the search He calls them “hidden treasure.” (
[Prov. 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004), [Matt.
13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044)<span id="iv.xvii-p6.3"></span>
.) These words are said to us that we may not apply ourselves to the
words of the Scriptures carelessly or in a chance way, but with great
exactness. For if any one listen to what is said in them without
enquiring into the meaning, and receive all so as it is spoken,
according to the letter, he will suppose many unseemly things of God,
will admit of Him that He is a man, that He is made of brass, is
wrathful, is furious, and many opinions yet worse than these. But if he
fully learn the sense that lies beneath, he will be freed from all this
unseemliness. ( [Rev. i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015) <span
id="iv.xvii-p6.4"></span> .) The very text which now lies before us
says, that God has a bosom, a thing proper to bodily substances, yet no
one is so insane as to imagine, that He who is without body is a body.
In order then that we may properly interpret the entire passage
according to its spiritual meaning, let us search it through from its
beginning.

<span id="iv.xvii-p7"></span>“No man hath seen God at any time.” By what
connection of thought does the Apostle come to say this? After showing
the exceeding greatness of the gifts of Christ, and the infinite
difference between them and those ministered by Moses, he would add the
reasonable cause of the difference. Moses, as being a servant, was
minister of lower things, but Christ being Lord and King, and the King’s
Son, brought to us things far greater, being ever with the Father, and
beholding Him continually; wherefore He saith, “No man hath seen God at
any time.” What then shall we answer to the most mighty of voice,
Esaias, when he says, “I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and
lifted up” ( [Isa. vi. 1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001) <span
id="iv.xvii-p7.1"></span> ); and to John himself testifying of Him, that
“he said these things when he had seen His glory”? ( [John
12.41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)<span id="iv.xvii-p7.2"></span>
.) What also to Ezekiel? for he too beheld Him sitting above the
Cherubim. ( [Ezek. 1:0](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#000), [Ezek.
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#000)<span id="iv.xvii-p7.3"></span> .)
What to Daniel? for he too saith, “The Ancient of days did sit” ( [Dan.
vii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009) <span id="iv.xvii-p7.4"></span>
.) What to Moses himself, saying, “Show me Thy Glory, that I may see
Thee so as to know Thee.” ( [Ex. xxxiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#013) <span id="iv.xvii-p7.5"></span> ,
partly from LXX.) And Jacob took his name from this very thing, being
called  <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) “Israel”; for Israel is
“one that sees God.”  <span id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) And others
have seen him. How then saith John, “No man hath seen God at any time”?
It is to declare, that all these were instances of (His) condescension,
not the vision of the Essence itself unveiled. For had they <span
id="page_51">p. 51</span> <span id="iv.xvii-Page_51"></span> seen the
very Nature, they would not have beheld It under different forms, since
that is simple, without form, or parts, or bounding lines. It sits not,
nor stands, nor walks: these things belong all to bodies. But how He Is,
He only knoweth. And this He hath declared by a certain prophet, saying,
“I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes  <span
id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) by the hands of the prophets” ( [Hos.
xii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#010) <span
id="iv.xvii-p10.1"></span> ), that is, “I have condescended, I have not
appeared as I really was.” For since His Son was about to appear in very
flesh, He prepared them from old time to behold the substance of God, as
far as it was possible for them to see It; but what God really is, not
only have not the prophets seen, but not even angels nor archangels. If
you ask them, you shall not hear them answering anything concerning His
Essence, but sending up,  <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) “Glory
to God in the Highest, on earth peace, good will towards men.” ( [Luke
ii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014) <span
id="iv.xvii-p11.1"></span> .) If you desire to learn something from
Cherubim or Seraphim, you shall hear the mystic song of His Holiness,
and that “heaven and earth are full of His glory.” ( [Isa. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003) <span id="iv.xvii-p11.2"></span> .)
If you enquire of the higher powers, you shall but find  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) that their one work is the praise of
God. “Praise ye Him,” saith David, “all His hosts.” ( [Ps. cxlviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002) <span id="iv.xvii-p12.1"></span> .)
But the Son only Beholds Him, and the Holy Ghost. How can any created
nature even see the Uncreated? If we are absolutely unable clearly to
discern any incorporeal power whatsoever, even though created, as has
been often proved in the case of angels, much less can we discern the
Essence which is incorporeal and uncreated.  Wherefore Paul saith, “Whom
no man hath seen, nor can see.” ( [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016) <span id="iv.xvii-p12.2"></span> .)
Does then this special attribute  <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) belong to the Father only, not to the
Son? Away with the thought. It belongs also to the Son; and to show that
it does so, hear Paul declaring this point, and saying, that He “is the
Image of the invisible God.” ( [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015) <span id="iv.xvii-p13.2"></span> .)
Now if He be the Image of the Invisible, He must be invisible Himself,
for otherwise He would not be an “image.” And wonder not that Paul saith
in another place, “God was manifested in the Flesh” ( [1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016) <span id="iv.xvii-p13.3"></span> );
because the manifestation  <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) took
place by means of the flesh, not according to (His) Essence. Besides,
Paul shows that He is invisible, not only to men, but also to the powers
above, for after saying, “was manifested in the Flesh,” he adds, “was
seen of angels.”

<span id="iv.xvii-p15"></span>\[2.\] So that even to angels He then
became visible, when He put on the Flesh; but before that time they did
not so behold Him, because even to them His Essence was invisible.

<span id="iv.xvii-p16"></span>“How then,” asks some one, “did Christ
say, ‘Despise not one of these little ones, for I tell you, that their
angels do always behold the face of My Father which is in heaven’? (
[Matt. xviii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#010) <span
id="iv.xvii-p16.1"></span> .) Hath then God a face, and is He bounded by
the heavens?” Who so mad as to assert this? What then is the meaning of
the words? As when He saith, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God” ( [Matt. v. 8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008) <span
id="iv.xvii-p16.2"></span> ), He means that intellectual vision which is
possible to us, and the having God in the thoughts; so in the case of
angels, we must understand  <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) that
by reason of their pure and sleepless  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) nature they do nothing else, but
always image to themselves God. And therefore Christ saith, that “No man
knoweth the Father, save the Son.” ( [Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027) <span id="iv.xvii-p18.2"></span> .)
What then, are we all in ignorance? God forbid; but none knoweth Him as
the Son knoweth Him. As then many  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) have seen Him in the mode of vision
permitted to them, but no one has beheld His Essence, so many of us know
God, but what His substance can be none knoweth, save only He that was
begotten of Him. For by “knowledge” He here means an exact idea and
comprehension, such as the Father hath of the Son. “As the Father
knoweth Me, even so know I the Father.” ( [John
10.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span id="iv.xvii-p19.1"></span>
.)

<span id="iv.xvii-p20"></span> Observe, therefore, with what fullness
 <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) the Evangelist speaks; for
having said that “no man hath seen God at any time,” he does not go on
to say, “that the Son who hath seen, hath declared Him,” but adds
something beyond “seeing” by the words, “Who is in the bosom of the
Father”; because, “to dwell  <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) in
the bosom” is far more than “to see.” For he that merely “seeth” hath
not an in every way exact knowledge of the object, but he that “dwelleth
in the bosom” can be ignorant of nothing. Now lest when thou hearest
that “none knoweth the Father, save the Son,” thou shouldest assert that
although He knoweth the Father more than all, yet He knoweth not how
great He is, the Evangelist says that He dwells in the bosom of the
Father; and Christ Himself declares, that He knoweth Him as much as the
Father knoweth the Son. Ask therefore the gainsayer, “Tell me, doth the
Father know the Son?” And if he be not mad, he will certainly answer
“Yes.” Then ask again; “Doth He see and know Him with exact vision and
knowledge? Doth He know clearly what He Is?” He will certainly confess
this also. From this next collect the exact comprehension the Son has of
the Father. For He saith, “As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the
Father” ( [John 10.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span
id="iv.xvii-p22.2"></span> ); and in another place, “Not that any man
hath seen the <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="iv.xvii-Page_52"></span> Father, save He which is of God.” ( [John
6.46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span id="iv.xvii-p22.3"></span>
.) Wherefore, as I said, the Evangelist mentions “the bosom,” to show
all this to us by that one word; that great is the affinity and nearness
of the Essence, that the knowledge is nowise different, that the power
is equal. For the Father would not have in His bosom one of another
essence, nor would He have dared, had He been one amongst many servants,
to live  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) in the bosom of his
Lord, for this belongs only to a true Son, to one who has  <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) much confidence towards His Father,
and who is in nothing inferior to Him.

<span id="iv.xvii-p25"></span>Wouldest thou learn also His eternity?
Hear what Moses saith concerning the Father. When he asked what he was
commanded to answer should the Jews enquire of him, “Who it was that had
sent him,” he heard these words: “Say, I AM hath sent me.” ( [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014) <span id="iv.xvii-p25.1"></span> .)
Now the expression “I AM,”  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) is
significative of Being ever, and Being without beginning, of Being
really and absolutely. And this also the expression, “Was in the
beginning,” declares, being indicative of Being ever; so that John uses
this word to show that the Son Is from everlasting to everlasting  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) in the bosom of the Father. For that
you may not from the sameness of name, suppose that He is some one of
those who are made sons by grace, first, the article is added,
distinguishing Him from those by grace. But if this does not content
you, if you still look earthwards, hear a name more absolute than this,
“Only-Begotten.” If even after this you still look below, “I will not
refuse,” says he, (St. John,) “to apply to God a term belonging to man,
I mean the word ‘bosom,’ only suspect nothing degrading.” Dost thou see
the lovingkindness and carefulness of the Lord? God applies  <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) to Himself unworthy expressions, that
even so thou mayest see through them, and have some great and lofty
thought of Him; and dost thou tarry below? For tell me, wherefore is
that gross and carnal word “bosom” employed in this place? Is it that we
may suppose God to be a body? Away, he by no means saith so. Why then is
it spoken? for if by it neither the genuineness of the Son is
established, nor that God is not a body, the word, because it serves no
purpose, is superfluously thrown in. Why then is it spoken? For I shall
not desist from asking thee this question. Is it not very plain, that it
is for no other reason but that by it we might understand the
genuineness of the Only-Begotten, and His Co-eternity with the Father?

<span id="iv.xvii-p29"></span> \[3.\] “He hath declared Him,” saith
John. What hath he declared? That “no man hath seen God at any time”?
That “God is one”? But this all the other prophets testify, and Moses
continually  <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) exclaims, “The Lord
thy God is one Lord” ( [Deut. vi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)
<span id="iv.xvii-p30.2"></span> ); and Esaias, “Before Me there was no
God formed, neither shall there be after me.” ( [Isa. xliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010) <span id="iv.xvii-p30.3"></span> .)
What more then have we learned from “the Son which is in the bosom of
the Father”? What from “the Only-Begotten”? In the first place, these
very words were uttered by His working; in the next place, we have
received a teaching that is far clearer, and learned that “God is a
spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in spirit and in
truth” ( [John 4.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.xvii-p30.4"></span> ); and again, that it is impossible to see
God; “that no man knoweth” Him, “save the Son” ( [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027) <span id="iv.xvii-p30.5"></span> );
that He is the Father of the true and Only-Begotten; and all other
things that are told us of Him. But the word “hath declared”  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) shows the plainer and clearer teaching
which He gave not to the Jews only but to all the world, and
established. To the prophets not even all the Jews gave heed, but to the
Only-Begotten Son of God all the world yielded and obeyed. So the
“declaration” in this place shows the greater clearness of His teaching,
and therefore also He is called “Word,” and “Angel  <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) of great Counsel.”  <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415)

<span id="iv.xvii-p34"></span>Since then we have been vouchsafed a
larger and more perfect teaching, God having no longer spoken by the
prophets, but “having in these last days spoken to us by His Son” (
[Heb. i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001) <span
id="iv.xvii-p34.1"></span> ), let us show forth a conversation far
higher than theirs, and suitable to the honor bestowed on us. Strange
would it be that He should have so far lowered Himself, as to choose to
speak to us no longer by His servants, but by His own mouth, and yet we
should show forth nothing more than those of old. They had Moses for
their teacher, we, Moses’ Lord. Let us then exhibit a heavenly wisdom
 <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) worthy of this honor, and let
us have nothing to do with earth. It was for this that He brought His
teaching from heaven above, that He might remove our thoughts thither,
that we might be imitators of our Teacher according to our power. But
how may we become imitators of Christ? By acting in everything for the
common good, and not merely seeking our own. “For even Christ,” saith
Paul, “pleased not Himself, but as it is written, The reproaches of them
that reproached Thee fell on Me.” ( [Rom.
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003), [Ps.
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span id="iv.xvii-p35.2"></span>
.) Let no one therefore seek his own. In truth, a man (really) seeks his
own good when he looks to that of his neighbor. What is their good is
ours; we are one body, and parts and limbs one of another. Let us not
then be as though we were rent asunder. Let no one say, “such a person
is no <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span id="iv.xvii-Page_53"></span>
friend of mine, nor relation, nor neighbor, I have nought to do with
him, how shall I approach, how address him?” Though he be neither
relation nor friend, yet he is a man, who shares the same nature with
thee, owns the same Lord, is thy fellow-servant, and fellow-sojourner,
 <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) for he is born in the same
world. And if besides he partakes of the same faith, behold he hath also
become a member of thee: for what friendship could work such union, as
the relationship of faith? And our intimacy one with another must not be
such nearness only as friends ought to show to friends, but such as is
between limb and limb, because no man can possibly discover any intimacy
greater than this sort of friendship and fellowship.  <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) As then you cannot say, “Whence arises
my intimacy and connection with this limb?” (that would be ridiculous;)
so neither can you say so in the case of your brother. “We are all
baptized into one body” ( [1 Cor. xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013) <span id="iv.xvii-p37.1"></span> ),
saith Paul. “Wherefore into one body?” That we be not rent asunder, but
preserve the just proportions of that one body by our intercourse and
friendship one with another.

<span id="iv.xvii-p38"></span> Let us not then despise one another, lest
we be neglectful of ourselves.  <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419)
“For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourisheth and cherisheth
it.” ( [Eph. v. 29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029) <span
id="iv.xvii-p39.1"></span> .) And therefore God hath given to us but one
habitation, this earth, hath distributed all things equally, hath
lighted one sun for us all, hath spread above us one roof, the sky, made
one table, the earth, bear  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) food
for us. And another table hath He given far better than this, yet that
too is one, (those who share our mysteries understand my words,) one
manner of birth He hath bestowed on all, the spiritual, we all have one
country, that in the heavens, of the same cup drink we all. He hath not
bestowed on the rich man a gift more abundant and more honorable, and on
the poor one more mean and small, but He hath called all alike. He hath
given carnal things with equal regard to all,  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) and spiritual in like manner. Whence
then proceeds the great inequality of conditions in life? From the
avarice and pride of the wealthy. But let not, brethren, let not this
any longer be; and when matters of universal interest and more pressing
necessity bring us together, let us not be divided by things earthly and
insignificant: I mean, by wealth and poverty, by bodily relationship, by
enmity and friendship; for all these things are a shadow, nay less
substantial than a shadow, to those who possess the bond of charity from
above. Let us then preserve this unbroken, and none of those evil
spirits  <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) will be able to enter
in, who cause division in so perfect union;  <span
id="fr_423"></span>[424](#fn_423) to which may we all attain by the
grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with
whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_393"></span>[50:394](1140020.htm#fr_393) <span
id="iv.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>εἰς σύνεσιν</span> <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="iv.xvii-p5.2"></span>מַשְׂכִּיל</span> Maschil, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvii-p5.3"></span>σύνεσις</span>,
*intellectus* , et ut Hieron. reddit, *eruditio* , aliqui, *erudiens* ,
vel *intellectum præstans* . Lorin. *in tit* . [Ps.
31](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#000)<span id="iv.xvii-p5.4"></span>
(32).

<span id="fn_394"></span>[50:395](1140020.htm#fr_394) <span
id="iv.xvii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p6"></span> Some <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xvii-p6.1"></span>mss.</span> read “silver, and search for it as
treasure; He would not have said *Search* , &c.”

<span id="fn_395"></span>[50:396](1140020.htm#fr_395) <span
id="iv.xvii-p7.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p8.1"></span>γνωστῶς</span> .

<span id="fn_396"></span>[50:397](1140020.htm#fr_396) <span
id="iv.xvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p9"></span> Augus. *De Civ. Dei* , lib. 16, 39.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[51:398](1140020.htm#fr_397) <span
id="iv.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p10"></span> lit. “been likened.”

<span id="fn_398"></span>[51:399](1140020.htm#fr_398) <span
id="iv.xvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p11"></span> al. “only singing.”

<span id="fn_399"></span>[51:400](1140020.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iv.xvii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p12"></span> al. “they shall answer again.”

<span id="fn_400"></span>[51:401](1140020.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iv.xvii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p13.1"></span>ἐ ξαίρετον</span> .

<span id="fn_401"></span>[51:402](1140020.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iv.xvii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p14"></span> al. therefore saith (Paul), “Who was
manifested in the flesh,” for the manifestation, &c.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[51:403](1140020.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iv.xvii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p17"></span> al. “many say.”

<span id="fn_403"></span>[51:404](1140020.htm#fr_403) <span
id="iv.xvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p18.1"></span>ἄ γρυπνον</span> .

<span id="fn_404"></span>[51:405](1140020.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iv.xvii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p19"></span> al. “many prophets.”

<span id="fn_405"></span>[51:406](1140020.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iv.xvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p21.1"></span>περιουσίας</span> , al. “exactness.”

<span id="fn_406"></span>[51:407](1140020.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iv.xvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p22.1"></span>ἐ νδιαιτᾶσθαι</span> .

<span id="fn_407"></span>[52:408](1140020.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iv.xvii-p22.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p23.1"></span>τρέφεσθαι</span> , al. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xvii-p23.2"></span>στρέφεσθαι</span> ,
*versari* .

<span id="fn_408"></span>[52:409](1140020.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iv.xvii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p24"></span> lit. “uses.”

<span id="fn_409"></span>[52:410](1140020.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iv.xvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p26"></span> lit. “He Who Is.” Another reading of the
passage is, “if he were asked…and should answer, he is bidden to say
that, &c.”

<span id="fn_410"></span>[52:411](1140020.htm#fr_410) <span
id="iv.xvii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p27.1"></span>ἀ νάρχως καὶ ἀϊδίως</span> .

<span id="fn_411"></span>[52:412](1140020.htm#fr_411) <span
id="iv.xvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p28"></span> al. “allows to be applied.”

<span id="fn_412"></span>[52:413](1140020.htm#fr_412) <span
id="iv.xvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p30.1"></span>ἄ νω καὶ κάτω</span> .

<span id="fn_413"></span>[52:414](1140020.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iv.xvii-p30.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p31.1"></span>ἐ ξηγήσατο</span> .

<span id="fn_414"></span>[52:415](1140020.htm#fr_414) <span
id="iv.xvii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p32"></span> or, “Messenger.”

<span id="fn_415"></span>[52:416](1140020.htm#fr_415) <span
id="iv.xvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p33.1"></span>μεγάλης βουλῆς ἄγγελος</span> . The LXX.
version of the titles of Christ, [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006) <span id="iv.xvii-p33.2"></span> .

<span id="fn_416"></span>[52:417](1140020.htm#fr_416) <span
id="iv.xvii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p35.1"></span>φιλοσοφίαν</span> .

<span id="fn_417"></span>[53:418](1140020.htm#fr_417) <span
id="iv.xvii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p36.1"></span>ὁ μόσκηνος</span> , “tent-fellow.”

<span id="fn_418"></span>[53:419](1140020.htm#fr_418) <span
id="iv.xvii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p37"></span> al. “care.”

<span id="fn_419"></span>[53:420](1140020.htm#fr_419) <span
id="iv.xvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p39"></span> al. “let us then so care for our
neighbors, as not neglecting each his own flesh.”

<span id="fn_420"></span>[53:421](1140020.htm#fr_420) <span
id="iv.xvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p40.1"></span>ἀ νῆκεν</span> .

<span id="fn_421"></span>[53:422](1140020.htm#fr_421) <span
id="iv.xvii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xvii-p41.1"></span>ὁ μοτίμως</span> .

<span id="fn_422"></span>[53:423](1140020.htm#fr_422) <span
id="iv.xvii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p42"></span> al. “passions.”

<span id="fn_423"></span>[53:424](1140020.htm#fr_423) <span
id="iv.xvii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xvii-p43"></span> al. “union with Him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 1.19](1140021)
