[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140008)  [Next](1140010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi"></span> <span id="iv.vi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="iv.vi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.vi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.vi-p2.2"></span>[John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.vi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p3"></span>“In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God.”

<span id="iv.vi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.vi-p4.1"></span>When</span> children are just brought to their
learning, their teachers do not give them many tasks in succession, nor
do they set them once for all, but they often repeat to them the same
short ones, so that what is said may be easily implanted in their minds,
and they may not be vexed at the first onset with the quantity, and with
finding it hard to remember, and become less active in picking up what
is given them, a kind of sluggishness arising from the difficulty. And
I, who wish to effect the same with you, and to render your labor easy,
take by little and little the food which lies on this Divine table, and
instill it into your souls. On this account I shall handle again the
same words, not so as to say again the same things, but to set before
you only what yet remains. Come, then, let us again apply our discourse
to the introduction.

<span id="iv.vi-p5"></span> “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God.” Why, when all the other Evangelists had begun with the
Dispensation  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) ; (for Matthew says,
“The Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David”; and Luke
too relates to us in the beginning of his Gospel the events relating to
Mary; and in like manner Mark dwells on the same narratives, from that
point detailing to us the history of the Baptist;) why, when they began
with these matters, did John briefly and in a later place hint at them,
saying, “the Word was made flesh” ( [John
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iv.vi-p6.2"></span> .);
and, passing by everything else, His conception, His birth, His bringing
up, His growth, at once discourse to us concerning His Eternal
Generation?

<span id="iv.vi-p7"></span> I will now tell you what the reason of this
is. Because the other Evangelists had dwelt most on the accounts of His
coming in the flesh, there was fear lest some, being of grovelling
minds, might for this reason rest in these doctrines alone, as indeed
was the case with Paul of Samosata. In order, therefore, to lead away
from this fondness for earth those who were like to fall into it, and to
draw them up towards heaven, with good reason he commences his narrative
from above, and from the eternal subsistence. For while Matthew enters
upon his relation from Herod the king, Luke from Tiberius Cæsar, Mark
from the Baptism of John, this Apostle, leaving alone all these things,
ascends beyond all time or age.  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74)
Thither darting forward the imagination of his hearers to the “ <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.vi-p8.2"></span>was in the beginning</span> ,”
not allowing it to stay at any point, nor setting any limit, as they did
in Herod, and Tiberius, and John.

<span id="iv.vi-p9"></span> And what we may mention besides as
especially deserving our admiration is, that John, though he gave
himself up to the higher doctrine,  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)
yet did not neglect the Dispensation; nor were the others, though intent
upon the relation of this, silent as to the subsistence before the ages.
With good cause; for One Spirit It was that moved the souls of all; and
therefore they have shown great unanimity in their narrative. But thou,
beloved, when thou hast heard of “The Word,” do not endure those who
say, that He is a work; nor those even who think, that He is simply a
word. For many are the words of God which angels execute, but of those
words none is God; they all are prophecies or commands, (for in
Scripture it is usual to call the laws of God His commands, and
prophecies, words; wherefore in speaking of the angels, he says, “Mighty
in strength, fulfilling His word”) ( [Ps. ciii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#020) <span id="iv.vi-p10.2"></span> ),
but this <span class="c11"><span id="iv.vi-p10.3"></span>Word</span> is
a Being with subsistence,  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76)
proceeding  <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) without affection
 <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) from the Father Himself. For this,
as I before said, he has shown by the term “Word.” As therefore the
expression, “In the beginning was the Word,” shows His Eternity, so “was
in the beginning with God,” has declared to us His Co-eternity. For that
you may not, when you hear “In the beginning was the Word,” suppose Him
to be Eternal, and yet imagine the life of <span id="page_17">p.
17</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_17"></span> the Father to differ from His
by some interval and longer duration, and so assign a beginning to the
Only-Begotten, he adds, “was in the beginning with God”; so eternally
even as the Father Himself, for the Father was never without the Word,
but He was always God with God, yet Each in His proper Person.  <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79)

<span id="iv.vi-p15"></span> How then, one says, does John assert, that
He was in the world, if He was with God? Because He was both  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) with God and in the world also. For
neither Father nor Son are limited in any way. Since, if “there is no
end of His greatness” ( [Ps. cxlv. 3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)
<span id="iv.vi-p16.1"></span> ), and if “of His wisdom there is no
number” ( [Ps. cxlvii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005) <span
id="iv.vi-p16.2"></span> ), it is clear that there cannot be any
beginning in time  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) to His Essence.
Thou hast heard, that “In the beginning God made the heaven and the
earth” ( [Gen. i. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001) <span
id="iv.vi-p17.2"></span> ); what dost thou understand from this
“beginning”? clearly, that they were created before all visible things.
So, respecting the Only-Begotten, when you hear that He was “in the
beginning,” conceive of him as before all intelligible things,  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) and before the ages.

<span id="iv.vi-p19"></span> But if any one say, “How can it be that He
is a Son, and yet not younger than the Father? since that which proceeds
from something else needs must be later than that from which it
proceeds”; we will say that, properly speaking, these are human
reasonings; that he who questions on this matter will question on others
yet more improper;  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) and that to
such we ought not even to give ear. For our speech is now concerning
God, not concerning the nature of men, which is subject to the sequence
and necessary conclusions of these reasonings. Still, for the assurance
of the weaker sort, we will speak even to these points.

<span id="iv.vi-p21"></span> \[2.\] Tell me, then, does the radiance of
the sun proceed from the substance  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84)
itself of the sun, or from some other source? Any one not deprived of
his very senses needs must confess, that it proceeds from the substance
itself. Yet, although the radiance proceeds from the sun itself, we
cannot say that it is later in point of time than the substance of that
body, since the sun has never appeared without its rays. Now if in the
case of these visible and sensible bodies there has been shown to be
something which proceeds from something else, and yet is not after that
from whence it proceeds; why are you incredulous in the case of the
invisible and ineffable Nature? This same thing there takes place, but
in a manner suitable to That Substance.  <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) For it is for this reason that Paul too
calls Him “Brightness” ( [Heb. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)
<span id="iv.vi-p23.2"></span> ); setting forth thereby His being from
Him and His Co-eternity. Again, tell me, were not all the ages, and
every interval  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) created by Him? Any
man not deprived of his senses must necessarily confess this. There is
no interval  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) therefore between the
Son and the Father; and if there be none, then He is not after, but
Co-eternal with Him. For “before” and “after” are notions implying time,
since, without age or time, no man could possibly imagine these words;
but God is above times and ages.

<span id="iv.vi-p26"></span>But if in any case you say that you have
found a beginning to the Son, see whether by the same reason and
argument you are not compelled to reduce the Father also to a beginning,
earlier indeed, but still a beginning. For when you have assigned to the
Son a limit and beginning of existence, do you not proceed upwards from
that point, and say, that the Father was before it? Clearly you do. Tell
me then, what is the extent of the Father’s prior subsistence? For
whether you say that the interval is little, or whether you say it is
great, you equally have brought the Father to a beginning. For it is
clear, that it is by measuring the space that you say whether it is
little or great; yet it would not be possible to measure it, unless
there were a beginning on either side; so that as far as you are
concerned you have given the Father a beginning, and henceforth,
according to your argument, not even the Father will be without
beginning. See you that the word spoken by the Saviour is true, and the
saying everywhere discovers its force? And what is that word? It is “He
that honoreth not the Son, honoreth not the Father.” ( [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023) <span id="iv.vi-p26.1"></span> .)

<span id="iv.vi-p27"></span> And I know indeed that what now has been
said cannot by many be comprehended, and therefore it is that in many
places we avoid  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) agitating
questions of human reasonings, because the rest of the people cannot
follow such arguments, and if they could, still they have nothing firm
or sure in them. “For the thoughts of mortal men are miserable, and our
devices are but uncertain.” ( [Wisd. ix.
14](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#014) <span id="iv.vi-p28.3"></span> .)
Still I should like to ask our objectors, what means that which is said
by the Prophet, “Before Me there was no God formed, nor is there any
after Me”? ( [Is. xliii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010) <span
id="iv.vi-p28.4"></span> .) For if the Son is younger than the Father,
how, says He, “Nor is there  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) any
after me”? Will you take away the being of the Only-Begotten Himself?
You either must dare this, or admit one Godhead with distinct Persons of
the Father and Son.

<span id="iv.vi-p30"></span> Finally, how could the expression, “All
things were made by Him,” be true? For if there is an age older than He,
how can that  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) which was before Him
have been made by Him? See ye to what daring the argument has carried
them, <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_18"></span>
when once the truth has been unsettled? Why did not the Evangelist say,
that He was made from things that were not, as Paul declares of all
things, when he says, “Who calleth those things which be not as though
they were”; but says, “Was in the beginning”? ( [Rom. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017) <span id="iv.vi-p31.3"></span> .)
This is contrary to that; and with good reason. For God neither is made,
 <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) nor has anything older; these are
words of the Greeks.  <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Tell me this
too: Would you not say, that the Creator beyond all comparison excels
His works? Yet since that which is from things that were not is similar
to them, where is the superiority not admitting of comparison? And what
mean the expressions, “I am the first and I am the last” ( [Is. xliv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006) <span id="iv.vi-p33.1"></span> );
and, “before Me was no other God formed”? ( [Is. xliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#010) <span id="iv.vi-p33.2"></span> .)
For if the Son be not of the same Essence, there is another God; and if
He be not Co-eternal, He is after Him; and if He did not proceed from
His Essence, clear it is that He was made. But if they assert, that
these things were said to distinguish Him from idols, why do they not
allow that it is to distinguish Him from idols that he says, “the Only
True God”? ( [John xvii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003) <span
id="iv.vi-p33.3"></span> .) Besides, if this was said to distinguish Him
from idols, how would you interpret the whole sentence? “After Me,” He
says, “is no other God.” In saying this, He does not exclude the Son,
but that “After Me there is no idol God,” not that “there is no Son.”
Allowed, says he; what then? and the expression, “Before Me was no other
God formed,” will you so understand, as that no idol God indeed was
formed before Him, but yet a Son was formed before Him? What evil spirit
would assert this? I do not suppose that even Satan himself would do so.

<span id="iv.vi-p34"></span> Moreover, if He be not Co-eternal with the
Father, how can you say that His Life is infinite? For if it have a
beginning from before,  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) although it
be endless, yet it is not infinite; for the infinite must be infinite in
both directions. As Paul also declared, when he said, “Having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life” ( [Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003) <span id="iv.vi-p35.3"></span> ); by
this expression showing that He is both without beginning and without
end. For as the one has no limit, so neither has the other. In one
direction there is no end, in the other no beginning.

<span id="iv.vi-p36"></span>\[3.\] And how again, since He is “Life,”
was there ever when He was not? For all must allow, that Life both is
always, and is without beginning and without end, if It be indeed Life,
as indeed It is. For if there be when It is not, how can It be the life
of others, when It even Itself is not?

<span id="iv.vi-p37"></span> “How then,” says one, “does John lay down a
beginning by saying, ‘In the beginning was’?” Tell me, have you attended
to the “In the beginning,” and to the “was,” and do you not understand
the expression, “the Word was”? What! when the Prophet says, “From
everlasting  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) and to everlasting
Thou art” ( [Ps. xc. 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002) <span
id="iv.vi-p38.3"></span> ), does he say this to assign Him limits? No,
but to declare His Eternity. Consider now that the case is the same in
this place. He did not use the expression as assigning limits, since he
did not say, “had a beginning,” but “was in the beginning”; by the word
“was” carrying thee forward to the idea that the Son is without
beginning. “Yet observe,” says he, “the Father is named with the
addition of the article, but the Son without it.” What then, when the
Apostle says, “The Great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ” ( [Tit. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013) <span id="iv.vi-p38.4"></span> );
and again, “Who is above all, God”? ( [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005) <span id="iv.vi-p38.5"></span> .) It
is true that here he has mentioned the Son, without the article; but he
does the same with the Father also, at least in his Epistle to the
Philippians ( [Philip. 2.6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.vi-p38.6"></span> ), he says, “Who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God”; and again to the Romans,
“Grace to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ.” ( [Rom. i. 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007) <span
id="iv.vi-p38.7"></span> .) Besides, it was superfluous for it to be
attached in that place, when close  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)
above it was continually attached to “the Word.” For as in speaking
concerning the Father, he says, “God is a Spirit” ( [John iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024) <span id="iv.vi-p39.2"></span> ),
and we do not, because the article is not joined to “Spirit,” yet deny
the Spiritual Nature of God; so here, although the article is not
annexed to the Son, the Son is not on that account a less God. Why so?
Because in saying “God,” and again “God,” he does not reveal to us any
difference in this Godhead, but the contrary; for having before said,
“and the Word was God”; that no one might suppose the Godhead of the Son
to be inferior, he immediately adds the characteristics of genuine
Godhead, including Eternity, (for “He was,” says he, “in the beginning
with God,”) and attributing to Him the office of Creator. For “by Him
were all things made, and without Him was not anything made that was
made”; which His Father also everywhere by the Prophets declares to be
especially characteristic of His own Essence. And the Prophets are
continually busy on this kind of demonstration, not only of itself, but
when they contend against the honor shown to idols; “Let the gods
perish,” says one “who have not made heaven and earth” ( [Jer. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011) <span id="iv.vi-p39.3"></span> ):
and again, “I have stretched out the heaven with My hand” ( [Is. xliv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024) <span id="iv.vi-p39.4"></span> );
and it is as declaring it to be indicative of Divinity, that <span
id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span id="iv.vi-Page_19"></span> He everywhere
puts it. And the Evangelist himself was not satisfied with these words,
but calls Him “Life” too and “Light.” If now He was ever with the
Father, if He Himself created all things, if He brought all things into
existence, and keeps together  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) all
things, (for, this he meant by “Life,”) if He enlightens all things, who
so senseless as to say, that the Evangelist desired to teach an
inferiority of Divinity by those very expressions, by which, rather than
by any others, it is possible to express its equality and not differing?
Let us not then confound the creation with the Creator, lest we too hear
it said of us, that “they served the creature rather than the Creator” (
[Rom. i. 25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025) <span
id="iv.vi-p40.3"></span> ); for although it be asserted that this is
said of the heavens, still in speaking of the heavens he positively
says, that we must not serve  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) the
creature, for it is a heathenish  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)
thing.

<span id="iv.vi-p43"></span>\[4.\] Let us therefore not lay ourselves
under this curse. For this the Son of God came, that He might rid us
from this service; for this He took the form of a slave, that He might
free us from this slavery; for this He was spit upon, for this He was
buffeted, for this He endured the shameful death. Let us not, I entreat
you, make all these things of none effect, let us not go back to our
former unrighteousness, or rather to unrighteousness much more grievous;
for to serve the creature is not the same thing as to bring down the
Creator, as far at least as in us lies, to the meanness of the creature.
For He continues being such as He is; as says the Psalmist, “Thou art
the same, and Thy years shall not fail.” ( [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027) <span id="iv.vi-p43.1"></span> .)
Let us then glorify Him as we have received from our fathers, let us
glorify Him both by our faith and by our works; for sound doctrines
avail us nothing to salvation, if our life is corrupt. Let us then order
it according to what is well-pleasing to God, setting ourselves far from
all filthiness, unrighteousness, and covetousness, as strangers and
foreigners and aliens to the things here on earth. If any have much
wealth and possessions, let him so use them as one who is a sojourner,
and who, whether he will or not, shall shortly pass from them. If one be
injured by another, let him not be angry forever, nay rather not even
for a time. For the Apostle has not allowed us more than a single day
for the venting of anger.

<span id="iv.vi-p44"></span>“Let not,” says he, “the sun go down upon
your wrath” ( [Eph. iv. 26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026) <span
id="iv.vi-p44.1"></span> ); and with reason; for it is matter for
contentment that even in so short a time nothing unpleasant take place;
but if night also overtake us, what has happened becomes more grievous,
because the fire of our wrath is increased ten thousand times by memory,
and we at our leisure enquire into it more bitterly. Before therefore we
obtain this pernicious leisure and kindle a hotter fire, he bids us
arrest beforehand and quench the mischief. For the passion of wrath is
fierce, fiercer than any flame; and so we need much haste to prevent the
flame, and not allow it to blaze up high, for so this disease becomes a
cause of many evils. It has overturned whole houses, it has dissolved
old companionships, and has worked tragedies not to be remedied in a
short moment of time. “For,” saith one, “the sway of his fury shall be
his destruction.” ( [Ecclesiasticus
1.22](../../../bib/apo/sir001.htm#022)<span id="iv.vi-p44.2"></span> .)
Let us not then leave such a wild beast unbridled, but put upon him a
muzzle in all ways strong, the fear of the judgment to come. Whenever a
friend grieves thee, or one of thine own family exasperates thee, think
of the sins thou hast committed against God, and that by kindness
towards him thou makest that judgment more lenient to thyself,
(“Forgive,” saith He, “and ye shall be forgiven”) ( [Luke vi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037) <span id="iv.vi-p44.3"></span> ),
and thy passion shall quickly skulk away.  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)

<span id="iv.vi-p46"></span>And besides, consider this, whether there
has been a time when thou wert being carried away into ferocity, and
didst control thyself, and another time when thou hast been dragged
along by the passion. Compare the two seasons, and thou shalt gain
thence great improvement. For tell me, when didst thou praise thyself?
Was it when thou wast worsted, or when thou hadst the mastery? Do we not
in the first case vehemently blame ourselves, and feel ashamed. even
when none reproves us, and do not many feelings of repentance come over
us, both for what we have said and done; but when we gain the mastery,
then are we not proud, and exult as conquerors? For victory in the case
of anger is, not the requiting evil with the like, (that is utter
defeat,) but the bearing meekly to be ill treated and ill spoken of. To
get the better is not to inflict but to suffer evil. Therefore when
angry do not say, “certainly I will retaliate,” “certainly I will be
revenged”; do not persist in saying to those who exhort you to gain a
victory, “I will not endure that the man mock me, and escape clear.” He
will never mock thee, except when thou avengest thyself; or if he even
should mock thee he will do so as a fool. Seek not when thou conquerest
honor from fools, but consider that sufficient which comes from men of
understanding. Nay, why do I set before thee a small and mean body of
spectators, when I make it up of men? Look up straight to God: He will
praise thee, and the man who is approved by Him must not seek honor from
mortals. Mortal honor often arises from flattery or hatred of others,
and brings no profit; but the <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="iv.vi-Page_20"></span> decision of God is free from this inequality,
and brings great advantage to the man whom He approves. This praise then
let us follow after.

<span id="iv.vi-p47"></span>Will you learn what an evil is anger? Stand
by while others are quarreling in the forum. In yourself you cannot
easily see the disgrace of the thing, because your reason is darkened
and drunken; but when you are clear from the passion, and while your
judgment is sound, view your own case in others. Observe, I pray you,
the crowds collecting round, and the angry men like maniacs acting
shamefully in the midst. For when the passion boils up within the
breast, and becomes excited and savage, the mouth breathes fire, the
eyes emit fire, all the face becomes swollen, the hands are extended
disorderly, the feet dance ridiculously, and they spring at those who
restrain them, and differ nothing from madmen in their insensibility to
all these things; nay, differ not from wild asses, kicking and biting.
Truly a passionate man is not a graceful one.

<span id="iv.vi-p48"></span> And then, when after this exceedingly
ridiculous conduct, they return home and come to themselves, they have
the greater pain, and much fear, thinking who were present when they
were angry. For like raving men, they did not then know the standers by,
but when they have returned to their right mind, then they consider,
were they friends? were they foes and enemies that looked on? And they
fear alike about both; the first because they will condemn them and give
them more shame; the others because they will rejoice at it. And if they
have even exchanged blows, then their fear is the more pressing; for
instance, lest anything very grievous happen to the sufferer; a fever
follow and bring on death, or a troublesome swelling rise and place him
in danger of the worst. And, “what need” (say they) “had I of fighting,
and violence, and quarreling? Perish such things.” And then they curse
the ill-fated business which caused them to begin, and the more foolish
lay on “wicked spirits,” and “an evil hour,” the blame of what has been
done; but these things are not from an evil hour, (for there is no such
thing as an evil hour,) nor from a wicked spirit, but from the
wickedness of those captured by the passion; they draw the spirits to
them, and bring upon themselves all things terrible. “But the heart
swells,” says one, “and is stung by insults.” I know it; and that is the
reason why I admire those who master this dreadful wild beast; yet it is
possible if we will, to beat off the passion. For why when our rulers
insult us do we not feel it? It is because fear counterbalances the
passion, and frightens us from it, and does not allow it to spring up at
all. And why too do our servants, though insulted by us in ten thousand
ways, bear all in silence? Because they too have the same restraint laid
upon them. And think thou not merely of the fear of God, but that it is
even God Himself who then insults thee, who bids thee be silent, and
then thou wilt bear all things meekly, and say to the aggressor, How can
I be angry with thee? there is another that restrains both my hand and
my tongue; and the saying will be a suggestion of sound wisdom, both to
thyself and to him. Even now we bear unbearable things on account of
men, and often say to those who have insulted us, “Such an one insulted
me, not you.” Shall we not use the same caution in the case of God? How
else can we hope for pardon? Let us say to our soul, “It is God who
holds our hands, who now insults us; let us not be restive, let not God
be less honored by us than men.” Did ye shudder at the word? I wish you
would shudder not at the word only, but at the deed. For God hath
commanded us when buffeted not only to endure it, but even to offer
ourselves to suffer something worse; and we withstand Him with such
vehemence, that we not only refuse to offer ourselves to suffer evil,
but even avenge ourselves, nay often are the first to act on the
offensive,  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) and think we are
disgraced if we do not the same in return. Yes, and the mischief is,
that when utterly worsted we think ourselves conquerors, and when lying
undermost and receiving ten thousand blows from the devil, then we
imagine that we are mastering him. Let us then, I exhort you, understand
what is the nature  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) of this
victory, and this kind of nature  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) let us follow after. To suffer evil is
to get the crown. If then we wish to be proclaimed victors by God, let
us not in these contests observe the laws of heathen games, but those of
God, and learn to bear all things with longsuffering; for so we may get
the better of our antagonists, and obtain both present and promised
goods, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom and with whom to the Father and the Holy Spirit be glory,
power, and honor, now and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[16:74](1140009.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p6.1"></span>οἰκονομίας</span> .

<span id="fn_74"></span>[16:75](1140009.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iv.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p8.1"></span>αἰῶνος</span> .

<span id="fn_75"></span>[16:76](1140009.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p10.1"></span>λόγον</span> .

<span id="fn_76"></span>[16:77](1140009.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.vi-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p11.1"></span>οὐσία ἐνυπόστατος</span> .

<span id="fn_77"></span>[16:78](1140009.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p12.1"></span>προελθοῦσα</span> .

<span id="fn_78"></span>[16:79](1140009.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p13.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p13.2"></span>παθῶς</span> .

<span id="fn_79"></span>[17:80](1140009.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.vi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p14.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p14.2"></span>ποστάσει</span> .

<span id="fn_80"></span>[17:81](1140009.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p16"></span> al. “God with God.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[17:82](1140009.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iv.vi-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p17.1"></span>χρονικὴ</span> .

<span id="fn_82"></span>[17:83](1140009.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.vi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p18.1"></span>νοητῶν</span> .

<span id="fn_83"></span>[17:84](1140009.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p20.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p20.2"></span>τοπώτερα</span> .

<span id="fn_84"></span>[17:85](1140009.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.vi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p22.1"></span>φύσέως</span> .

<span id="fn_85"></span>[17:86](1140009.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p23.1"></span>τὸ αὐτὸ δὴ τοῦτο ἔστιν οὕτως ὡς ἐκείνῃ οὐσίᾳ
πρέπον ἦν</span> .

<span id="fn_86"></span>[17:87](1140009.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.vi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p24.1"></span>διάστημα</span> .

<span id="fn_87"></span>[17:88](1140009.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p25.1"></span>μσον</span> .

<span id="fn_88"></span>[17:89](1140009.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p28.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p28.2"></span>ναβαλλόμεθα</span> , “put off.”

<span id="fn_89"></span>[17:90](1140009.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.vi-p28.5"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p29"></span> LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p29.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p29.2"></span>στιν</span> .

<span id="fn_90"></span>[17:91](1140009.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p31.1"></span>τὸ</span> , al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p31.2"></span>ὁ</span> .

<span id="fn_91"></span>[18:92](1140009.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.vi-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p32.1"></span>γίνεται</span> .

<span id="fn_92"></span>[18:93](1140009.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.vi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p33"></span> Heathens.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[18:94](1140009.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p35.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p35.2"></span>νωθεν</span> , “a parte ante.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[18:95](1140009.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p38.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p38.2"></span>πὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος</span> .

<span id="fn_95"></span>[18:96](1140009.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.vi-p38.8"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p39.1"></span>συνεχῶς</span> .

<span id="fn_96"></span>[19:97](1140009.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.vi-p39.5"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p40.1"></span>συγκροτεῖ</span> , al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p40.2"></span>συγκρατεῖ</span> .

<span id="fn_97"></span>[19:98](1140009.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.vi-p40.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p41.1"></span>λατρεύειν</span> .

<span id="fn_98"></span>[19:99](1140009.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.vi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p42.1"></span>̔</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p42.2"></span>Ελληνικὸν</span> .

<span id="fn_99"></span>[19:100](1140009.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.vi-p44.4"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p45.1"></span>δραπετεύσει</span> .

<span id="fn_100"></span>[20:101](1140009.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.vi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p49.1"></span>ἄ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p49.2"></span>ρχειν χειρῶν ἀδίκων</span> .

<span id="fn_101"></span>[20:102](1140009.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.vi-p49.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p50.1"></span>τρόπος</span> .

<span id="fn_102"></span>[20:103](1140009.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iv.vi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.vi-p51.1"></span>τρόπου τὸ εἶδος</span> .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 1.3](1140010)
