[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140084)  [Next](1140086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxxii"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxii-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span id="iv.lxxxii-Page_294"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXX.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxxii-p2.2"></span>[John xvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)<span
id="iv.lxxxii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p3"></span>“These words spake Jesus, and lifted up
His eyes to heaven, and saith, Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy
Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee.”

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p4"></span> \[1.\] “ <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p4.1"></span>He</span> that hath done and taught,”  <span
id="fr_2295"></span>[2296](#fn_2295) it saith, “the same shall be called
great in the Kingdom of heaven.” And with much reason; for to show true
wisdom in words, is easy, but the proof which is by works is the part of
some noble and great one. Wherefore also Christ, speaking of the
endurance of evil, putteth Himself forth, bidding us take example from
Him. On this account too, after this admonition, He betaketh Himself to
prayer, teaching us in our temptations to leave all things, and flee to
God. For because He had said, “In the world ye shall have tribulation,”
and had shaken their souls, by the prayer He raiseth them again. As yet
they gave heed unto Him as to a man; and for their sake He acteth thus,
just as He did in the case of Lazarus, and there telleth the reason;
“Because of the people that stand by I said it, that they might believe
that Thou hast sent Me.” ( [John
11.42](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#042)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p5.3"></span>
.) “Yea,” saith some one, “this took place with good cause in the case
of the Jews; but wherefore in that of the disciples?” With good cause in
the case of the disciples also. For they who, after all that had been
said and done, said, “Now we know that Thou knowest” ( [John
16.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#030)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p5.4"></span>
), most of all needed to be established. Besides, the Evangelist doth
not even call the action prayer; but what saith he? “He lifted up His
eyes to heaven,” and saith rather that it was a discoursing with the
Father. And if elsewhere he speaks of prayer, and at one time shows Him
kneeling on His knees, at another lifting His eyes to heaven, be not
thou troubled; for by these means we are taught the earnestness which
should be in our petitions, that standing we should look up, not with
the eyes of the flesh only, but of the mind, and that we should bend our
knees, bruising our own hearts. For Christ came not merely to manifest
Himself, but also about to teach virtue ineffable. But it behooveth the
teacher to teach, not by words only, but also by actions. Let us hear
then what He saith in this place.

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p6"></span>“Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy
Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee.”

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p7"></span> Again He showeth us, that not unwilling
He cometh to the Cross. For how could He be unwilling, who prayed that
this might come to pass, and called the action “glory,” not only for
Himself the Crucified, but also for the Father? since this was the case,
for not the Son only, but the Father also was glorified. For before the
Crucifixion, not even the Jews knew Him;  <span
id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296) “Israel,” it saith, “hath not known
Me” ( [Isa. i. 3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p8.2"></span> ); but after the Crucifixion, all the world
ran to Him. Then He speaketh also of the manner of the glory, and how He
will glorify Him.

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p9"></span> [John
17.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p9.1"></span>
. “As Thou hast given Him power over all flesh,” “that nothing which
Thou hast given Him should perish.”  <span
id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297)

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p11"></span>For to be always doing good, is glory to
God. But what is, “As Thou hast given Him power over all flesh”? He now
showeth, that what belongs to the preaching is not confined to the Jews
alone, but is extended to all the world, and layeth down beforehand the
first invitations to the Gentiles. And since He had said, “Go not into
the way of the Gentiles” ( [Matt. x. 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)
<span id="iv.lxxxii-p11.1"></span> ), and after this time is about to
say, “Go ye, and make disciples of all nations” ( [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019) <span id="iv.lxxxii-p11.2"></span>
), He showeth that the Father also willeth this. For this greatly
offended the Jews, and the disciples too; nor indeed after this did they
easily endure to lay hold on the Gentiles, until they received the
teaching of the Spirit; because hence arose no small stumblingblock for
the Jews. Therefore, when Peter after such a manifestation of the Spirit
came to Jerusalem, he could scarcely, by relating the vision of the
sheet, escape the charges brought against him. But what is, “Thou hast
given Him power over all flesh”? I will ask the heretics, “When did He
receive this power? was it before He formed them, or after?” He himself
saith, that it was after that He had been crucified,  <span
id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298) and had risen again; at least then
He said, “All power is given unto Me” ( [Matt. xxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018) <span id="iv.lxxxii-p12.3"></span>
), and, “Go ye and make disciples of all nations.” What then, had He not
authority over His own works? Did He make them, and had He not authority
over them after having made them? Yet He is seen doing all in times of
old, punishing some as sinners,  <span
id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299) (for, “Surely I will not hide,” it
saith, “from My servant Abraham, that which I am about to do”— [Gen.
xviii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#017) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p13.4"></span> , LXX.,) and honoring others as righteous.
Had He then the power at that time, and now had He lost it, and did He
again receive <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxii-Page_295"></span> it? What devil could assert this? But if
His power was the same both then and now, (for, saith He, “as the Father
raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom
He will”— [John 5.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.lxxxii-p13.5"></span> ,) what is the meaning of the words? He was
about to send them to the Gentiles; in order therefore that they might
not think that this was an innovation, because He had said, “I am not
sent, save unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel” ( [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024) <span id="iv.lxxxii-p13.6"></span>
), He showeth that this seemeth good to the Father also. And if He saith
this with great meanness of circumstance, it is not wonderful. For so He
edified both those at that time, and those who came afterwards; and as I
have before said, He always by the excess of meanness firmly persuaded
them that the words were those of condescension.

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p14"></span>\[2.\] But what is, “Of all flesh”? For
certainly not all believed. Yet, for His part, all believed; and if men
gave no heed to His words, the fault was not in the teacher, but in
those who received them not.

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p15"></span>“That He should give eternal life to as
many as Thou hast given Him.”

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p16"></span>If here also He speaketh in a more human
manner, wonder not. For He doth so both on account of the reasons I have
given, and to avoid the saying anything great concerning Himself; since
this was a stumblingblock to the hearers because as yet they imagined
nothing great concerning Him. John, for example, when He speaks in his
own person, doth not so, but leadeth up his language to greater
sublimity, saying, “All things were made by Him, and without Him was not
anything made” ( [John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p16.1"></span>
); and that He was “Life”; and that He was “Light”; and that “He came to
His own”: he saith not, that He would not have had power, had He not
received it, but that He gave to others also “power to become sons of
God.” And Paul in like manner calleth Him equal with God. But He Himself
asketh in a more human way, saying thus, “That He should give eternal
life to as many as Thou hast given Him.” ( [Philip. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006) <span id="iv.lxxxii-p16.2"></span>
.)

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p17"></span> [John
17.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p17.1"></span>
. “And this is life eternal, that they might know Thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou hast sent.”

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p18"></span> “The only true God,” He saith, by way
of distinction from those which are not gods; for He was about to send
them to the Gentiles. But if they  <span
id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300) will not allow this, but on account
of this word “only” reject the Son from being true God, in this way as
they proceed they reject Him from being God at all.  <span
id="fr_2301"></span>[2302](#fn_2301) For He also saith, “Ye seek not the
glory which is from the only God.” ( [John
5.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p20.3"></span>
.) Well then; shall not the Son be God? But if the Son be God, and the
Son of the Father who is called the Only God, it is clear that He also
is true, and the Son of Him who is called the Only true God. Why, when
Paul saith, “Or I only and Barnabas” ( [1 Cor. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#006) <span id="iv.lxxxii-p20.4"></span>
), doth he exclude Barnabas? Not at all; for the “only” is put by way of
distinction from others. And, if He be not true God, how is He “Truth”?
for truth far surpasses what is true. What shall we call the not being a
“true” man, tell me? shall we not call it the not being a man at all? so
if the Son is not true God, how is He God? And how maketh He us gods and
sons, if He is not true? But on these matters we have spoken more
particularly in another place; wherefore let us apply ourselves to what
follows.

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p21"></span> [John
17.4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p21.1"></span>
. “I have glorified Thee on the earth.” Well said He, “on the earth”;
for in heaven He had been already glorified, having His own natural
glory, and being worshiped by the Angels. Christ then speaketh not of
that glory which is bound up with His  <span
id="fr_2302"></span>[2303](#fn_2302) Essence, (for that glory, though
none glorify Him, He ever possesseth in its fullness,) but of that which
cometh from the service of men. And so the, “Glorify Me,” is of this
kind; and that thou mayest understand that He speaketh of this manner of
glory, hear what follows.

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p23"></span>“I have finished the work which Thou
gavest Me that I should do it.”

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p24"></span> And yet the action was still but
beginning, or rather was not yet beginning. How then said He, “I have
finished”? Either He meaneth, that “I have done all My part”; or He
speaketh of the future, as having already come to pass; or, which one
may say most of all, that all was already effected, because the root of
blessings had been laid, which fruits would certainly and necessarily
follow, and from His being  <span id="fr_2303"></span>[2304](#fn_2303)
present at and assisting in those things which should take place after
these. On this account He saith again in a condescending way, “Which
Thou gavest Me.” For had He indeed waited to hear and learn, this would
have fallen far short of His glory. For that He came to this  <span
id="fr_2304"></span>[2305](#fn_2304) of His own will, is clear from many
passages. As when Paul saith, that “He so loved us, as to give Himself
for us” ( [Eph. v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p26.2"></span> ); and, “He emptied Himself, and took upon
Him the form of a servant” ( [Philip. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007) <span id="iv.lxxxii-p26.3"></span>
); and, “As the Father hath loved Me, so have I loved you.” ( [John
15.9](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#009)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p26.4"></span>
.)

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p27"></span> [John
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span id="iv.lxxxii-p27.1"></span>
. “And now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with Thine Own Self,  <span
id="fr_2305"></span>[2306](#fn_2305) with the glory which I had with
Thee before the world was.”

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p29"></span> Where is that glory? For allowing that
He was  <span id="fr_2306"></span>[2307](#fn_2306) with reason unhonored
among men, because of the covering  <span
id="fr_2307"></span>[2308](#fn_2307) which was put around <span
id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span id="iv.lxxxii-Page_296"></span> Him;
how seeketh He  <span id="fr_2308"></span>[2309](#fn_2308) to be
glorified with the Father? What then saith He here?  The saying refers
to the Dispensation; since His fleshly nature had not yet been
glorified, not having as yet enjoyed incorruption, nor shared the kingly
throne. Therefore He said not “on earth,” but “with Thee.”

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p33"></span>\[3.\] This glory we also shall enjoy
according to our measure, if we be sober. Wherefore Paul saith, “If so
be that we suffer with Him, that we may also be glorified together.” (
[Rom. viii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p33.1"></span> .) Ten thousand tears then do they merit,
who through sluggishness and sleep plot against themselves when such
glory is set before them; and, were there no hell, they would be more
wretched than any, who, when it is in their power to reign and to be
glorified with the Son of God, deprive themselves of so great blessings.
Since if it were necessary to be cut in pieces, if to die ten thousand
deaths, if to give up every day ten thousand lives and as many bodies,
ought we not to submit to such things  <span
id="fr_2309"></span>[2310](#fn_2309) for such glory? But now we do not
even despise money, which hereafter, though unwilling, we shall leave:
we do not despise money, which brings about us ten thousand mischiefs,
which remains here, which is not our own. For we are but stewards of
that which is not our own, although we receive it from our fathers. But
when there is hell besides, and the worm that dieth not, and the fire
that is not quenched, and the gnashing of teeth, how, tell me, shall we
bear these things? How long will we refuse to see clearly, and spend our
all on daily fightings, and contentions, and unprofitable talk, feeding,
cultivating earth, fattening the body and neglecting the soul, making no
account of necessary things, but much care about things superfluous and
unprofitable? And we build splendid tombs, and buy costly houses, and
draw about with us herds of all kinds of servants, and devise different
stewards, appointing managers of lands, of houses, of money, and
managers of those managers; but as to our desolate soul, we care nothing
for that. And what will be the limit to this? Is it not one belly that
we fill, is it not one body that we clothe? What is this great bustle of
business? Why and wherefore do we cut up and tear to pieces the one
 <span id="fr_2310"></span>[2311](#fn_2310) soul, which we have had
assigned to us,  <span id="fr_2311"></span>[2312](#fn_2311) in attending
to the service of such things, contriving for ourselves a grievous
slavery? For he who needs many things is the slave of many things,
although he seem to be their master. Since the lord is the slave even of
his domestics, and brings in another and a heavier mode of service; and
in another way also he is their slave, not daring without them to enter
the agora, nor the bath, nor the field, but they frequently go about in
all directions without him. He who seems to be master, dares not, if his
slaves be not present, to go forth from home, and if whilst unattended
he do but put his head out of his house, he thinks that he is laughed
at. Perhaps some laugh at us when we say this, yet on this very account
they would be deserving of ten thousand tears. For to show that this is
slavery, I would gladly ask you, wouldest thou wish to need some one to
put the morsel to thy mouth, and to apply the cup to thy lips? Wouldest
thou not deem such a service worthy of tears? What if thou didst require
continually supporters to enable thee to walk, wouldest thou not think
thyself pitiable, and in this respect more wretched than any? So then
thou oughtest to be disposed now. For it matters nothing whether one is
so treated by irrational things,  <span
id="fr_2312"></span>[2313](#fn_2312) or by men.

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p38"></span> Why, tell me, do not the Angels differ
from us in this respect, that they do not want so many things as we do?
Therefore the less we need, the more we are on our way to them; the more
we need, the more we sink down to this perishable life. And that thou
mayest learn that these things are so, ask those who have grown old
which life they deem happiest, that when they were helplessly  <span
id="fr_2313"></span>[2314](#fn_2313) mastered, or now when they are
masters of these things? We have mentioned these persons, because those
who are intoxicated with youth, do not even know the excess of their
slavery. For what of those in fever, do they call themselves happy when,
thirsting much, they drink much and need more, or when, having recovered
their health, they are free from the desire? Seest thou that in every
instance the needing much is pitiable, and far apart from true wisdom,
and an aggravation of slavery and desire? Why then do we voluntarily
increase to ourselves wretchedness? For, tell me, if it were possible to
live uninjured without roof or walls, wouldest thou not prefer this;
wherefore then dost thou increase the signs of thy weakness? Do we not
for this call Adam happy, that he needed nothing, no house, no clothes?
“Yes,” saith some one, “but now we are in need of them.” Why then do we
make our need greater? If many persons curtail many of the things
actually needed, (servants, I mean, and houses, and money,) what excuse
can we have if we overstep the need? The more thou puttest about thee,
the more slavish dost thou become; for by whatever proportion thou
requirest more, in that proportion thou hast trenched upon thy freedom.
For absolute  <span id="fr_2314"></span>[2315](#fn_2314) freedom is, to
want nothing at all; the next is, to want little; and this the Angels
and their imitators especially <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxii-Page_297"></span> possess. But for men to succeed in this
while tarrying in a mortal body, think how great praise this hath. This
also Paul said, when writing to the Corinthians, “But I spare you,” and,
“lest such should have trouble in the flesh.”  <span
id="fr_2315"></span>[2316](#fn_2315) ( [1 Cor. vii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028) <span id="iv.lxxxii-p41.3"></span>
.) Riches are called “usables,”  <span
id="fr_2316"></span>[2317](#fn_2316) that we may “use” them rightly, and
not keep and bury them; for this is not to possess them, but to be
possessed by them. Since if we are going to make this our aim how to
multiply them, not that we may employ them rightly, the order is
reversed, and they possess us, not we them. Let us then free ourselves
from this grievous bondage, and at last become free. Why do we devise
ten thousand different chains for ourselves? Is not the bond of nature
enough for thee, and the necessity of life, and the crowd of ten
thousand affairs, but dost thou twine also other nets for thyself, and
put them about thy feet? And when wilt thou lay hold on heaven, and be
able to stand on  <span id="fr_2317"></span>[2318](#fn_2317) that
height? For a great thing, a great thing is it, that even having cut
asunder all these cords, thou shouldest be able to lay hold on the city
which is above. So many other hindrances are there; all which that we
may conquer, let us keep to the mean estate  <span
id="fr_2318"></span>[2319](#fn_2318) \[and having put away
superfluities, let us keep to what is necessary.\] Thus shall we lay
hold on eternal life, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2295"></span>[294:2296](1140085.htm#fr_2295) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p5"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p5.1"></span>Whosoever shall do,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxii-p5.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[294:2297](1140085.htm#fr_2296) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p8.1"></span>i.e. the Father.</span>

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[294:2298](1140085.htm#fr_2297) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p10.1"></span>N.T. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p10.2"></span>That He should give eternal life to as many
as Thou hast given Him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[294:2299](1140085.htm#fr_2298) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p12.1"></span>Morel.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p12.2"></span>had been made flesh.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[294:2300](1140085.htm#fr_2299) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p13.1"></span>Some <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p13.2"></span>mss.</span> add,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxii-p13.3"></span>and setting right some
who turn.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[295:2301](1140085.htm#fr_2300) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p19.1"></span>i.e. the heretics: some <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.lxxxii-p19.2"></span>mss.</span> </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxii-p19.3"></span>τὸ μόνον</span>

<span id="fn_2301"></span>[295:2302](1140085.htm#fr_2301) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p20.2"></span>even reject God.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2302"></span>[295:2303](1140085.htm#fr_2302) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p22.1"></span>i.e. the Father’s.</span>

<span id="fn_2303"></span>[295:2304](1140085.htm#fr_2303) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p25.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p25.2"></span>and His being.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2304"></span>[295:2305](1140085.htm#fr_2304) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p25.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p26.1"></span>i.e. to His death.</span>

<span id="fn_2305"></span>[295:2306](1140085.htm#fr_2305) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p28.1"></span>παρὰ σεαυτῷ</span>

<span id="fn_2306"></span>[295:2307](1140085.htm#fr_2306) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p30.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p30.2"></span>Thou wast.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2307"></span>[295:2308](1140085.htm#fr_2307) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p31.1"></span>i.e. the flesh.</span>

<span id="fn_2308"></span>[296:2309](1140085.htm#fr_2308) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p32.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p32.2"></span>seekest Thou.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2309"></span>[296:2310](1140085.htm#fr_2309) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p34.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p34.2"></span>all.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2310"></span>[296:2311](1140085.htm#fr_2310) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p35.1"></span>one <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p35.2"></span>ms.</span> </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxii-p35.3"></span>the precious.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2311"></span>[296:2312](1140085.htm#fr_2311) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p35.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p36.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p36.2"></span>have received.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2312"></span>[296:2313](1140085.htm#fr_2312) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p37.1"></span>i.e. receives so much help from them.</span>

<span id="fn_2313"></span>[296:2314](1140085.htm#fr_2313) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p39.1"></span>τὸν ὅτε ἐκρατοῦντο μάτην, ἢ τὸν ὅτε αὐτῶν
κρατοῦσι νῦν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p39.2"></span>. There may be some words omitted.</span>

<span id="fn_2314"></span>[296:2315](1140085.htm#fr_2314) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p39.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p40.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p40.2"></span>κριρῆς</span>

<span id="fn_2315"></span>[297:2316](1140085.htm#fr_2315) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p40.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p41"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p41.1"></span>such shall have,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxii-p41.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2316"></span>[297:2317](1140085.htm#fr_2316) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p41.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p42.1"></span>χρήματα</span>

<span id="fn_2317"></span>[297:2318](1140085.htm#fr_2317) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p43.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p43.2"></span>rise up to.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2318"></span>[297:2319](1140085.htm#fr_2318) <span
id="iv.lxxxii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxii-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxii-p44.1"></span>εὐτελείας</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 17.6](1140086)
