[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140047)  [Next](1140049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xlv"></span> <span id="iv.xlv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xlv-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xlv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xlv-p2.2"></span>[John vi.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.xlv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p3"></span> *“And when even was now come, His disciples
went down unto*  <span id="fr_1207"></span>[1208](#fn_1207) *the sea and
entered*  <span id="fr_1208"></span>[1209](#fn_1208) *into a ship, and
went over*  <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1210](#fn_1209) *the sea toward
Capernaum. And it was*  <span id="fr_1210"></span>[1211](#fn_1210) *now
dark, and Jesus was not come unto them. And the sea arose by reason of a
great wind that blew.”*

<span id="iv.xlv-p8"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xlv-p8.1"></span>Christ</span> provideth for the good of his
disciples not only when He is present in the body, but also when far
away; for having abundance of means and of skill, He effecteth one and
the same end by contrary actions. Observe, for instance, what He hath
done here. He leaveth His disciples, and goeth up into a mountain; and
they,  <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1212](#fn_1211) when even was come,
went down unto the sea. They waited for Him until evening, expecting
that He would come unto them; but when even was come, they could no
longer endure not to seek their Master;  <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1213](#fn_1212) so great a love possessed them.
They said not, “It is now evening, and night hath overtaken us, whither
shall we depart? the place is dangerous, the time unsafe”; but, goaded
 <span id="fr_1213"></span>[1214](#fn_1213) by their longing, they
entered into the ship. For it is not without a cause that the Evangelist
hath declared  <span id="fr_1214"></span>[1215](#fn_1214) the time also,
but by it to show the warmth of their love.

<span id="iv.xlv-p13"></span> Wherefore then doth Christ let them go,
and not show Himself?  <span id="fr_1215"></span>[1216](#fn_1215) And
again,  <span id="fr_1216"></span>[1217](#fn_1216) wherefore doth He
show Himself walking alone upon the sea? By the first He teacheth them
how great (an evil) it is to be forsaken by Him, and maketh their
longing greater; by the second, again, He showeth forth His power. For
as in His teaching they heard not all in common with the multitude, so
in the case of the miracles they saw them not all with the mass of
people, since it was needful that they who were about to receive in
charge the presidency  <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1218](#fn_1217) of the
world, should have somewhat more than the rest. “And what sort of
miracles,” saith some one, “saw they by themselves?” The Transfiguration
on the mount; this on the sea, and those after the Resurrection, which
are many and important. And from these I conjecture that there were
others also. They came to Capernaum without any certain information, but
expecting to find Him there, or even in mid passage; this the Evangelist
implies by saying that “it was now dark, and Jesus was not yet come to
them.”

<span id="iv.xlv-p17"></span>“And the sea arose by reason of a great
wind that blew.” What did they? They were troubled, for there were many
and various causes which forced them to be so. They were afraid by
reason of the time for it was dark, of the storm for the sea had risen,
of the place for they were not near land; but,

<span id="iv.xlv-p18"></span> [John
6.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#019)<span id="iv.xlv-p18.1"></span> .
“Had rowed about five and twenty  <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[1219](#fn_1218) furlongs.”

<span id="iv.xlv-p20"></span>And, lastly, by reason of the strangeness
of the thing, for,

<span id="iv.xlv-p21"></span> “They see Him  <span
id="fr_1219"></span>[1220](#fn_1219) walking upon the sea.” And when
they were greatly troubled,

<span id="iv.xlv-p23"></span> [John
6.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#020)<span id="iv.xlv-p23.1"></span> .
“He saith unto them, It is I, be not afraid.”

<span id="iv.xlv-p24"></span> Wherefore then appeareth He? To show that
it was He who would make the storm cease. For this the Evangelist hath
shown, saying,  <span id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220)

<span id="iv.xlv-p26"></span> [John
6.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#021)<span id="iv.xlv-p26.1"></span> .
“They were willing to receive Him,  <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221) and immediately the ship was near
the land.”  <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222)

<span id="iv.xlv-p29"></span>He not only gave them a safe passage, but
also one with a fair wind.

<span id="iv.xlv-p30"></span> To the multitude He showeth not Himself
walking upon the sea, for the miracle was too great to suit their
infirmity. Indeed, even by the disciples He was not seen long doing
this, but He appeared, and at once retired.  <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223) Now this seems to me to be a
different miracle from that found in [Matthew
xiv](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#000) <span id="iv.xlv-p31.3"></span> .;
and that it is different is clear from many reasons. For He worketh
often the same miracles, in order to cause the <span id="page_154">p.
154</span> <span id="iv.xlv-Page_154"></span> beholders not merely to
count them very strange,  <span id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224) but
also to receive them with great faith.

<span id="iv.xlv-p33"></span>“It is I, be not afraid.” As He spake the
word, He cast out fear from their souls. But at another time not so;
wherefore Peter said, “Lord, if it be Thou, bid me to come unto Thee.” (
[Matt. xiv. 28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028) <span
id="iv.xlv-p33.1"></span> .) Whence then was it that at that time they
did not straightway admit this,  <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225) but now were persuaded? It was
because then the storm continued to toss the bark, but now at His voice
the calm had come. Or if the reason be not this, it is that other which
I have before mentioned, that oftentimes working the same miracles, He
made the second to be readily received by means of the first. But
wherefore went He not up into the ship? Because He would make the marvel
greater, would more openly  <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226)
reveal to them His Godhead, and would show them, that when He before
gave thanks, He did not so as needing aid, but in condescension to them.
He allowed the storm to arise, that they might ever seek Him; He stilled
the storm, that He might make known to them His power; He went not up
into the ship, that He might make the marvel greater.

<span id="iv.xlv-p36"></span> [John
6.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#022)<span id="iv.xlv-p36.1"></span> .
“And the people that were there saw that there was none other boat there
save the one into which the disciples had entered, and that Jesus went
not into the boat, but His disciples.”  <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227)

<span id="iv.xlv-p38"></span> And why is John so exact? Why said he not
that the multitudes having passed over on the next day departed?  <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228) He desires to teach us something
else, namely, that Jesus allowed the multitudes if not openly, at least
in a secret manner, to suspect what had taken place. For, “They saw,”
saith he, “that there was none other boat there but one, and that Jesus
went not into it with His disciples.”

<span id="iv.xlv-p40"></span> [John
6.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#024)<span id="iv.xlv-p40.1"></span> .
And embarking in boats from Tiberias, they “came to Capernaum seeking
Jesus.”

<span id="iv.xlv-p41"></span>What else then could they suspect, save
that He had arrived there crossing the sea on foot? for it was not
possible to say that He had passed over in another ship. For “there was
one,” saith the Evangelist, “into which His disciples entered.” Still
when they came to Him after so great a wonder, they asked Him not how He
crossed over, how He arrived there, nor sought to understand so great a
sign. But what say they?

<span id="iv.xlv-p42"></span> [John
6.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#025)<span id="iv.xlv-p42.1"></span> .
“Master, when camest Thou hither?”

<span id="iv.xlv-p43"></span> \[2.\] Unless any one affirm that the
“when” is here used by them in the sense of “how.” But it is  <span
id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229) worth while also to notice here the
fickleness of their impulses  <span id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230)
For they who said, “This is that Prophet”; they who were anxious to
“take Him and make Him a king,” now when they have found Him take no
such counsel, but having cast out their astonishment, they no longer
admire Him for His former deeds. They sought Him, desiring again to
enjoy a table like the first.

<span id="iv.xlv-p46"></span> The Jews under the guidance of Moses
passed over the Red Sea, but that case is widely different from this. He
did all with prayer and as a servant, but Christ with absolute  <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231) power. There when the south wind
 <span id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232) blew, the water yielded so
as to make them pass over on dry land, but here the miracle was greater.
( [Ex. xiv. 21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021) <span
id="iv.xlv-p48.2"></span> .) For the sea retaining its proper nature so
bare its Lord upon its surface,  <span
id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233) thus testifying to the Scripture
which saith, “Who walketh upon the sea as upon a pavement.” ( [Job ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008) <span id="iv.xlv-p49.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xlv-p50"></span>And with reason, when He was about to enter
into stubborn and disobedient Capernaum, did He work the miracle of the
loaves, as desiring not only by what took place within, but also by the
miracles which were wrought without the city, to soften its
disobedience. For was it not enough to soften even any stone, that such
multitudes should come with great eagerness to that city? Yet they had
no such feeling, but again desired food for the body; for which also
they are reproached by Jesus.

<span id="iv.xlv-p51"></span>Let us then, beloved, knowing these things,
give thanks to God for things of sense, but much more for things
spiritual; for such is His will, and it is on account of the latter that
He giveth the former, leading in, as it were, by these the more
imperfect sort, and giving them previous teaching, because they are yet
gaping upon the world. But when such persons having received these
worldly things, rest in them, then are they upbraided and rebuked. For
in the case of him that had the palsy, Christ wished first to give that
which was spiritual, but they that were present endured it not; for when
He said, “Thy sins be forgiven thee,” they exclaimed, “This man
blasphemeth.” ( [Matt. ix. 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002) <span
id="iv.xlv-p51.1"></span> .) Let us not, I entreat you, be so affected,
but let us make more  <span id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234) account
of those (spiritual) things. Wherefore? Because when spiritual things
are present with us, no harm ariseth from the absence  <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235) of fleshly things; but when they
are not, what hope, what comfort, shall then remain to us? wherefore it
is for these we ought always to call upon God, and entreat Him for them.
And <span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span id="iv.xlv-Page_155"></span>
for such hath Christ also taught us to pray; for if we unfold that
Prayer, we shall find that there is nothing carnal in it, but all
spiritual, and that even the small portion which seemeth to relate to
sense, becometh by the manner spiritual. For to bid us ask no more than
our “successive,”  <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236) that is,
our “daily,” bread, would mark a mind spiritual and truly wise. And
consider what goeth before that, “Hallowed be Thy Name, Thy kingdom
come, Thy will be done as in heaven so on earth”; then, after naming
that temporal (need), He quickly leaveth it, and bringeth  <span
id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237) us again to the spiritual doctrine,
saying, “Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.” Nowhere hath
He put in the Prayer riches or glory or dominion, but all things
contributing to the benefit of the soul; nothing earthly, but all things
heavenly. If then we are bidden to refrain from the things of this
present life, how could we help being wretched and miserable, asking
from God those things which even having He biddeth us cast away, to free
us from care about them, and for which He biddeth us take no pains.
 <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) This is the “using vain
repetition”; and this is why we effect nothing by our prayers. “How
then,” saith some one, “do the wicked grow rich, how the unjust and
impure, plunderers and covetous?” Not by God’s giving; (away with the
thought!) but by plundering, and taking more than their due.  <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) “And how doth God allow them?” As
He allowed that rich man, reserving him for greater punishment. ( [Luke
xvi. 25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025) <span
id="iv.xlv-p57.3"></span> .) Hear what (Abraham) saith to him; “Son,
thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus
evil things, but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented.” Therefore
that we also come not to hear that voice, by living softly and idly, and
gathering together for ourselves many sins, let us choose the true
riches and right wisdom, that we may obtain the promised good things; to
which may we all arrive, through the grace and lovingkindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with whom, to the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be glory, now and ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[153:1208](1140048.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="iv.xlv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p4.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p4.2"></span>πὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p4.3"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p4.4"></span>εἰς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p4.5"></span>, G. T.\].</span>

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[153:1209](1140048.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="iv.xlv-p4.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p5.2"></span>ναβάντες</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p5.3"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p5.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p5.5"></span>μβ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p5.6"></span>. G. T.\].</span>

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[153:1210](1140048.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="iv.xlv-p5.7"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p6.1"></span>πέραν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p6.2"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p6.3"></span>εἰς τὸ π</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p6.4"></span>. G. T.\].</span>

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[153:1211](1140048.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="iv.xlv-p6.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p7.2"></span>γένετο</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p7.3"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p7.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p7.5"></span>γεγόνει</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p7.6"></span>, G. T.\].</span>

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[153:1212](1140048.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="iv.xlv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p9.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p9.2"></span>they having been left behind by their Master,
when,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p9.3"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[153:1213](1140048.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="iv.xlv-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p10.1"></span>Ben.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p10.2"></span>not to go to seek Him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[153:1214](1140048.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="iv.xlv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p11.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p11.2"></span>inflamed.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[153:1215](1140048.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="iv.xlv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p12.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p12.2"></span>signifies.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[153:1216](1140048.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="iv.xlv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p14.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p14.2"></span>and retire.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[153:1217](1140048.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="iv.xlv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p15.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p15.2"></span>but rather.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[153:1218](1140048.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="iv.xlv-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p16.1"></span>προστασίαν</span>

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[153:1219](1140048.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="iv.xlv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p19"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p19.1"></span>five and twenty or thirty,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p19.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[153:1220](1140048.htm#fr_1219) <span
id="iv.xlv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p22"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p22.1"></span>they see Jesus,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p22.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[153:1221](1140048.htm#fr_1220) <span
id="iv.xlv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p25.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p25.2"></span>is shown (or It shows by the Evangelist,
saying,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p25.3"></span>&c.).</span>

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[153:1222](1140048.htm#fr_1221) <span
id="iv.xlv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p27.1"></span>\[into the ship,\] N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[153:1223](1140048.htm#fr_1222) <span
id="iv.xlv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p28"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p28.1"></span>at the land whither they went,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p28.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[153:1224](1140048.htm#fr_1223) <span
id="iv.xlv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p31.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p31.2"></span>withdrew from them.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[154:1225](1140048.htm#fr_1224) <span
id="iv.xlv-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p32.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p32.2"></span>so that the beholders might both marvel, and
not count them very strange.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[154:1226](1140048.htm#fr_1225) <span
id="iv.xlv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p34.1"></span>i.e. that it was really Christ.</span>

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[154:1227](1140048.htm#fr_1226) <span
id="iv.xlv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p35.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p35.2"></span>more nakedly,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p35.3"></span>al.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p35.4"></span>more clearly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[154:1228](1140048.htm#fr_1227) <span
id="iv.xlv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p37.1"></span>N.T.</span> [John
6.22-24](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#022)<span
id="iv.xlv-p37.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p37.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p37.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p37.5"></span>The day following, when the people which stood
on the other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there
save that one whereinto His disciples were entered and that Jesus went
not with His disciples into the boat, but that His disciples were gone
away alone; (howbeit there came other little boats from Tiberias nigh
unto the place where they did eat bread, after that the Lord had given
thanks;) when the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither
His disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum seeking
for Jesus.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p37.6"></span>
The readings here vary, without variety of meaning.</span>

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[154:1229](1140048.htm#fr_1228) <span
id="iv.xlv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p39.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p39.2"></span>came.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[154:1230](1140048.htm#fr_1229) <span
id="iv.xlv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p44.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p44.2"></span>hence.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[154:1231](1140048.htm#fr_1230) <span
id="iv.xlv-p44.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p45.1"></span>εὔθραυστον ὁρμὴν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p45.2"></span>, al.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xlv-p45.3"></span>εὔκολον γνώμην</span>

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[154:1232](1140048.htm#fr_1231) <span
id="iv.xlv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p47.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p47.2"></span>all.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[154:1233](1140048.htm#fr_1232) <span
id="iv.xlv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p48.1"></span>a strong east wind.</span>

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[154:1234](1140048.htm#fr_1233) <span
id="iv.xlv-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p49"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p49.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p49.2"></span>back.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[154:1235](1140048.htm#fr_1234) <span
id="iv.xlv-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p52"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p52.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p52.2"></span>much.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[154:1236](1140048.htm#fr_1235) <span
id="iv.xlv-p52.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p53.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p53.2"></span>lack.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[155:1237](1140048.htm#fr_1236) <span
id="iv.xlv-p53.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p54.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p54.2"></span>πιουσίον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p54.3"></span>, i.e.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p54.4"></span>εἰς τὴν ἐπίουσαν ἡμ</span>

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[155:1238](1140048.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="iv.xlv-p54.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p55"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p55.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p55.2"></span>came.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[155:1239](1140048.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="iv.xlv-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p56.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p56.2"></span>no pains, but rather neither to have nor to
desire them.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[155:1240](1140048.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="iv.xlv-p56.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xlv-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p57.1"></span>Ben. omits</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xlv-p57.2"></span>but by plundering, and taking more than their
due.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 6.26,27](1140049)
