[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140040)  [Next](1140042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxxviii"></span> <span id="iv.xxxviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXVI.</span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>
<span class="c1"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>[John iv.
54](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#054)<span id="iv.xxxviii-p2.3"></span>;
v. 1</span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p3"></span>“This is again the second miracle that
Jesus did, when He was come out of Judæa into Galilee. After this there
was a feast of the Jews; and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>As</span> in gold mines one skillful in what
relates to them would not endure to overlook even the smallest vein as
producing much wealth, so in the holy Scriptures it is impossible
without loss to pass by one jot or one tittle, we must search into all.
For they all are uttered by the Holy Spirit, and nothing useless  <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948) is written in them.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p6"></span> Consider, for instance, what the
Evangelist in this place saith, “This is again the second miracle that
Jesus did, when He was come out of Judæa into Galilee.” Even the word
“second” he has added not without cause, but to exalt yet more the
praise  <span id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) of the Samaritans, by
showing that even when a second miracle had been wrought, they who
beheld it had not yet reached as high as those who had not seen one.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p8"></span> “After this there was a feast of the
Jews.” What “feast”? Methinks that of Pentecost. “And Jesus went up to
Jerusalem.” Continually at the feasts He frequenteth the City, partly
that He might appear to feast with them, partly that He might attract
the multitude that was free from guile; for during these days  <span
id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950) especially, the more simply disposed
ran together more than at other times.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p10"></span> [John
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#003)<span id="iv.xxxviii-p10.1"></span>
. “Now there is at Jerusalem a sheep pool,  <span
id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951) called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda,
having five porches. In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk,
 <span id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) of halt, blind, withered,
waiting for the moving of the water.”

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span id="iv.xxxviii-Page_125"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p13"></span> What manner of cure is this? What
mystery doth it signify to us? For these things are not written
carelessly, or without a purpose, but as by a figure and type they show
in outline  <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) things to come, in
order that what was exceedingly strange might not by coming unexpectedly
harm among the many the power of faith.  <span
id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) What then is it that they show in
outline? A Baptism was about to be given, possessing much power, and the
greatest of gifts, a Baptism purging all sins, and making men alive
instead of dead. These things then are foreshown as in a picture by the
pool, and by many other circumstances. And first is given a water which
purges the stains of our bodies, and those defilements which are not,
but seem to be, as those from touching the dead,  <span
id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955) those from leprosy, and other similar
causes; under the old covenant one may see many things done by water on
this account. However, let us now proceed to the matter in hand.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p17"></span> First then, as I before said, He
causeth defilements of our bodies, and afterwards infirmities of
different kinds, to be done away by water. Because God, desiring to
bring us nearer to faith in  <span id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956)
baptism, no longer healeth defilements only, but diseases also. For
those figures which came nearer \[in time\] to the reality, both as
regarded Baptism, and the Passion, and the rest, were plainer than the
more ancient;  <span id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) and as the guards
near the person of the prince are more splendid than those before,
 <span id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958) so was it with the types. And
“an Angel came down and troubled the water,” and endued it with a
healing power, that the Jews might learn that much more could the Lord
of Angels heal the diseases  <span id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) of
the soul. Yet as here it was not simply the nature of the water that
healed, (for then this would have always taken place,) but water joined
to the operation  <span id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) of the Angel;
so in our case, it is not merely the water that worketh, but when it
hath received the grace of the Spirit, then it putteth away  <span
id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) all our sins. Around this pool “lay a
great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for
the moving of the water”; but then infirmity was a hindrance to him who
desired to be healed, now each hath power to approach, for now it is not
an Angel that troubleth, it is the Lord of Angels who worketh all. The
sick man cannot now say, “I have no man”; he cannot say, “While I am
coming another steppeth down before me”; though the whole world should
come, the grace is not spent, the power is not exhausted, but remaineth
equally great as it was before. Just as the sun’s beams give light every
day, yet are not exhausted, nor is their light made less by giving so
abundant a supply; so, and much more, the power of the Spirit is in no
way lessened by the numbers of those who enjoy it. And this miracle was
done in order that men, learning that it is possible by water to heal
the diseases of the body, and being exercised in this for a long time,
might more easily believe that it can also heal the diseases of the
soul.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p24"></span> But why did Jesus, leaving the rest,
come to one who was of thirty-eight years standing? And why did He ask
him, “Wilt thou be made whole?” Not that He might learn, that was
needless; but that He might show  <span
id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) the man’s perseverance, and that we
might know that it was on this account that He left the others and came
to him. What then saith he? “Yea Lord,” he saith, but “I have no man
when the water is troubled to put me into the pool, but while I am
coming another steppeth down before me.”

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p26"></span> It was that we might learn these
circumstances that Jesus asked, “Wilt thou be made whole?” and said not,
“Wilt thou that I heal thee?” (for as yet the man had formed no exalted
notions concerning Him,) but “Wilt thou be made whole?” Astonishing was
the perseverance of the paralytic, he was of thirty and eight years
standing, and each year hoping to be freed from his disease, he
continued in attendance,  <span id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) and
withdrew not. Had he not been very persevering, would not the future,
 <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) if not the past, have been
sufficient to lead him from the spot? Consider, I pray you, how watchful
it was likely that the other sick men there would be since the time when
the water was troubled was uncertain. The lame and halt indeed might
observe it, but how did the blind see? Perhaps they learnt it from the
clamor which arose.

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p29"></span> \[2.\] Let us be ashamed then,
beloved, let us be ashamed, and groan over our excessive sloth. “Thirty
and eight years” had that man been waiting without obtaining what he
desired, and withdrew not. And he had failed not through any
carelessness of his own, but through being oppressed and suffering
violence from others, and not even thus did he grow dull;  <span
id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) while we if we have persisted for ten
days to pray for anything and have not obtained it, are too slothful
afterwards to employ the same zeal. And on men we wait for so long a
time, warring and enduring hardships and performing servile
ministrations, and often at last failing in our expectation, but on our
 <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) Master, from whom we are sure
to obtain a recompense greater than our labors, (for, saith the Apostle,
“Hope maketh <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="iv.xxxviii-Page_126"></span> not ashamed”— [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005) <span id="iv.xxxviii-p31.3"></span>
,) on Him we endure not to wait with becoming diligence. What
chastisement doth this deserve! For even though we could receive nothing
from Him, ought we not to deem the very conversing with Him continually
the cause of  <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) ten thousand
blessings? “But continual prayer is a laborious thing.” And what that
belongs to virtue is not laborious? “In truth,” says some one, “this
very point is full of great difficulty, that pleasure is annexed to
vice, and labor to virtue.” And many, I think, make this a question.
What then can be the reason?  <span id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968)
God gave us at the beginning a life free from care and exempt from
labor. We used not the gift aright, but were perverted by doing nothing,
 <span id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969) and were banished from
Paradise. On which account He made our life for the future one of toil,
assigning as it were His reasons for this to mankind, and saying, “I
allowed you at the beginning to lead a life of enjoyment,  <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970) but ye were rendered worse by liberty,
wherefore I commanded that henceforth labor and sweat be laid upon you.”
 <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) And when even this labor did
not restrain us, He next gave us a law containing many commandments,
imposing it on us like bits and curbs placed upon an unruly horse to
restrain his prancings, just as horse breakers do. This is why life is
laborious, because not to labor is wont to be our ruin. For our nature
cannot bear to be doing nothing, but easily turns aside to wickedness.
Let us suppose that the man who is temperate, and he who rightly
performs the other virtues, has no need of labor, but that they do all
things in their sleep, still how should we have employed our ease? Would
it not have been for pride and boastfulness? “But wherefore,” saith some
one, “has great pleasure been attached to vice, great labor and toil to
virtue?” Why, what thanks wouldest thou have had, and for what wouldest
thou have received a reward, if the matter had not been one of
difficulty? Even now I can show you many who naturally hate intercourse
with women, and avoid conversation with them as impure; shall we then
call these chaste, shall we crown these, tell me, and proclaim them
victors? By no means. Chastity is self-restraint, and the mastering
pleasures which fight, just as in war the trophies are most honorable
when the contest is violent, not when no one raises a hand against us.
Many are by their very nature passionless; shall we call these good
tempered? Not at all. And so the Lord after naming three manners of the
eunuch state, leaveth two of them uncrowned, and admitteth one into the
kingdom of heaven. ( [Matt. xix. 12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)
<span id="iv.xxxviii-p36.4"></span> .) “But what need,” saith one, “was
there of wickedness?” I say this too. “What is it then which made
wickedness to be?” What but our willful negligence? “But,” saith one,
“there ought to be only good men.” Well, what is proper to the good man?
Is it to watch and be sober, or to sleep and snore? “And why,” saith
one, “seemed  <span id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972) it not good that a
man should act rightly without laboring?” Thou speakest words which
become the cattle or gluttons, or who make their belly their god. For to
prove that these are the words of folly, answer me this. Suppose there
were a king and a general, and while the king was asleep or drunk, the
general should endure hardship and erect a trophy, whose would you count
the victory to be? who would enjoy the pleasure of what was done? Seest
thou that the soul is more especially disposed towards those things for
which she hath labored? and therefore God hath joined labors to virtue,
wishing to make us attached to her. For this cause we admire virtue,
even although we act not rightly ourselves, while we condemn vice even
though it be very pleasant. And if thou sayest, “Why do we not admire
those who are good by nature more than those who are so by choice?” we
reply, Because it is just to prefer him that laboreth to him that
laboreth not. For why is it that we labor? It is because thou didst not
bear with moderation the not laboring. Nay more, if one enquire exactly,
in other ways also sloth is wont to undo us, and to cause us much
trouble. Let us, if you will, shut a man up, only feeding and pampering
him, not allowing him to walk nor conducting him forth to work, but let
him enjoy table and bed, and be in luxury continually; what could be
more wretched than such a life? “But,” saith one, “to work is one thing,
to labor is another.”  <span id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973) Yea, but
it was in man’s power then  <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) to
work without labor. “And is this,” saith he, “possible?” Yea, it is
possible; God even desired it, but thou enduredst it not. Therefore He
placed thee to work in the garden, marking out employment, but joining
with it no labor. For had man labored at the beginning, God would not
afterwards have put labor by way of punishment. For it is possible to
work and not to be wearied, as do the angels. To prove that they work,
hear what David saith; “Ye that excel in strength, ye that do His word.”
( [Ps. ciii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#020) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p39.2"></span> , LXX.) Want of strength causeth much
labor now, but then it was not so. For “he that hath entered into His
rest, hath ceased,” saith one, “from his works, as God from His” ( [Heb.
iv. 10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#010) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p39.3"></span> ): not meaning here idleness, but the
ceasing from labor. For God worketh even now, <span id="page_127">p.
127</span> <span id="iv.xxxviii-Page_127"></span> as Christ saith, “My
Father worketh hitherto, and I work.” ( [John
5.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.xxxviii-p39.4"></span> .) Wherefore I exhort you that, laying
aside all carelessness, you be zealous for virtue. For the pleasure of
wickedness is short, but the pain lasting; of virtue, on the contrary,
the joy grows not old, the labor is but for a season. Virtue even before
the crowns are distributed animates  <span
id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) her workman, and feeds him with hopes;
vice even before the time of vengeance punishes him who works for her,
wringing and terrifying his conscience, and making it apt to imagine all
(evils). Are not these things worse than any labors, than any toils? And
if these things were not so, if there were pleasure, what could be more
worthless than that pleasure? for as soon as it appears it flies away,
withering and escaping before it has been grasped, whether you speak of
the pleasure of beauty, or that of luxury, or that of wealth, for they
cease not daily to decay. But when there is besides (for this pleasure)
punishment and vengeance, what can be more miserable than those who go
after it? Knowing then this, let us endure all for virtue, so shall we
enjoy true pleasure, through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, now
and ever, and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_948"></span>[124:949](1140041.htm#fr_948) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>distracting.</span> ”

<span id="fn_949"></span>[124:950](1140041.htm#fr_949) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p7.2"></span>wonder.</span> ”

<span id="fn_950"></span>[124:951](1140041.htm#fr_950) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p9.2"></span>feasts.</span> ”

<span id="fn_951"></span>[124:952](1140041.htm#fr_951) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p11.1"></span>προβατικὴ κολυμβήθρα</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p11.2"></span>\[</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p11.3"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p11.4"></span>πὶ τῇ π</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p11.5"></span>. G. T.\].</span>

<span id="fn_952"></span>[124:953](1140041.htm#fr_952) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p11.6"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p12.1"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p12.2"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p12.3"></span>σθενούντων</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p12.4"></span>\] G. T. and Ben.</span>

<span id="fn_953"></span>[125:954](1140041.htm#fr_953) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p14.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p14.2"></span>πογράφει</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p14.3"></span>, al.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p14.4"></span>προϋπ</span>

<span id="fn_954"></span>[125:955](1140041.htm#fr_954) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p14.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p15.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p15.2"></span>harm the faith of the hearers.</span> ”

<span id="fn_955"></span>[125:956](1140041.htm#fr_955) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p16.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p16.2"></span>πὸ κηδείας</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p16.3"></span>,</span> <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p16.4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p16.5"></span>Num. v</span>

<span id="fn_956"></span>[125:957](1140041.htm#fr_956) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p18.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p18.2"></span>faith of,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p18.3"></span>al.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p18.4"></span>the gift of.</span> ”

<span id="fn_957"></span>[125:958](1140041.htm#fr_957) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p18.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p19.1"></span>Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p19.2"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p19.3"></span>have more power to lead
by the hand than the archetypes.</span> ”

<span id="fn_958"></span>[125:959](1140041.htm#fr_958) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p20.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p20.2"></span>afar.</span> ”

<span id="fn_959"></span>[125:960](1140041.htm#fr_959) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p21.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p21.2"></span>hindrances.</span> ”

<span id="fn_960"></span>[125:961](1140041.htm#fr_960) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p22.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p22.2"></span>πὶ τῇ ἐνεργείᾳ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p22.3"></span>, al.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p22.4"></span>at the coming
down.</span> ”

<span id="fn_961"></span>[125:962](1140041.htm#fr_961) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p22.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p23.1"></span>λύει</span>

<span id="fn_962"></span>[125:963](1140041.htm#fr_962) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p25.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p25.2"></span>teach.</span> ”

<span id="fn_963"></span>[125:964](1140041.htm#fr_963) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p27.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p27.2"></span>lay in wait.</span> ”

<span id="fn_964"></span>[125:965](1140041.htm#fr_964) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p28.1"></span>i.e. the manifest hopelessness of his being
able to go down *first* into the pool.</span>

<span id="fn_965"></span>[125:966](1140041.htm#fr_965) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p30.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p30.2"></span>νάρκα</span>

<span id="fn_966"></span>[125:967](1140041.htm#fr_966) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p31.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p31.2"></span>the kind.</span> ”

<span id="fn_967"></span>[126:968](1140041.htm#fr_967) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p32.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p32.2"></span>worth.</span> ”

<span id="fn_968"></span>[126:969](1140041.htm#fr_968) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p33.1"></span>Morel and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p33.2"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p33.3"></span>but hear also the
explanation, for this we will now say for love of you. What then,</span>
” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p33.4"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_969"></span>[126:970](1140041.htm#fr_969) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p33.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p34.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p34.2"></span>ργίας</span>

<span id="fn_970"></span>[126:971](1140041.htm#fr_970) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p35.1"></span>τρυφᾷν</span>

<span id="fn_971"></span>[126:972](1140041.htm#fr_971) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p36.1"></span>Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p36.2"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl.</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p36.3"></span>therefore I have done
that which remained to do, I have encompassed ( *or* clothed) you with
labors and toils.</span> ”

<span id="fn_972"></span>[126:973](1140041.htm#fr_972) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p36.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p37.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p37.2"></span>thoughtest thou.</span> ”

<span id="fn_973"></span>[126:974](1140041.htm#fr_973) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p38.1"></span>Some <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p38.2"></span>mss.</span> read,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxxviii-p38.3"></span>was it then meet to
work without toil? yea,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p38.4"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_974"></span>[126:975](1140041.htm#fr_974) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p38.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p39.1"></span>i.e. during the abode in Paradise.</span>

<span id="fn_975"></span>[127:976](1140041.htm#fr_975) <span
id="iv.xxxviii-p39.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xxxviii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p40.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxxviii-p40.2"></span>releases.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 5.6,7](1140042)
