[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140091)  [Next](1140093.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxxix"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXXVII.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p2.2"></span>[John
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p3"></span> *“But Thomas, one of the twelve, called
Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came. The other disciples
therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said, Except I
shall see in His hands*  <span id="fr_2574"></span>[2575](#fn_2574.md) *—I
will not believe.”*

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p5"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p5.1"></span>As</span> to believe carelessly and in a
random way, comes of an over-easy temper; so to be beyond measure
curious and meddlesome, marks a most gross understanding. On this
account Thomas is held to blame. For he believed not the Apostles when
they said, “We have seen the Lord”; not so much mistrusting them, as
deeming the thing to be impossible, that is to say, the resurrection
from the dead. Since he saith not, “I do not believe you,” but, “Except
I put my hand—I do not  <span id="fr_2575"></span>[2576](#fn_2575.md)
believe.” But how was it, that when all were collected together, he
alone was absent? Probably after the dispersion which had lately taken
place, he had not returned even then. But do thou, when thou seest the
unbelief of the disciple, consider the lovingkindness of the Lord, how
for the sake of a single soul He showed Himself with His wounds, and
cometh in order to save even the one, though he was grosser than the
rest; on which account indeed he sought proof from the grossest of the
senses, and would not even trust his eyes. For he said not, “Except I
see,” but, “Except I handle,” he saith, lest what he saw might somehow
be an apparition. Yet the disciples who told him these things, were at
the time worthy of credit, and so was He that promised; yet, since he
desired more, Christ did not deprive him even of this.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p7"></span> And why doth He not appear to him
straightway, instead of “after eight days”?  <span
id="fr_2576"></span>[2577](#fn_2576.md) ( [John
20.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026.md)<span id="iv.lxxxix-p8.6"></span>
.) In order that being in the mean time continually instructed by the
disciples, and hearing the same thing, he might be inflamed to more
eager desire, and be more ready to believe for the future. But whence
knew he that His side had been opened? From having heard it from the
disciples. How then did he believe partly, and partly not believe?
Because this thing was very strange and wonderful. But observe, I pray
you, the truthfulness of the disciples, how they hide no faults, either
their own or others’, but record them with great veracity.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p9"></span>Jesus again presenteth himself to them,
and waiteth not to be requested by Thomas, nor to hear any such thing,
but before he had spoken, Himself prevented him, and fulfilled his
desire; showing that even when he spake those words to the disciples, He
was present. For He used the same words, and in a manner conveying a
sharp rebuke, and instruction for the future. For having said,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p10"></span> [John
20.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p10.1"></span> . “Reach hither thy finger, and behold My
hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into My side”; He added,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p11"></span>“And be not faithless, but believing.”

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p12"></span>Seest thou that his doubt proceeded from
unbelief? But it was before he had received the Spirit; after that, it
was no longer so, but, for the future, they were perfected.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p13"></span>And not in this way only did Jesus
rebuke him, but also by what follows; for when he, being fully
satisfied, breathed again, and cried aloud,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p14"></span> [John
20.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p14.1"></span> . “My Lord, and my God,” He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p15"></span> [John
20.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p15.1"></span> . “Because thou hast seen Me, thou hast
believed; blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have believed.”

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p16"></span>For this is of faith, to receive things
not seen; since,“ Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen.” ( [Heb. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001.md) <span id="iv.lxxxix-p16.1"></span>
.) And here He pronounceth blessed not the disciples only, but those
also who after them should believe. “Yet,” saith some one, “the
disciples saw and believed.” Yes, but they sought nothing of the kind,
but from the proof of the napkins, they straightway received the word
concerning the Resurrection, and before they saw the body, exhibited all
faith. When therefore any one in the present day say, “I would that I
had lived in those times, and had seen Christ working miracles,” let
them reflect, that, “Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have
believed.”

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span id="iv.lxxxix-Page_326"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p17"></span> It is worth enquiring, how an
incorruptible body showed the prints of the nails, and was tangible by a
mortal hand. But be not thou disturbed; what took place was a matter of
condescension. For that which was so subtle and light as to enter in
when the doors were shut, was free from all density  <span
id="fr_2577"></span>[2578](#fn_2577.md) ; but this marvel was shown, that
the Resurrection might be believed, and that men might know that it was
the Crucified One Himself, and that another rose not in His stead. On
this account He arose  <span id="fr_2578"></span>[2579](#fn_2578.md)
bearing the signs of the Cross, and on this account He eateth. At least
the Apostles everywhere made this a sign of the Resurrection, saying,
“We, who did eat and drink with Him.” ( [Acts x.
41](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#041.md) <span id="iv.lxxxix-p19.5"></span>
.) As therefore when we see Him walking on the waves before the
Crucifixion, we do not say, that that body is of a different nature, but
of our own; so after the Resurrection, when we see Him with the prints
of the nails, we will no more say, that he is therefore  <span
id="fr_2579"></span>[2580](#fn_2579.md) corruptible. For He exhibited these
appearances on account of the disciple.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p21"></span> [John
20.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p21.1"></span> . “And many other signs truly did Jesus.”

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p22"></span>\[2.\] Since this Evangelist hath
mentioned fewer than the others, he tells us that neither have all the
others mentioned them all, but as many as were sufficient to draw the
hearers to belief. For, “If,” it saith, “they should be written every
one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books.”
( [John 21.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p22.1"></span> .) Whence it is clear, that What they have
mentioned they wrote not for display, but only for the sake of what was
useful. For how could they who omitted the greater part, write these
others  <span id="fr_2580"></span>[2581](#fn_2580.md) for display? But why
went they not through them all? Chiefly on account of their number;
besides, they also considered, that he who believed not those they had
mentioned, would not give heed to a greater number; while he who
received these, would have no need of another in order to believe. And
here too he seems to me to be for the time speaking of the miracles
after the Resurrection. Wherefore He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p24"></span> “In the presence of His disciples.”
 <span id="fr_2581"></span>[2582](#fn_2581.md)

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p26"></span>For as before the Resurrection it was
necessary that many should be done, in order that they might believe
that He was the Son of God, so was it also after the Resurrection, in
order that they might admit that He had arisen. For another reason also
he has added, “In the presence of His disciples,” because He conversed
with them alone after the Resurrection; wherefore also He said, “The
world seeth Me no more.” ( [John
14.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p26.1"></span> .)  Then, in order that thou mayest
understand that what was done was done only for the sake of the
disciples, he added,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p27"></span> [John
20.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p27.1"></span> . “That believing ye might have life in His
Name.”  <span id="fr_2582"></span>[2583](#fn_2582.md)

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p29"></span>Speaking generally to mankind, and
showing that not on Him who is believed on, but on ourselves, he bestows
a very great favor. “In His Name,” that is, “through Him”; for He is the
Life.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p30"></span> [John
21.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.lxxxix-p30.1"></span>
. “After these things, Jesus showed Himself again to the disciples at
the sea of Tiberias.”  <span id="fr_2583"></span>[2584](#fn_2583.md)

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p32"></span> Seest thou that He remaineth not with
them continually, nor as before? He appeared, for instance, in the
evening, and flew away; then after eight days again once, and again flew
away; then after these things by the sea, and again with great terror.
But what is the, “showed”? From this it is clear that He was not seen
unless He condescended, because His body was henceforth incorruptible,
and of unmixed purity.  <span id="fr_2584"></span>[2585](#fn_2584.md) But
wherefore hath the writer mentioned the place? To show that he had now
taken away the greater part of their fear, so that they now ventured
forth from their dwelling, and went about everywhere. For they were no
longer shut up at home, but had gone into Galilee, avoiding the danger
from the Jews. Simon, therefore, comes to fish. For since neither was He
with them continually, nor was the Spirit yet given, nor they at that
time yet entrusted with anything, having nothing to do, they went after
their trade.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p34"></span> [John
21.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.lxxxix-p34.1"></span>
. “There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas,  <span
id="fr_2585"></span>[2586](#fn_2585.md) and Nathanael,”  <span
id="fr_2586"></span>[2587](#fn_2586) (he that was called by Philip,.md)
“and the sons of Zebedee, and two others.”  <span
id="fr_2587"></span>[2588](#fn_2587.md)

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p38"></span> Having then nothing to do, they went to
their fishing,  <span id="fr_2588"></span>[2589](#fn_2588.md) and this same
they did by night, because they were greatly afraid. This Luke also
mentions;  <span id="fr_2589"></span>[2590](#fn_2589.md) but this is not
the same occasion, but a different one. And the other disciples
followed, because they were henceforth bound to one another, and at the
same time desired to see the fishing, and to bestow  <span
id="fr_2590"></span>[2591](#fn_2590.md) their leisure well. As they then
were laboring and wearied, Jesus presenteth Himself before them, and
doth not at once reveal Himself, so that they enter into converse with
Him. He therefore saith to them,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p42"></span> [John
21.5](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.lxxxix-p42.1"></span>
. “Have ye  <span id="fr_2591"></span>[2592](#fn_2591.md) any meat  <span
id="fr_2592"></span>[2593](#fn_2592.md) ?”

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p45"></span>For a time He speaketh rather after a
human <span id="page_327">p. 327</span> <span
id="iv.lxxxix-Page_327"></span> manner, as if about to buy somewhat of
them. But when they made signs that they had none, He bade them cast
their nets to the right; and on casting they obtained a haul.  <span
id="fr_2593"></span>[2594](#fn_2593.md) But when they recognized Him, the
disciples Peter and John again exhibited the peculiarities of their
several tempers. The one was more fervent, the other more lofty; the one
more keen, the other more clear-sighted. On this account John first
recognized Jesus, Peter first came to Him.  <span
id="fr_2594"></span>[2595](#fn_2594.md) For no ordinary signs were they
which had taken place. What were they? First, that so many fish were
caught; then, that the net did not break;  <span
id="fr_2595"></span>[2596](#fn_2595.md) then, that before they landed, the
coals had been found, and fish laid thereon, and bread.  <span
id="fr_2596"></span>[2597](#fn_2596.md) For He no longer made things out of
matter already subsisting, as, through a certain dispensation, He did
before the Crucifixion. When therefore Peter knew Him, he threw down
all, both fish and nets, and girded himself. Seest thou his respect and
love? Yet they were only two hundred cubits off; but not even so could
Peter wait to go to Him in the boat, but reached the shore by swimming.
What then doth Jesus?

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p50"></span> [John
21.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p50.1"></span> . “Come,” He saith, “dine.” “And none of
them durst ask Him.”  <span id="fr_2597"></span>[2598](#fn_2597.md)

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p52"></span>For they no longer had the same
boldness, nor were they so confident, nor did they now approach Him with
speech, but with silence and great fear and reverence, sat down giving
heed to Him.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p53"></span> “For they knew that  <span
id="fr_2598"></span>[2599](#fn_2598.md) it was the Lord.”

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p55"></span> And therefore they did not ask Him,
“Who art Thou?” But seeing that His form was altered, and full of much
awfulness, they were greatly amazed, and desired to ask somewhat
concerning it; but fear, and their knowledge that He was not some other,
but the Same, checked the enquiry, and they only ate what He created for
them  <span id="fr_2599"></span>[2600](#fn_2599.md) with a greater exertion
of power than before. For here He no more looketh to heaven, nor
performeth those human acts, showing that those also which He did were
done by way of condescension. And to show that He remained not with them
continually, nor in like manner as before, It saith that,

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p57"></span> [John
21.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p57.1"></span> . “This was the third time that Jesus
appeared to them,  <span id="fr_2600"></span>[2601](#fn_2600.md) after that
He arose from the dead.”

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p59"></span> And He biddeth them “to bring of the
fish,” to show that what they saw was no appearance. But here indeed it
saith not that He ate with them, but Luke, in another place, saith that
He did; for “He was eating together with them.”  <span
id="fr_2601"></span>[2602](#fn_2601.md) ( [Acts i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004.md) <span id="iv.lxxxix-p60.7"></span>
.) But the, “how,” it is not ours to say; for these things came to pass
in too strange a manner, not as though His nature now needed food, but
from an act of condescension, in proof of the Resurrection.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p61"></span>\[3.\] Perhaps when ye heard these
things, ye glowed, and called those happy who were then with Him, and
those who shall be with Him at the day of the general Resurrection. Let
us then use every exertion that we may see that admirable Face. For if
when now we hear we so burn, and desire to have been in those days which
He spent upon earth, and to have heard His Voice, and seen His face, and
to have approached, and touched, and ministered unto Him; consider how
great a thing it is to see Him no longer in a mortal body, nor doing
human actions, but with a body guard of Angels, being ourselves also in
a form of unmixed purity, and beholding Him, and enjoying the rest of
that bliss which passes all language. Wherefore, I entreat, let us use
every means, so as not to miss such glory. For nothing is difficult if
we be willing, nothing burdensome if we give heed. “If we endure, we
shall also reign with Him.” ( [2 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#012.md) <span id="iv.lxxxix-p61.1"></span>
.)  What then is, “If we endure”? If we bear tribulations, if
persecutions, if we walk in the strait way. For the strait way is by its
nature laborious, but by our will it is rendered light, from the hope of
things to come. “For our present light affliction worketh for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the
things which are seen, but at those which are not seen.” ( [2 Cor.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.lxxxix-p61.2"></span>
.) Let us then transfer our eyes to heaven, and continually imagine
“those” things, and behold them. For if we always spend our time with
them, we shall not be moved to desire the pleasures of this world, nor
find it hard to bear its sorrows; but we shall laugh at these and the
like, and nothing will be able to enslave or lift us up, if only we
direct our longing thither,  <span id="fr_2602"></span>[2603](#fn_2602.md)
and look to that love.  <span id="fr_2603"></span>[2604](#fn_2603.md) And
why say I that we shall not grieve at present troubles? We shall
henceforth not even appear to see them. Such a thing is strong desire.
 <span id="fr_2604"></span>[2605](#fn_2604.md) Those, for instance, who
<span id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="iv.lxxxix-Page_328"></span>
are not at present with us, but being absent are loved, we image every
day. For mighty is the sovereignty of love,  <span
id="fr_2605"></span>[2606](#fn_2605.md) it alienates the soul from all
things else, and chains to the desired object. If thus we love Christ,
all things here will seem to be a shadow, an image, a dream. We too
shall say, “Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall
tribulation, or distress?” ( [John
8.35](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#035.md)<span id="iv.lxxxix-p65.3"></span>
.) He said not, “money, or wealth, or beauty,” (these are very mean and
contemptible,) but he hath put the things which seem to be grievous,
famines, persecutions, deaths. He then spat on these even, as being
nought; but we for the sake of money separate ourselves from our life,
and cut ourselves off from the light. And Paul indeed prefers “neither
death, nor life, nor things present, nor things to come, nor any other
creature,” to the love which is towards Him; but we, if we see a little
portion of gold, are fired, and trample on His laws. And if these things
are intolerable when spoken of, much more are they so when done.  <span
id="fr_2606"></span>[2607](#fn_2606.md) For the terrible thing is this,
that we shudder to hear, but do not shudder to do: we swear readily, and
perjure ourselves, and plunder, and exact usury, care nothing for
sobriety, desist from exactness in prayer, transgress most of the
commandments, and for the sake of money make no account of our own
members.  <span id="fr_2607"></span>[2608](#fn_2607.md) For he that loves
wealth will work ten thousand mischiefs to his neighbor, and to himself
as well. He will easily be angry with him, and revile him, and call him
fool, and swear and perjure himself, and does not  <span
id="fr_2608"></span>[2609](#fn_2608.md) even preserve the measures of the
old law. For he that loves gold will not love his neighbor; yet we, for
the Kingdom’s sake, are bidden to love even our enemies. Now if by
fulfilling the old commandments, we shall not be able to enter the
Kingdom of heaven, unless our righteousness exceed and go beyond them,
when we transgress even these, what excuse shall we obtain? He that
loves money, not only will not love his enemies, but will even treat his
friends as enemies.

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p69"></span> \[4.\] But why speak I of friends? the
lovers of money have often ignored nature itself. Such a one knows not
kindred, remembers not companionship, reverences not age, has no friend,
but will be ill-disposed towards all, and above all others to himself,
not only by destroying his soul, but by racking himself with ten
thousand cares, and toils, and sorrows. For he will endure foreign
travels, hatreds, dangers, plots, anything whatever, only that he may
have in his house the root of all evil, and may count much gold. What
then can be more grievous than this disease? It is void of any luxury or
pleasure, for the sake of which men often sin, it is void of honor or
glory. For the lover of money suspects that he has tens of thousands,
and really has many, who accuse, and envy, and slander, and plot against
him. Those whom he has wronged hate him as having been ill-used; those
who have not yet suffered, fearing least they may suffer, and
sympathizing with those who have, manifest the same hostility; while the
greater and more powerful, being stung and indignant on account of the
humbler sort, and at the same time also envying him, are his enemies and
haters. And why speak I of men? For when one hath God also made his
enemy, what hope shall there then be for him? what consolation? what
comfort? He that loves riches will  <span
id="fr_2609"></span>[2610](#fn_2609.md) never be able to use them; he will
be their slave and keeper, not their master. For, being ever anxious to
make them more, he will never be willing to spend them; but he will cut
short himself, and be in poorer state than any poor man, as nowhere
stopping in his desire. Yet riches are made not that we should keep, but
that we should use them; but if we are going to bury them for others,
what can be more miserable than we, who run about desiring to get
together the possessions of all men,  <span
id="fr_2610"></span>[2611](#fn_2610.md) that we may shut them up within,
and cut them off from common use? But there is another malady not less
than this. Some men bury their money in the earth, others in their
bellies, and in pleasure and drunkenness; together with injustice adding
to themselves the punishment of wantonness. Some minister with their
substance to parasites and flatterers, others to dice and harlots,
others to different expenses of the same kind, cutting out for
themselves ten thousand roads that lead to hell, but leaving the right
and sanctioned road which leads to heaven. And yet it hath not greater
gain only, but greater pleasure than the things we have mentioned. For
he who gives to harlots is ridiculous and shameful, and will have many
quarrels, and brief pleasure; or rather, not even brief, because, give
what he will to the women his mistresses, they will not thank him for
it; for, “The house of a stranger is a cask with holes.” ( [Prov. xxiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#027.md) <span id="iv.lxxxix-p71.3"></span>
, LXX.) Besides, that sort of persons is impudent,  <span
id="fr_2611"></span>[2612](#fn_2611.md) and Solomon hath compared their
love to the grave; and then only do they stop, when they see their lover
stripped of all. Or rather, such a woman doth not stop even then, but
tricks herself out the more, and tramples on him when he is down, and
excites much laughter against him, and works him so much mischief, as it
is not possible even to describe by words. Not such is the pleasure of
the saved; for neither hath any there a rival, but all rejoice and are
glad, both they that receive blessings, and they that look <span
id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span id="iv.lxxxix-Page_329"></span> on. No
anger, no despondency, no shame, no disgrace, besiege the soul of such a
one, but great is the gladness of his conscience, and great his hope of
things to come; bright his glory, and great his distinction; and more
than all is the favor and safety which is from God, and not one
precipice, nor suspicion, but a waveless harbor, and calm. Considering
therefore all these things, and comparing pleasure with pleasure, let us
choose the better,  <span id="fr_2612"></span>[2613](#fn_2612.md) that we
may obtain the good things to come, through the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2574"></span>[325:2575](1140092.htm#fr_2574.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p4"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p4.1"></span>But he said unto them, Except I shall see in
His hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of
the nails, and thrust my hand into His side.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p4.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2575"></span>[325:2576](1140092.htm#fr_2575.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p6"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p6.1"></span>will not,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p6.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2576"></span>[325:2577](1140092.htm#fr_2576.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p8"></span> [John
20.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p8.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p8.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p8.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p8.4"></span>And after eight days again His disciples were
within, and Thomas with them; then came Jesus, the door being shut, and
stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p8.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2577"></span>[326:2578](1140092.htm#fr_2577.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p18.1"></span>παχύτητος</span>

<span id="fn_2578"></span>[326:2579](1140092.htm#fr_2578.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p19.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p19.2"></span>raiseth Himself,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p19.3"></span>or,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p19.4"></span>is raised.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2579"></span>[326:2580](1140092.htm#fr_2579.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p19.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p20.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p20.2"></span>henceforth,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p20.3"></span>λοιπὸν</span>

<span id="fn_2580"></span>[326:2581](1140092.htm#fr_2580.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p23.1"></span>According to Savile’s conject. and two <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p23.2"></span>mss.</span> </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p23.3"></span>πῶς ἂν ταῦτα</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p23.4"></span>for</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p23.5"></span>πῶς ἐνταῦθα</span>

<span id="fn_2581"></span>[326:2582](1140092.htm#fr_2581.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p25"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p25.1"></span>of His disciples, which are not written in
this book,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p25.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2582"></span>[326:2583](1140092.htm#fr_2582.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p28"></span> [John
20.31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p28.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p28.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p28.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p28.4"></span>But these are written, that ye might believe
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p28.5"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2583"></span>[326:2584](1140092.htm#fr_2583.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p31"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p31.1"></span>of Tiberias; and on this wise showed He
Himself,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p31.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2584"></span>[326:2585](1140092.htm#fr_2584.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p33.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p33.2"></span>κήρατον</span>

<span id="fn_2585"></span>[326:2586](1140092.htm#fr_2585.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p35"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p35.1"></span>Thomas, called Didymus.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2586"></span>[326:2587](1140092.htm#fr_2586.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p36"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p36.1"></span>Nathanael of Cana in Galilee.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2587"></span>[326:2588](1140092.htm#fr_2587.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p37"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p37.1"></span>two other of His disciples,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p37.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2588"></span>[326:2589](1140092.htm#fr_2588.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p39"></span> [John
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p39.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p39.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p39.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p39.4"></span>Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing.
They say unto him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and entered
into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing. But when
the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples
knew not that it was Jesus.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p39.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2589"></span>[326:2590](1140092.htm#fr_2589.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p39.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p40"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxix-p40.1"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p40.2"></span>[Luke xxiv.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#037.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p40.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p40.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p40.5"></span>But they were terrified and
affrighted.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2590"></span>[326:2591](1140092.htm#fr_2590.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p40.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p41.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p41.2"></span>dispose.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2591"></span>[326:2592](1140092.htm#fr_2591.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p43"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p43.1"></span>Children, have ye,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p43.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2592"></span>[326:2593](1140092.htm#fr_2592.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p44.1"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p44.2"></span>fish,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p44.3"></span>προσφάγιον</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p44.4"></span>, that which is eaten with the bread.</span>

<span id="fn_2593"></span>[327:2594](1140092.htm#fr_2593.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p46"></span> [John
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#005.md),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#006.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p46.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p46.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p46.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p46.4"></span>They answered Him, No. And He said unto
them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find.
They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the
multitude of fishes. And the other disciples came in a little ship, for
they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits, dragging
the net with fishes.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p46.5"></span>  N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2594"></span>[327:2595](1140092.htm#fr_2594.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p46.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p47"></span> [John
21.7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p47.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p47.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p47.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p47.4"></span>Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved
saith unto Peter, It is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that it was
the Lord, he girt his fisher’s coat unto him, (for he was naked,) and
did cast himself into the sea.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p47.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2595"></span>[327:2596](1140092.htm#fr_2595.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p47.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p48"></span> [John
21.11](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p48.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p48.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p48.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p48.4"></span>Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to
land full of great fishes, an hundred and fifty and three: and for all
there were so many, yet was not the net broken.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p48.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2596"></span>[327:2597](1140092.htm#fr_2596.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p48.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p49"></span> [John
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#010.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p49.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p49.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p49.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p49.4"></span>As soon then as they were come to land, they
saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and bread. Jesus saith
unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p49.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2597"></span>[327:2598](1140092.htm#fr_2597.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p51"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p51.1"></span>ask him, Who art Thou?</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p51.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2598"></span>[327:2599](1140092.htm#fr_2598.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p54"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p54.1"></span>knowing that,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p54.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2599"></span>[327:2600](1140092.htm#fr_2599.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p56"></span> [John
21.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.lxxxix-p56.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p56.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p56.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p56.4"></span>Jesus then cometh, and taketh bread, and
giveth them, and fish likewise.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p56.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2600"></span>[327:2601](1140092.htm#fr_2600.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p58"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p58.1"></span>was manifested to His disciples.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p58.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2601"></span>[327:2602](1140092.htm#fr_2601.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p60.1"></span>συναλιζόμενος αὐτοῖς ἦν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p60.2"></span>. The words are rendered
as above in the margin of the Auth. Version, and St. Chrys. seems to
have so understood them. The Vulgate has,</span> “convescens ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p60.3"></span> The literal sense is
either</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p60.4"></span>eating salt with them,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxix-p60.5"></span>or, as in the text of
Auth. Version,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p60.6"></span>being assembled with.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2602"></span>[327:2603](1140092.htm#fr_2602.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p61.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p62.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p62.2"></span>increase that longing.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2603"></span>[327:2604](1140092.htm#fr_2603.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p63.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p63.2"></span>γάπην</span>

<span id="fn_2604"></span>[327:2605](1140092.htm#fr_2604.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p63.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p64.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p64.2"></span>ἔρως</span>

<span id="fn_2605"></span>[328:2606](1140092.htm#fr_2605.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p64.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p65.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p65.2"></span>γάπης</span>

<span id="fn_2606"></span>[328:2607](1140092.htm#fr_2606.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p65.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p66.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p66.2"></span>much more those (i.e. the opposite) when not
done.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2607"></span>[328:2608](1140092.htm#fr_2607.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p66.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p67.1"></span>i.e. our members in Christ.</span>

<span id="fn_2608"></span>[328:2609](1140092.htm#fr_2608.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p68.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p68.2"></span>will not.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2609"></span>[328:2610](1140092.htm#fr_2609.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p70"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p70.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p70.2"></span>From his riches? he will.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2610"></span>[328:2611](1140092.htm#fr_2610.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p70.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p71"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p71.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p71.2"></span>get together all.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2611"></span>[328:2612](1140092.htm#fr_2611.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p71.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p72"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p72.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p72.2"></span>forward.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2612"></span>[329:2613](1140092.htm#fr_2612.md) <span
id="iv.lxxxix-p72.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxix-p73"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p73.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxix-p73.2"></span>the better things.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 21.15](1140093.md)
