[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140017)  [Next](1140019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xv"></span> <span id="iv.xv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xv-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xv-p2.2"></span>[John i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015)<span id="iv.xv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p3"></span>“John beareth witness of Him, and crieth,
saying, This is He of whom I spake, saying, He that cometh after me is
preferred before me, for He was before me.”

<span id="iv.xv-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xv-p4.1"></span>Do</span> we then run and labor in vain? Are we
sowing upon the rocks? Does the seed fall upon the rocks? Does the seed
fall without our knowing it by the wayside, and among thorns? I am
greatly troubled and fear, lest our husbandry be unprofitable; not
 <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) as though I shall be a loser as
well as you, touching the reward of this labor. For it is not with those
who teach as it is with husbandmen. Oftentimes the husbandman after his
year’s toil, his hard work and sweat, if the earth produce no suitable
return for his pains, will be  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313)
able to find comfort for his labors from none else, but returns ashamed
and downcast from his barn to his dwelling, his wife and children,
unable to require of any man a reward for his lengthened toil. But in
our case there is  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) nothing like
this. For even though the soil which we cultivate bring forth no fruit,
if we have shown all industry, the Lord of it and of us will not suffer
us to depart with disappointed hopes, but will give us a recompense;
for, says St. Paul, “Every man shall receive his own reward according to
his own labor” ( [1 Cor. iii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#008) <span
id="iv.xv-p7.1"></span> ), not according to the event of things. And
that it is so, hearken: “And Thou,” he saith, “Son of man, testify unto
this people, if <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> <span
id="iv.xv-Page_43"></span> they will hear, and if they will understand.”
( [Ezek. ii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005) <span
id="iv.xv-p7.2"></span> , not from LXX.) And Ezekiel says,  <span
id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) “If the watchman give warning what it
behooves to flee from, and what to choose, he hath delivered his own
soul, although there be none that will take heed.” ( [Ezek.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018), [Ezek.
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#009)<span id="iv.xv-p8.1"></span> ;
not quoted from LXX.) Yet although we have this strong consolation, and
are confident of the recompense that shall be made us, still when we see
that the work in you does not go forward, our state is not better than
the state of those husbandmen who lament and mourn, who hide their faces
and are ashamed. This is the sympathy of a teacher, this is the natural
care of a father. For Moses too, when it was in his power to have been
delivered from the ingratitude of the Jews, and to have laid the more
glorious foundation of another and far greater  <span
id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) people, (“Let Me alone,” said God,
“that I may consume them,  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) and
make of thee a nation mightier than this”— [Ex. xxxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010) <span id="iv.xv-p10.1"></span> ,)
because he was a holy man, the servant of God, and a friend  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) very true and generous, he did not
endure even to hearken to this word, but chose rather to perish with
those who had been once allotted to him, than without them to be saved
and be in greater honor. Such ought he to be who has the charge of
souls. For it is a strange thing that any one who has weak children,
will not be called the father of any others than those who are sprung
from him, but that he who has had disciples placed in his hands should
be continually changing one flock for another, that we should be
catching at the charge now of these, then of those, then again of
others,  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) having no real
affection for any one. May we never have cause to suspect this of you.
We trust that ye abound more in faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
love to one another and towards all men. And this we say as desiring
that your zeal may be increased, and the excellence of your conversation
 <span id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320) farther advanced. For it is
thus that you will be able to bring your understandings down to the very
depth of the words set before us, if no film  <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321) of wickedness darken the eyes of your
intellect, and disturb its clearsightedness and acuteness.

<span id="iv.xv-p15"></span> What then is it which is set before  <span
id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) us to-day? “John bare witness of Him,
and cried, saying, This was He of whom I spake, He that cometh after me
is preferred before me, for He was before me.” The Evangelist is very
full in making frequent mention of John, and often bearing about his
testimony. And this he does not without a reason, but very wisely; for
all the Jews held the man in great admiration, (even Josephus imputes
the war to his death;  <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) and
shows, that, on his account, what once was the mother city, is now no
city at all,  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324) and continues
 <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) the words of his encomium to
great length,) and therefore desiring by his means to make the Jews
ashamed, he continually reminds them of the testimony of the forerunner.
The other Evangelists make mention of the older prophets, and at each
successive thing that took place respecting Him refer the hearer to
them. Thus when the Child is born, they say, “Now all this was done,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esias the prophet,
saying, Behold, a virgin shall be with Child, and shall bring forth a
Son” ( [Matt. 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022), [Isa.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="iv.xv-p19.1"></span> );
and when He is plotted against and sought for everywhere so diligently,
that even tender infancy is slaughtered by  <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) Herod, they bring in Jeremy, saying,
“In Ramah was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning, Rachel weeping for her children” ( [Matt.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#018), [Jer.
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)<span id="iv.xv-p20.2"></span> );
and again, when He comes up out of Egypt, they mention  <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) Hosea, saying, “Out of Egypt have I
called My Son” ( [Matt. 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015), [Hos.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)<span id="iv.xv-p21.1"></span> );
and this they do everywhere. But John providing testimony more clear and
fresh, and uttering a voice more glorious than the other, brings
continually forward not those only who had departed and were dead, but
one also who was alive and present, who pointed Him out and baptized
Him, him he continually introduces, not desiring to gain credit for the
master  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) through the servant, but
condescending to the infirmity of his hearers.  <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) For as unless He had taken the form of
a servant, He would not have been easily received, so had He not by the
voice of a servant prepared the ears of his fellow-servants, the many
(at any rate) of the Jews would not  <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330) have received the Word.

<span id="iv.xv-p25"></span> \[2.\] But besides this, there was another
great and wonderful provision. For because to speak any great words
concerning himself, makes a man’s witness to be suspected, and is often
an obstacle to many hearers, another comes to testify of Him. And
besides this the many  <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) are in a
manner wont to run more readily to a voice which is more familiar and
natural to them, as recognizing it more than other voices; and therefore
the voice from heaven was uttered  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) once or twice, but that of John
oftentimes and <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span
id="iv.xv-Page_44"></span> continually. For those  <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) of the people who had surmounted the
infirmity of their nature, and had been released from all the things of
sense, could hear the Voice from heaven, and had no great need of that
of man, but in all things obeyed  <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) that other, and were led by it; but
they who yet moved below, and were wrapt in many veils, needed that
meaner (voice). In the same way John, because he had snipped himself in
every way of the  <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) things of
sense, needed no other instructors,  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) but was taught from heaven. “He that
sent me,” saith he, “to baptize with water, the Same said unto me, Upon
whom thou shalt see the Spirit” of God “descending, the same is He.” (
[John 1.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span
id="iv.xv-p31.1"></span> ) But the Jews who still were children, and
could not as yet reach to that height, had a man for their teacher, a
man who did not speak to them words of his own, but brought them a
message from above.

<span id="iv.xv-p32"></span> What then saith he? He “beareth witness
concerning Him, and crieth, saying” What means that word “crieth”?
Boldly, he means, and freely, without any reserve,  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) he proclaims. What does he proclaim?
to what does he “bear witness,” and “cry”? “This is He of whom I said,
He that cometh after me is preferred before me; for He was before me.”
The testimony is dark,  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338) and
contains besides much that is lowly. For he does not say, “This is the
Son of God, the Only-begotten, the true Son ”; but what? “He that cometh
after me, is preferred before me; for He was before me.” As the mother
birds do not teach their young all at once how to fly, nor finish their
teaching in a single day, but at first lead them forth so as to be just
outside the nest, then after first allowing them to rest, set them again
to flying,  <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) and on the next day
continue a flight much farther, and so gently, by little and little,
bring them to the proper height; just so the blessed John did not
immediately bring the Jews to high things, but taught them for a while
to fly up a little above the earth saying, that Christ was greater than
he. And yet this, even this was for the time no small thing, to have
been able to persuade  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) the
hearers that one who had not yet appeared nor worked any wonders was
greater than a man, (John, I mean,) so marvelous, so famous, to whom all
ran, and whom they thought to be an angel. For a while therefore he
labored to establish this in the minds of his hearers, that He to whom
testimony was borne was greater than he who bore it; He that came after,
than he that came before, He who had not yet appeared, than he that was
manifest and famous. And observe how prudently he introduces his
testimony; for he does not only point Him out when He has appeared, but
even before He appears, proclaims Him. For the expression, “This is He
of whom I spake,” is the expression of one declaring this. As also
Matthew says, that when all came to him, he said, “I indeed baptize you
with water, but He that cometh after me is mightier than I, the latchet
of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose.”  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) Wherefore then even before His
appearance did he this? In order that when He appeared, the testimony
might readily be received, the minds of the hearers being already
prepossessed by what was said concerning Him, and the mean external
appearance not vitiating it.  <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342)
For if without having heard anything at all concerning Him they had seen
the Lord,  <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) and as they beheld
Him had at the same time received the testimony of John’s words, so
wonderful and great, the meanness of His appearance  <span
id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) would have straightway been an
objection to the grandeur of the expressions. For Christ took on Him an
appearance so mean and ordinary, that even Samaritan women, and harlots,
and publicans, had confidence boldly to approach and converse with Him.
As therefore, I said, if they had at once heard these words and seen
Himself, they might perhaps have mocked at the testimony of John; but
now because even before Christ appeared, they had often heard and had
been accustomed to  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345) what was
said concerning Him, they were affected in the opposite way, not
rejecting the instruction of the words by reason of the appearance of
Him who was witnessed of, but from their belief of what had been already
told them, esteeming Him even more glorious.

<span id="iv.xv-p42"></span> The phrase, “that cometh after,” means,
“that” preacheth “after me,” not “that” was born “after me.” And this
Matthew glances at when he says,  <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) “after me cometh a man,” not speaking
of His birth from Mary, but of His coming to preach (the Gospel), for
had he been speaking of the birth, he would not have said, “cometh,” but
“is come”; since He was born when John spake this. What then means “is
before me”? Is more glorious, more honorable. “Do not,” he saith,
“because I came preaching first from this, suppose that I am greater
than He; I am much inferior, so much inferior that I am not worthy to be
counted in the rank of a servant.” This is the sense of “is before me,”
which Matthew showing in a different manner, saith,  <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) “The latchet of whose shoes I <span
id="page_45">p. 45</span> <span id="iv.xv-Page_45"></span> am not worthy
to unloose.” ( [Luke iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016) <span
id="iv.xv-p44.1"></span> .) Again, that the phrase, “is before me,” does
not refer to His coming into Being, is plain from the sequel; for had he
meant to say this, what follows, “for He was before me,” would be
superfluous. For who so dull and foolish as not to know that He who “was
born before”  <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) him “was before”
 <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) him? Or if the words refer to
His subsistence  <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) before the
ages, what is said is nothing else than that “He who cometh after me
came into being before me.” Besides, such a thing as this is
unintelligible, and the cause is thrown in needlessly; for he ought to
have said the contrary, if he had wished to declare this, “that He who
cometh after me was before me, since also He was born before me.” For
one might with reason assign this, (the “being born before”) as the
cause of “being before,” but not the “being before,” as the cause of
“being born.” While what we assert is very reasonable. Since you all at
least know this, that they are always things uncertain not things
evident, that require their causes to be assigned. Now if the argument
related to the production of substance,  <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) it could not have been uncertain that
he who “was born” first must needs “be” first; but because he is
speaking concerning honor, he with reason explains what seems to be a
difficulty. For many might well enquire, whence and on what pretext He
who came after, became before, that is, appeared with great honor; in
reply to this question therefore, he immediately assigns the reason; and
the reason is, <span class="c11"><span id="iv.xv-p48.2"></span>His
Being</span> first. He does not say, that “by some kind of advancement
he cast me who has been first behind him, and so became before me,” but
that “he was before me,” even though he arrives after me.

<span id="iv.xv-p49"></span> But how, says one, if the Evangelist refers
 <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) to His manifestation to men,
and to the glory which was to attend Him from them, does he speak of
what was not yet accomplished, as having already taken place? for he
does not say, “shall be,” but “was.” Because this is a custom among the
prophets of old, to speak of the future as of the past. Thus Isaiah
speaking of His slaughter does not say, “He shall be led (which would
have denoted futurity) as a sheep to the slaughter”; but “He was led as
a sheep to the slaughter” ( [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007) <span id="iv.xv-p50.1"></span> );
yet He was not yet Incarnate, but the Prophet speaks of what should be
as if it had come to pass. So David, pointing to the Crucifixion, said
not, “They shall pierce My hands and My feet,” but “They pierced My
hands and My feet, and parted My garments among them, and cast lots upon
My vesture” ( [Ps. 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span id="iv.xv-p50.2"></span> );
and discoursing of the traitor as yet unborn, he says, “He which did eat
of My bread, hath lifted up  <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) his
heel against Me” ( [Ps. xli. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009) <span
id="iv.xv-p51.1"></span> ); and of the circumstances of the Crucifixion,
“They gave Me gall for meat, and in My thirst they gave Me vinegar to
drink.” ( [Ps. lxix. 21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021) <span
id="iv.xv-p51.2"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xv-p52"></span> \[4.\] Do you desire that we adduce more
examples, or do these suffice? For my part, I think they do; for if we
have not dug over the ground in all its extent,  <span
id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) we have at least dug down to its
bottom; and this last kind of work is not less laborious than the
former; and we fear lest by straining your attention immoderately we
cause you to fall back.

<span id="iv.xv-p54"></span>Let us then give to our discourse a becoming
conclusion. And what conclusion is becoming? A suitable giving of glory
to God; and that is suitable which is given, not by words only, but much
more by actions. For He saith, “Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
Heaven.” ( [Matt. v. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016) <span
id="iv.xv-p54.1"></span> .) Now nothing is more full of light than a
most excellent conversation. As one of the wise men has said, “The paths
of the just shine like the light” ( [Prov. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018) <span id="iv.xv-p54.2"></span> ,
LXX.); and they shine not for them alone who kindle the flame by their
works, and are guides in the way of righteousness, but also for those
who are their neighbors. Let us then pour oil into these lamps, that the
flame become higher,  <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) that rich
light appear. For not only has this oil great strength now, but even
when sacrifices were at their height,  <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) it was far more acceptable than they
could be. “I will have mercy,”  <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357)
He saith, “and not sacrifice.” ( [Matt.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007), [Hos.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="iv.xv-p57.6"></span> .)
And with good reason; for that is a lifeless altar, this a living; and
all that is laid on that altar becomes the food of fire, and ends in
dust, and it is poured forth as ashes, and the smoke of it is dissolved
into the substance of the air; but here there is nothing like this, the
fruits which it bears are different. As the words of Paul declare; for
in describing the treasures of kindness to the poor laid up by the
Corinthians, he writes, “For the administration of this service not only
supplieth the want of the saints, but is abundant also by many
thanksgivings unto God.” ( [2 Cor. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012) <span id="iv.xv-p57.7"></span> .)
And again; “Whiles they glorify God for your professed subjection unto
the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and
unto all men; and by their prayer for you, which long after you.” Dost
thou behold it  <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) resolving itself
into thanksgiving and praise of God, and continual prayers of those
<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span id="iv.xv-Page_46"></span> who
have been benefited, and more fervent charity? Let us then sacrifice,
beloved, let us sacrifice every day upon these altars. For this
sacrifice is greater than prayer and fasting, and many things beside, if
only it come from honest gain, and honest toils, and be pure from all
covetousness, and rapine, and violence. For God accepts such  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) offerings as these, but the others He
turns away from and hates; He will not be honored out of other men’s
calamities, such sacrifice is unclean and profane, and would rather
anger God than appease Him. So that we must use all carefulness, that we
do not, in the place of service, insult Him whom we would honor. For if
Cain for making a second-rate offering,  <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) having done no other wrong, suffered
extreme punishment, how shall not we when we offer anything gained by
rapine and covetousness, suffer yet more severely. It is for this that
God has shown to us the pattern  <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361)
of this commandment, that we might have mercy, not be severe to our
fellow-servants; but he who takes what belongs to one and gives it to
another, hath not shown mercy, but inflicted hurt, and done an extreme
injustice. As then a stone cannot yield oil, so neither can cruelty
produce humanity; for alms when it has such a root as this is alms
 <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) no longer. Therefore I exhort
that we look not to this only, that we give to those that need, but also
that we give not from other men’s plunder. “When one prayeth, and
another curseth, whose voice will the Lord hear?” ( [Ecclesiasticus
34.24](../../../bib/apo/sir034.htm#024)<span id="iv.xv-p62.3"></span> .)
If we guide ourselves thus strictly, we shall be able by the grace of
God to obtain much lovingkindness and mercy and pardon for what we have
done amiss during all this long time, and to escape the river of fire;
from which may it come to pass that we be all delivered, and  <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) ascend to the Kingdom of Heaven,
through the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_312"></span>[42:313](1140018.htm#fr_312) <span
id="iv.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p5"></span> al. “nothing.”

<span id="fn_313"></span>[42:314](1140018.htm#fr_313) <span
id="iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p6"></span> al. “is.”

<span id="fn_314"></span>[42:315](1140018.htm#fr_314) <span
id="iv.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p7"></span> al. “shall be.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[43:316](1140018.htm#fr_315) <span
id="iv.xv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p8"></span> al. “this may be learnt from Ezekiel.”

<span id="fn_316"></span>[43:317](1140018.htm#fr_316) <span
id="iv.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p9"></span> al. “in a far greater way.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[43:318](1140018.htm#fr_317) <span
id="iv.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p10"></span> Lit. “wipe out.”

<span id="fn_318"></span>[43:319](1140018.htm#fr_318) <span
id="iv.xv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p11"></span> al. “very much a servant.”

<span id="fn_319"></span>[43:320](1140018.htm#fr_319) <span
id="iv.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p12"></span> al. “and others again with these.”

<span id="fn_320"></span>[43:321](1140018.htm#fr_320) <span
id="iv.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p13.1"></span>πολιτείας</span> .

<span id="fn_321"></span>[43:322](1140018.htm#fr_321) <span
id="iv.xv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p14.1"></span>λήμη</span> , al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p14.2"></span>λύμη</span> , “defilement.”

<span id="fn_322"></span>[43:323](1140018.htm#fr_322) <span
id="iv.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p16"></span> al. “said to.”

<span id="fn_323"></span>[43:324](1140018.htm#fr_323) <span
id="iv.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p17"></span> No such passage is extant in Josephus.
Probably the place alluded to is *Antiq.* b. xviii. c. 5, § 2, where the
destruction of the troops of Herod the tetrarch by Aretas is attributed
to the death of John the Baptist.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[43:325](1140018.htm#fr_324) <span
id="iv.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p18"></span> Ben. “the war through which the city of the
Jews, which was once the mother city, is no city.”

<span id="fn_325"></span>[43:326](1140018.htm#fr_325) <span
id="iv.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p19"></span> al. “raises.”

<span id="fn_326"></span>[43:327](1140018.htm#fr_326) <span
id="iv.xv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p20"></span> Morel. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p20.1"></span>καὶ πάντα τὰ αὐτοῦ ὄντως ἀνεζήτη, ὡς καὶ περὶ
τῆς ἀώρου ἡλικίας τῆς σφαττομένης</span> .

<span id="fn_327"></span>[43:328](1140018.htm#fr_327) <span
id="iv.xv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p21"></span> al. “produce.”

<span id="fn_328"></span>[43:329](1140018.htm#fr_328) <span
id="iv.xv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p22"></span> Morel. inserts “hence, away with the
thought.”

<span id="fn_329"></span>[43:330](1140018.htm#fr_329) <span
id="iv.xv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p23"></span> al. “of babes.”

<span id="fn_330"></span>[43:331](1140018.htm#fr_330) <span
id="iv.xv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p24"></span> al. “would not so.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[43:332](1140018.htm#fr_331) <span
id="iv.xv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p26"></span> al. “because the many.”

<span id="fn_332"></span>[43:333](1140018.htm#fr_332) <span
id="iv.xv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p27.1"></span>γέγονεν</span> .

<span id="fn_333"></span>[44:334](1140018.htm#fr_333) <span
id="iv.xv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p28"></span> al. “those therefore.”

<span id="fn_334"></span>[44:335](1140018.htm#fr_334) <span
id="iv.xv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p29"></span> Morel. “as obeying it in all things: but
they who yet moved below, needed also many other (things), because of
their groveling on the ground, and being wrapt.”

<span id="fn_335"></span>[44:336](1140018.htm#fr_335) <span
id="iv.xv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p30"></span> al. “all the.”

<span id="fn_336"></span>[44:337](1140018.htm#fr_336) <span
id="iv.xv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p31"></span> al. “men for inst.”

<span id="fn_337"></span>[44:338](1140018.htm#fr_337) <span
id="iv.xv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p33.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p33.2"></span>ποστολὴ</span> .

<span id="fn_338"></span>[44:339](1140018.htm#fr_338) <span
id="iv.xv-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p34"></span> Lit. “shaded over.”

<span id="fn_339"></span>[44:340](1140018.htm#fr_339) <span
id="iv.xv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p35"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xv-p35.1"></span>ms.</span> Savile reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xv-p35.2"></span>προστιθέασι τῇ πτήσει πάλιν
καὶ</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xv-p35.3"></span>…</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xv-p35.4"></span>πλείονα
συνάπτουσιν</span> .

<span id="fn_340"></span>[44:341](1140018.htm#fr_340) <span
id="iv.xv-p35.5"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p36"></span> al. “make believe.”

<span id="fn_341"></span>[44:342](1140018.htm#fr_341) <span
id="iv.xv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p37"></span> [Matt.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011), [Luke
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span id="iv.xv-p37.1"></span> .

<span id="fn_342"></span>[44:343](1140018.htm#fr_342) <span
id="iv.xv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p38"></span> Some <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xv-p38.1"></span>mss.</span> add, “but being able to possess the
souls of the many with much fearlessness.”

<span id="fn_343"></span>[44:344](1140018.htm#fr_343) <span
id="iv.xv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p39"></span> al. “Christ Himself.”

<span id="fn_344"></span>[44:345](1140018.htm#fr_344) <span
id="iv.xv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p40.1"></span>σχῆμα</span> .

<span id="fn_345"></span>[44:346](1140018.htm#fr_345) <span
id="iv.xv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p41"></span> Ben. “provoked (to curiosity) by.”

<span id="fn_346"></span>[44:347](1140018.htm#fr_346) <span
id="iv.xv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p43"></span> [Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011) <span id="iv.xv-p43.1"></span> not
verbally quoted.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[44:348](1140018.htm#fr_347) <span
id="iv.xv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p44"></span> Not found in Matt.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[45:349](1140018.htm#fr_348) <span
id="iv.xv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p45"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p45.1"></span>γενόμενος ἔμπροσθεν</span> .

<span id="fn_349"></span>[45:350](1140018.htm#fr_349) <span
id="iv.xv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p46"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p46.1"></span>πρῶτος ἢν</span> .

<span id="fn_350"></span>[45:351](1140018.htm#fr_350) <span
id="iv.xv-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p47.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p47.2"></span>πάρξεως</span> .

<span id="fn_351"></span>[45:352](1140018.htm#fr_351) <span
id="iv.xv-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p48"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p48.1"></span>οὐσιώσεως</span> .

<span id="fn_352"></span>[45:353](1140018.htm#fr_352) <span
id="iv.xv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p50"></span> al. “the reference is.”

<span id="fn_353"></span>[45:354](1140018.htm#fr_353) <span
id="iv.xv-p50.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p51"></span> al. “has magnified.”

<span id="fn_354"></span>[45:355](1140018.htm#fr_354) <span
id="iv.xv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p53"></span> al. “not much ground.”

<span id="fn_355"></span>[45:356](1140018.htm#fr_355) <span
id="iv.xv-p54.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p55"></span> al. “more soaring.”

<span id="fn_356"></span>[45:357](1140018.htm#fr_356) <span
id="iv.xv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p56"></span> lit. “flourished.”

<span id="fn_357"></span>[45:358](1140018.htm#fr_357) <span
id="iv.xv-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p57.1"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p57.2"></span>λεον</span> . St. Chrysostom plays on the word,
which was pronounced nearly as <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p57.3"></span>ἔ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p57.4"></span>λαιον</span> , “oil.” Thus on [2 Tim. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)<span id="iv.xv-p57.5"></span>, Hom.
vi.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[45:359](1140018.htm#fr_358) <span
id="iv.xv-p57.8"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p58"></span> the “service,” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p58.1"></span>λειτουργία</span> .

<span id="fn_359"></span>[46:360](1140018.htm#fr_359) <span
id="iv.xv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p59"></span> al. “only such.”

<span id="fn_360"></span>[46:361](1140018.htm#fr_360) <span
id="iv.xv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p60.1"></span>τὰ δευτερεῖα προσενεγκών</span> . St. Chrysostom
implies, that the offering of Cain was not of his best.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[46:362](1140018.htm#fr_361) <span
id="iv.xv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p61"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p61.1"></span>εἶδος</span> .

<span id="fn_362"></span>[46:363](1140018.htm#fr_362) <span
id="iv.xv-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p62.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xv-p62.2"></span>λεημοσύνη</span> , (lit. “mercifulness,”) whence
our *alms* .

<span id="fn_363"></span>[46:364](1140018.htm#fr_363) <span
id="iv.xv-p62.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xv-p63"></span> Morel. “sit down in the heavenly
bride-chamber.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 1.16](1140019)
