[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140100)  [Next](1140102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.vii"></span> <span id="v.vii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily III.</span>

<span id="v.vii-p2"></span> <span id="v.vii-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.vii-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews i.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span
id="v.vii-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.vii-p3"></span>“And again when He bringeth in the
First-Begotten into the world, He saith, And let all the angels of God
worship Him. And of the Angels He saith, Who maketh His angels spirits,
and His ministers a flame of fire. But unto the Son He saith, Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever.”

<span id="v.vii-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vii-p4.1"></span>Our</span> Lord Jesus Christ calls His coming in
the flesh an exodus \[or going out\]: as when He saith, “The sower went
out to sow.” ( [Matt. xiii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003) <span
id="v.vii-p4.2"></span> .) And again, “I went out from the Father, and
am come.” ( [John xvi. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028) <span
id="v.vii-p4.3"></span> .) And in many places one may see this. But Paul
calls it an \[eisodus or\] coming in, saying, “And when again He
bringeth in the First-Begotten into the world,” meaning by this Bringing
in, His taking on Him flesh.

<span id="v.vii-p5"></span>Now why has he so used the expression? The
things signified \[thereby\] are manifest, and in what respect it is
\[thus\] said. For Christ indeed calls it a Going out, justly; for we
were out from God. For as in royal palaces, prisoners and those who have
offended the king, stand without, and he who desires to reconcile them,
does not bring them in, but himself going out discourses with them,
until having made them meet for the king’s presence, he may bring them
in, so also Christ hath done. Having gone out to us, that is, having
taken flesh, and having discoursed to us of the King’s matters, so He
brought us in, having purged the sins, and made reconciliation.
Therefore he calls it a Going out.

<span id="v.vii-p6"></span>But Paul names it a Coming in, from the
metaphor of those who come to an inheritance and receive any portion or
possession. For the saying, “and when again He bringeth in the
First-Begotten into the world,” means this, “when he putteth the world
into His hand.” For when He was made known, then also He obtained
possession of the whole thereof, He saith not these things concerning
God The Word, but concerning that which is according to the flesh. For
if according to John, “He was in the world, and the world was made by
Him” ( [John i. 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010) <span
id="v.vii-p6.1"></span> ): how is He “brought in,” otherwise than in the
flesh?

<span id="v.vii-p7"></span> “And,” saith he, “Let all the angels of God
worship Him.” Whereas he is about to say something great and lofty, he
prepares it beforehand, and makes it acceptable, in that he represents
the Father as “bringing in” the Son. He had said above, that “He spake
to us not by prophets but by His Son”; that the Son is superior to
angels; yea and he establishes this from the name \[ <span
class="c11"><span id="v.vii-p7.1"></span>Son</span> \]. And here, in
what follows, from another fact also. What then may this be? From
worship. And he shows how much greater He is, as much as a Master is
than a slave; just as any one introducing another into a house
straightway commands those having the care thereof to do him reverence;
\[so\] saying in regard to the Flesh, “And let all the Angels of God
worship Him.”

<span id="v.vii-p8"></span>Is it then Angels only? No; for hear what
follows: “And of His Angels He saith, Which maketh His Angels spirits,
and His ministers a flame of fire: but unto the Son, Thy Throne, O God,
is for ever and ever.” Behold, the greatest difference! that they are
created, but He uncreated. While of His angels He saith, who “maketh”;
wherefore of the Son did He not say “Who maketh”? Although he might have
expressed the difference as follows: “Of His Angels He saith, Who maketh
His Angels spirits, <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_376"></span> but of the Son, ‘The Lord created Me’: ‘God
hath made Him Lord and Christ.’” ( [Prov.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022), [Acts
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span id="v.vii-p8.1"></span> .)
But neither was the one spoken concerning the Son, nor the other
concerning God The Word, but concerning the flesh. For when he desired
to express the true difference, he no longer included angels only, but
the whole ministering power above. Seest thou how he distinguishes, and
with how great clearness, between creatures and Creator, ministers and
Lord, the Heir and true Son, and slaves?

<span id="v.vii-p9"></span>\[2.\] “But unto the Son he saith, Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever.” Behold a symbol of Kingly Office.
“A scepter of righteousness is the scepter of Thy kingdom.” Behold again
another symbol of Royalty.

<span id="v.vii-p10"></span>Then again with respect to the flesh ( [Heb.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#009)<span id="v.vii-p10.1"></span> )
“Thou hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity, therefore God, even
Thy God, hath anointed Thee.”

<span id="v.vii-p11"></span> What is, “Thy God”? Why, after that he hath
uttered a great word, he again qualifieth it. Here he hits both Jews,
and the followers of Paul of Samosata, and the Arians, and Marcellus,
and Sabellius, and Marcion. How? The Jews, by his indicating two
Persons, both God and Man;  <span id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765)
the other Jews,  <span id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766) I mean the
followers of Paul of Samosata, by thus discoursing concerning His
eternal existence, and uncreated essence: for by way of distinction,
against the word, “He made,” he put, “Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever.” Against the Arians there is both this same again, and also that
He is not a slave; but if a creature, He is a slave. And against
Marcellus and the others, that these are two Persons, distinguished in
reference to their subsistence.  <span
id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767) And against the Marcionites, that
the Godhead is not anointed, but the Manhood.

<span id="v.vii-p15"></span>Next he saith, “Above Thy fellows.” But who
are these His “fellows” other than men? that is Christ received “not the
Spirit by measure.” ( [John iii. 34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)
<span id="v.vii-p15.1"></span> .) Seest thou how with the doctrine
concerning His uncreated nature he always joins also that of the
“Economy”? what can be clearer than this? Didst thou see how what is
created and what is begotten are not the same? For otherwise he would
not have made the distinction, nor in contrast to the word, “He made”
\[&c.\], have added, “But unto the Son He said, Thy throne, O God, is
for ever and ever.” Nor would he have called the name, “Son, a more
excellent Name,” if it is a sign of the same thing. For what is the
excellence? For if that which is created, and that which is begotten be
the same, and they \[the Angels\] were made, what is there \[in Him\]
“more excellent”? Lo! again <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p15.2"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p15.3"></span>Θεὸς</span> , “God,” with the Article.  <span
id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768)

<span id="v.vii-p17"></span>\[3.\] And again he saith ( [Heb.
1.10-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)<span id="v.vii-p17.1"></span>
): “Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the works of Thine hands. They shall perish, but
Thou remainest, and they shall all wax old as a garment, and as a
vesture shalt Thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but Thou art
the same and Thy years shall not fail.”

<span id="v.vii-p18"></span>Lest hearing the words, “and when He
bringeth in the First-Begotten into the world”; thou shouldest think it
as it were a Gift afterwards super-added to Him; above, he both
corrected this beforehand, and again further corrects, saying, “in the
beginning”: not now, but from the first. See again he strikes both Paul
of Samosata and also Arius a mortal blow, applying to the Son the things
which relate to the Father. And withal he has also intimated another
thing by the way, greater even than this. For surely he hath
incidentally pointed out also the transfiguration of the world, saying,
“they shall wax old as a garment, and as a vesture Thou shalt fold them
up, and they shall be changed.” Which also he saith in the Epistle to
the Romans, that he shall transfigure the world. (See [Rom. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021) <span id="v.vii-p18.1"></span> .)
And showing the facility thereof, he adds, as if a man should fold up a
garment so shall He both fold up and change it. But if He with so much
ease works the transfiguration and the creation to what is better and
more perfect, needed He another for the inferior creation? How far doth
your shamelessness go? At the same time too this is a very great
consolation, to know that things will not be as they are, but they all
shall receive change, and all shall be altered, but He Himself remaineth
ever existing, and living without end: “and Thy years,” he saith, “shall
not fail.”

<span id="v.vii-p19"></span>\[4.\] [Heb.
1.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013)<span id="v.vii-p19.1"></span> .
“But to which of the Angels said He at any time, Sit thou on My right
hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool?” Behold, again he
encourages them, inasmuch as their enemies were to be worsted, and their
enemies are the same also with Christ’s.

<span id="v.vii-p20"></span>This again belongs to Sovereignty, to Equal
Dignity, to Honor and not weakness, that the Father should be angry for
the things done to the Son. This belongs to His great Love and honor
towards the Son, as of a father towards a son. For He that is angry in
His behalf how is He a stranger to Him? Which also he saith in <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_377"></span> the second
Psalm, “He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, and the
Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall He speak unto them in His
wrath, and vex them in His sore displeasure.” ( [Ps.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005)<span id="v.vii-p20.1"></span> .)
And again He Himself saith, “Those that would not that I should reign
over them, bring hither before Me, and slay them.” ( [Luke xix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027) <span id="v.vii-p20.2"></span> .)
For that they are His own words, hear also what He saith in another
place, “How often would I have gathered thy children together, and ye
would not! Behold, your house is left desolate.” ( [Luke
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#035)<span id="v.vii-p20.3"></span> .)
And again, “The kingdom shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a
nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.” ( [Matt. xxi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043) <span id="v.vii-p20.4"></span> .)
And again, “He that falleth upon that stone shall be broken, but on
whomsoever It shall fall, It will grind him to powder.” ( [Matt. xxi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044) <span id="v.vii-p20.5"></span> .)
And besides, He who is to be their Judge in that world, much more did He
Himself repay them in this. So that the words “Till I make thine enemies
thy footstool” are expressive of honor only towards the <span
class="c11"><span id="v.vii-p20.6"></span>Son</span> .

<span id="v.vii-p21"></span> [Heb.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span id="v.vii-p21.1"></span> .
“Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them
who shall be heirs of salvation?” What marvel (saith he) if they
minister to the Son, when they minister even to our salvation? See how
he lifts up their minds, and shows the great honor which God has for us,
since He has assigned to Angels who are above us this ministration on
our behalf. As if one should say, for this purpose (saith he) He employs
them; this is the office of Angels, to minister to God for our
salvation. So that it is an angelical work, to do all for the salvation
of the brethren: or rather it is the work of Christ Himself, for He
indeed saves as Lord, but they as servants. And we, though servants are
yet Angels’ fellow-servants. Why gaze ye so earnestly on the Angels
(saith he)? They are servants of the Son of God, and are sent many ways
for our sakes, and minister to our salvation. And so they are partners
in service with us.

<span id="v.vii-p22"></span>Consider ye how he ascribes no great
difference to the kinds of creatures. And yet the space between angels
and men is great; nevertheless he brings them down near to us, all but
saying, For us they labor, for our sake they run to and fro: on us, as
one might say, they wait. This is their ministry, for our sake to be
sent every way.

<span id="v.vii-p23"></span>And of these examples both the Old
\[Testament\] is full, and the New. For when Angels bring glad tidings
to the shepherds, or to Mary, or to Joseph; when they sit at the
sepulcher, when they are sent to say to the disciples, “Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?” ( [Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011) <span id="v.vii-p23.1"></span> ),
when they release Peter out of the prison, when they discourse with
Philip, consider how great the honor is; when God sends His Angels for
ministers as to friends; when to Cornelius \[an Angel\] appears, when
\[an Angel\] brings forth all the apostles from the prison, and says,
“Go, stand and speak in the temple to the people the words of this life”
( [Acts v. 20](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020) <span
id="v.vii-p23.2"></span> ); and to Paul himself also an Angel appears.
Dost thou see that they minister to us on God’s behalf, and that they
minister to us in the greatest matters? wherefore Paul saith, “All
things are yours, whether life or death, or the world, or things
present, or things to come.” ( [1 Cor. iii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#022) <span id="v.vii-p23.3"></span> .)

<span id="v.vii-p24"></span> Well then the <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vii-p24.1"></span>Son</span> also was sent, but not as a servant,
nor as a minister, but as a Son, and Only-Begotten, and desiring the
same things with the Father. Rather indeed, He was not “sent”: for He
did not pass from place to place, but took on Him flesh: whereas these
change their places, and leaving those in which they were before, so
come to others in which they were not.

<span id="v.vii-p25"></span>And by this again he incidentally encourages
them, saying, What fear ye? Angels are ministering to us.

<span id="v.vii-p26"></span>\[5.\] And having spoken concerning the Son,
both what related to the Economy, and what related to the Creation, and
to His sovereignty, and having shown His co-equal dignity, and that as
absolute Master He ruleth not men only but also the powers above, he
next exhorts them, having made out his argument, that we ought to give
heed to the things which have been heard. ( [Heb.
2.1](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#001)<span id="v.vii-p26.1"></span> .)
“Wherefore we ought to give more earnest heed” (saith he) “to the things
which we have heard.” Why “more earnest”? Here he meant “more earnest”
than to the Law: but he suppressed the actual expression of it, and yet
makes it plain in the course of reasoning, not in the way of counsel,
nor of exhortation. For so it was better.

<span id="v.vii-p27"></span> [Heb.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003)<span id="v.vii-p27.1"></span> .
“For if the word spoken by Angels” (saith he) “was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how
shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first
began to be spoken to us by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them
that heard Him?”

<span id="v.vii-p28"></span>Why ought we to “give more earnest heed to
the things which we have heard”? were not those former things of God, as
well as these? Either then he meaneth “more earnest” than \[to\] the
Law, or “very earnest”; not making comparison, God forbid. For since, on
account of the long space of time, they had a great opinion of the Old
Covenant, but these things had been despised as yet new, he proves (more
than his argument required) that we ought rather to give heed to these.
How? By saying in effect, Both <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_378"></span> these and those are of God, but not in a
like manner. And this he shows us afterwards: but for the present he
treats it somewhat superficially, but afterwards more clearly, saying
“For if that first covenant had been faultless” ( [Heb.
8.7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p28.1"></span> ),
and many other such things: “for that which decayeth and waxeth old is
ready to vanish away.” ( [Heb.
8.13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013)<span id="v.vii-p28.2"></span> .)
But as yet he ventures not to say any such thing in the beginning of his
discourse, nor until he shall have first occupied and possessed his
hearer by his fuller \[arguments\].

<span id="v.vii-p29"></span>Why then ought we “to give more earnest
heed”? “Lest at any time,” saith he, “we should let them slip”—that is,
lest at any time we should perish, lest we should fall away. And here he
shows the grievousness of this falling away, in that it is a difficult
thing for that which hath fallen away to return again, inasmuch as it
hath happened through wilful negligence. And he took this form of speech
from the Proverbs. For, saith he, “my son \[take heed\] lest thou fall
away” ( [Prov. iii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#021) <span
id="v.vii-p29.1"></span> , LXX.), showing both the easiness of the fall,
and the grievousness of the ruin. That is, our disobedience is not
without danger. And while by his mode of reasoning he shows that the
chastisement is greater, yet again he leaves it in the form of a
question, and not in the conclusion. For indeed this is to make one’s
discourse inoffensive, when one does not in every case of one’s self
infer the judgment, but leaves it in the power of the hearer himself to
give sentence: and this would render them more open to conviction. And
both the prophet Nathan doth the same in the Old \[Testament\], and in
Matthew Christ, saying, “What will He do to the husbandmen” ( [Matt.
xxi. 40](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#040) <span id="v.vii-p29.2"></span>
) of that vineyard? so compelling them to give sentence themselves: for
this is the greatest victory.

<span id="v.vii-p30"></span>Next, when he had said, “For if the word
which was spoken by Angels was steadfast”—he did not add, much more that
by Christ: but letting this pass, he said what is less, “How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great salvation?” And see how he makes the
comparison. “For if the word which was spoken by Angels,” saith he.
There, “by Angels,” here, “by the Lord”—and there “a word,” but here,
“salvation.”

<span id="v.vii-p31"></span>Then lest any man should say, Thy sayings, O
Paul, are they Christ’s? he proves their trustworthiness both from his
having heard these things of Him, and from their being now spoken by
God; since not merely a voice is wafted, as in the case of Moses, but
signs are done, and facts bear witness.

<span id="v.vii-p32"></span>\[6.\] But what is this, “For if the word
spoken by Angels was steadfast”? For in the Epistle to the Galatians
also he saith to this effect, “Being ordained by angels in the hand of a
Mediator.” ( [Gal. iii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019) <span
id="v.vii-p32.1"></span> .) And again, “Ye received a law by the
disposition of Angels, and have not kept it.” ( [Acts vii.
53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053) <span id="v.vii-p32.2"></span> .)
And everywhere he saith it was given by angels. Some indeed say that
Moses is signified; but without reason. For here he says Angels in the
plural: and the Angels too which he here speaks of, are those in Heaven.
What then is it? Either he means the Decalogue only (for there Moses
spake, and God answered him— [Ex. xix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019) <span id="v.vii-p32.3"></span>
),—or that angels were present, God disposing them in order,—or that he
speaks thus in regard of all things said and done in the old Covenant,
as if Angels had part in them. But how is it said in another place, “The
Law was given by Moses” ( [John i. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)
<span id="v.vii-p32.4"></span> ), and here “by Angels”? For it is said,
“And God came down in thick darkness.”  <span
id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769) ( [Exod.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020)<span id="v.vii-p33.8"></span> .)

<span id="v.vii-p34"></span>“For if the word spoken by angels was
steadfast.” What is “was steadfast”? True, as one may say; and faithful
in its proper season; and all the things which had been spoken came to
pass. Either this is his meaning, or that they prevailed, and the
threatenings were coming to be accomplished. Or by “the word” he means
injunctions. For apart from the Law, Angels sent from God enjoined many
things: for instance at Bochim, in the Judges, in \[the history of\]
Samson. ( [Judg. 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001), [Judg.
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#003)<span id="v.vii-p34.1"></span> .)
For this is the cause why he said not “the Law” but “the word.” And he
seems to me haply rather to mean this, viz., those things which are
committed to the management of angels. What shall we say then? The
angels who were entrusted with the charge of the nation were then
present, and they themselves made the trumpets, and the other things,
the fire, the thick darkness. ( [Ex. xix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016) <span id="v.vii-p34.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.vii-p35"></span> “And every transgression and disobedience,”
saith he. Not this one and that one, but “every” one. Nothing, he saith,
remained unavenged, but “received a just recompense of reward,” instead
of \[saying\] punishment. Why now spake he thus? Such is the manner of
Paul, not to make much account of his phrases, but indifferently to put
down words of evil sound, even in matters of good meaning. As also in
another place he saith, “Bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.”  <span id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770) ( [2
Cor. x. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005) <span
id="v.vii-p36.9"></span> .) And again he hath put “the recompense” for
punishment,  <span id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771) as here he
calleth punishment “reward.” “If it be a righteous thing,” he saith,
“with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you
<span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span id="v.vii-Page_379"></span> who
are troubled rest.” ( [2 Thess. 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007)<span id="v.vii-p37.4"></span> .)
That is, justice was not violated, but God went forth against them, and
caused the penalty to come round on the sinners, though not all their
sins are made manifest, but only where the express ordinances were
transgressed.

<span id="v.vii-p38"></span>“How then shall we,” he saith, “escape if we
neglect so great salvation?” Hereby he signified, that other salvation
was no great thing. Well too did he add the “So great.” For not from
wars (he saith) will He now rescue us, nor bestow on us the earth and
the good things that are in the earth, but it will be the dissolution of
death, the destruction of the devil, the kingdom of Heaven, everlasting
life. For all these things he hath briefly expressed, by saying, “if we
neglect so great salvation.”

<span id="v.vii-p39"></span> \[7.\] Then he subjoins what makes this
worthy of belief. “Which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord”:
that is, had its beginning from the fountain itself. It was not a man
who brought it over  <span id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772) into the
earth, nor any created power, but the Only-Begotten Himself.

<span id="v.vii-p41"></span> “And was confirmed unto us by them that
heard \[Him\].” What is “confirmed”? It was believed,  <span
id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773) or, it came to pass. For (he saith)
we have the earnest;  <span id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774) that
is, it hath not been extinguished, it hath not ceased, but it is strong
and prevaileth. And the cause is, the Divine power works therein. It
means they who heard from the Lord, themselves confirmed us. This is a
great thing and trustworthy: which also Luke saith in the beginning of
his Gospel, “As they delivered unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses and ministers of the Word.” ( [Luke i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002) <span id="v.vii-p43.12"></span> .)

<span id="v.vii-p44"></span>How then was it confirmed? What if those
that heard were forgers? saith some one. This objection then he
overthrows, and shows that the grace was not human. If they had gone
astray, God would not have borne witness to them; for he subjoined (
[Heb. 2.4](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#004)<span
id="v.vii-p44.1"></span> ), “God also bearing witness with them.” Both
they indeed bear witness, and God beareth witness too. How doth He bear
witness? not by word or by voice, (though this also would have been
worthy of belief): but how? “By signs, and wonders, and divers
miracles.” (Well said he, “divers miracles,” declaring the abundance of
the gifts: which was not so in the former dispensation, neither so great
signs and so various.) That is, we did not believe them simply, but
through signs and wonders: wherefore we believe not them, but God
Himself.

<span id="v.vii-p45"></span>“And by gifts of the Holy Ghost, according
to His own will.”

<span id="v.vii-p46"></span>What then, if wizards also do signs, and the
Jews said that He “cast out devils through Beelzebub”? ( [Luke xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#015) <span id="v.vii-p46.1"></span> .)
But they do not such kind of signs: therefore said he “divers miracles”:
for those others were not miracles, \[or powers,  <span
id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775) \] but weakness and fancy, and
things altogether vain. Wherefore he said, “by gifts of the Holy Ghost
according to His own will.”

<span id="v.vii-p48"></span>\[8.\] Here he seems to me to intimate
something further. For it is not likely there were many there who had
gifts, but that these had failed, upon their becoming more slothful. In
order then that even in this he might comfort them, and not leave them
to fall away, he referred all to the will of God. He knows (he says)
what is expedient, and for whom, and apportions His grace accordingly.
Which also he \[Paul\] does in the Epistle to the Corinthians, saying,
“God hath set every one of us, as it pleased Him.” ( [1 Cor. xii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#018) <span id="v.vii-p48.1"></span> .)
And again, “The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal.” ( [1 Cor. xii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007) <span
id="v.vii-p48.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.vii-p49"></span>“According to His will.” He shows that the
gift is according to the will of the Father. But oftentimes on account
of their unclean and slothful life many have not received a gift, and
sometimes also those whose life is good and pure have not received one.
Why, I pray you? Lest they might be made haughty, that they might not be
puffed up, that they might not grow more negligent, that they might not
be more excited. For if even without a gift, the mere consciousness of a
pure life be sufficient to lift a man up, much more when the grace is
added also. Wherefore to the humble, to the simple, it was rather given,
and especially to the simple: for it is said, “in singleness and
gladness of heart.” ( [Acts ii. 46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)
<span id="v.vii-p49.1"></span> .) Yea, and hereby also he rather urged
them on, and if they were growing negligent gave them a spur. For the
humble, and he who imagines no great things concerning himself, becomes
more earnest when he has received a gift, in that he has obtained what
is beyond his deserts, and thinks that he is not worthy thereof. But he
who thinks he hath done well, reckoning it to be his due, is puffed up.
Wherefore God dispenseth this profitably: which one may see taking place
also in the Church: for one hath the word of teaching, another hath not
power to open his <span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_380"></span> mouth. Let not this man (he says) be grieved
because of this. For “the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man to profit withal.” ( [1 Cor. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007) <span id="v.vii-p49.2"></span> .)
For if a man that is an householder knoweth to whom he should entrust
anything, much more God, who understands the mind of men, “who knoweth
all things or ever they come into being.”  <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776) One thing only is worthy of grief,
Sin: there is nothing else.

<span id="v.vii-p51"></span>Say not, Wherefore have I not riches? or, If
I had, I would give to the poor. Thou knowest not, if thou hadst them,
whether thou wouldest not the rather be covetous. For now indeed thou
sayest these things, but being put to the trial thou wouldest be
different. Since also when we are satisfied, we think that we are able
to fast; but when we have gone without a little space, other thoughts
come into us. Again, when we are out of the way of strong drink, we
think ourselves able to master our appetite, but no longer so, when we
are caught by it.

<span id="v.vii-p52"></span>Say not, Wherefore had I not the gift of
teaching? or, If I had it, I should have edified innumerable souls. Thou
knowest not, if thou hadst it, whether it would not be to thy
condemnation,—whether envy, whether sloth, would not have disposed thee
to hide thy talent. Now, indeed, thou art now free from all these, and
though thou give not “the portion of meat” ( [Luke xii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042) <span id="v.vii-p52.1"></span> ),
thou art not called to account: but then, thou wouldest have been
responsible for many.

<span id="v.vii-p53"></span>\[9.\] And besides, neither now art thou
without the gift. Show in the little, what thou wouldst have been, if
thou hadst had the other. “For if” (he says) “ye are not faithful in
that which is little, how shall any one give you that which is great?” (
[Luke xvi. 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#011) <span
id="v.vii-p53.1"></span> .) Give such proof as did the widow; she had
two farthings,  <span id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777) and she cast
in all, whatsoever she possessed.

<span id="v.vii-p55"></span>Dost thou seek riches? Prove that thou
thinkest lightly of the few things, that I may trust thee also
concerning the many things. But if thou dost not think lightly even of
these, much less wilt thou do so of the other.

<span id="v.vii-p56"></span>Again, in speech, prove that thou canst use
fitly exhortation and counsel. Hast thou not external eloquence? hast
thou not store of thoughts? But nevertheless thou knowest these common
things. Thou hast a child, thou hast a neighbor, thou hast a friend,
thou hast a brother, thou hast kinsmen. And though publicly before the
Church, thou art not able to draw out a long discourse, these thou canst
exhort in private. Here, there is no need of rhetoric, nor of elaborate
discourse: prove in these, that if thou hadst skill of speech, thou
wouldest not have neglected it. But if in the small matter thou art not
in earnest, how shall I trust thee concerning the great?

<span id="v.vii-p57"></span>For, that every man can do this, hear what
Paul saith, how he charged even lay people; “Edify,” he says, “one
another, as also ye do.” ( [1 Thess. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011) <span id="v.vii-p57.1"></span> .)
And, “Comfort one another with these words.” ( [1 Thess. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#018) <span id="v.vii-p57.2"></span> .)
God knoweth how He should distribute to every man. Art thou better than
Moses? hear how he shrinks from the hardship. “Am I,” saith he, “able to
bear them? for Thou saidst to me, Bear them up, as a nursing-father
would bear up the sucking-child.” ( [Num. xi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012) <span id="v.vii-p57.3"></span> .)
What then did God? He took of his spirit and gave unto the others,
showing that neither when he bare them was the gift his own, but of the
Spirit. If thou hadst had the gift, thou wouldst perchance  <span
id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778) have been lifted up, perchance
wouldst thou have been turned out of the way. Thou knowest not thyself
as God knoweth thee. Let us not say, To what end is that? on what
account is this? When God dispenseth, let us not demand an account of
Him: for this \[is\] of the uttermost impiety and folly. We are slaves,
and slaves far apart from our Master, knowing not even the things which
are before us.

<span id="v.vii-p59"></span>\[10.\] Let us not then busy ourselves about
the counsel of God, but whatsoever He hath given, this let us guard,
though it be small, though it be the lowest, and we shall be altogether
approved. Or rather, none of the gifts of God is small: art thou grieved
because thou hast not the gift of teaching? Then tell me, which seems to
you the greater, to have the gift of teaching, or the gift of driving
away diseases? Doubtless the latter. But what? Tell me; doth it not seem
to thee greater to give eyes to the blind than even to drive away
diseases? But what? Tell me; doth it not seem to thee greater to raise
the dead than to give eyes to the blind? What again, tell me; doth it
not seem to thee greater to do this by shadows and napkins, than by a
word? Tell me then, which wouldst thou? Raise the dead with shadows and
napkins, or have the gift of teaching? Doubtless thou wilt say the
former, to raise the dead with shadows and napkins. If then I should
show to thee, that there is another gift far greater than this, and that
thou dost not receive it when it is in thy power to receive it, art not
thou justly deprived of those others? And this gift not one or two, but
all may have. I know that ye open wide your mouths and are amazed, at
being to hear that it is in your power to have a greater gift than
raising the dead, and giving eyes to the blind, doing the same things
which were done in the time of the Apostles. And it seems to you past
belief.

<span id="v.vii-p60"></span> <span id="page_381">p. 381</span> <span
id="v.vii-Page_381"></span> What then is this gift? charity. Nay,
believe me; for the word is not mine, but Christ’s speaking by Paul. For
what saith he? “Covet earnestly the best gifts: and yet show I unto you
a more excellent way.” ( [1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031) <span id="v.vii-p60.1"></span> .)
What is this, “yet more excellent”? What he means is this. The
Corinthians were proud over their gifts, and those having tongues, the
least gift, were puffed up against the rest. He saith therefore, Do ye
by all means desire gifts? I show unto you a way of gifts not merely
excelling but far more excellent. Then he saith, “Though I speak with
the tongues of Angels, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I
have faith so as to remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing.” ( [1 Cor. 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002)<span id="v.vii-p60.2"></span> .)

<span id="v.vii-p61"></span>Hast thou seen the gift? Covet earnestly
this gift. This is greater than raising the dead. This is far better
than all the rest. And that it is so, hear what Christ Himself saith,
discoursing with His disciples, “By this shall all men know that ye are
My disciples.” ( [John xiii. 35](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#035) <span
id="v.vii-p61.1"></span> .) And showing how, He mentioned not the
miracles, but what? “If ye have love one with another.” And again He
saith to the Father, “Hereby shall they know that Thou hast sent Me, if
they be one.” ( [John xvii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#021) <span
id="v.vii-p61.2"></span> .) And He said to His disciples, “A new
commandment I give to you, that ye love one another.” ( [John xiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034) <span id="v.vii-p61.3"></span> .)
Such an one therefore is more venerable and glorious than those who
raise the dead; with reason. For that indeed is wholly of God’s grace,
but this, of thine own earnestness also. This is of one who is a
Christian indeed: this shows the disciple of Christ, the crucified, the
man that hath nothing common with earth. Without this, not even
martyrdom can profit.

<span id="v.vii-p62"></span>And as a proof, see this plainly. The
blessed Paul took two of the highest virtues, or rather three; namely,
those which consist in miracles, in knowledge, in life. And without this
the others, he said, are nothing. And I will say how these are nothing.
“Though I give my goods to feed the poor,” he says, “and have not
charity, I am nothing.” ( [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003) <span id="v.vii-p62.1"></span> .)
For it is possible not to be charitable even when one feeds the poor and
exhausts one’s means.

<span id="v.vii-p63"></span> \[11.\] And indeed these things have been
sufficiently declared by us, in the place concerning Charity:  <span
id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779) and thither we refer the readers.
Meanwhile, as I was saying, let us covet earnestly the Gift, let us love
one another; and we shall need nothing else for the perfect acquisition
of virtue, but all will be easy to us without toils and we shall do all
perfectly with much diligence.

<span id="v.vii-p65"></span>But see, even now, it is said, we love one
another. For one man hath two friends, and another three. But this is
not to love for God’s sake, but for the sake of being beloved. But to
love for God’s sake hath not this as its principle of Love; but such an
one will be disposed towards all men as towards brethren; loving those
that are of the same faith as being true brothers; heretics and Heathen
and Jews, brothers indeed by nature, but vile and unprofitable,—pitying
and wearing himself out and weeping for them. Herein we shall be like
God if we love all men, even our enemies; not, if we work miracles.  For
we regard even God with admiration when He worketh wonders, yet much
more, when He showeth love towards man, when He is long-suffering. If
then even in God this is worthy of much admiration, much more in men is
it evident that this rendereth us admirable.

<span id="v.vii-p66"></span>This then let us zealously seek after: and
we shall be no way inferior to Paul and Peter and those who have raised
innumerable dead, though we may not be able to drive away a fever. But
without this \[Love\]; though we should work greater miracles even than
the Apostles themselves, though we should expose ourselves to
innumerable dangers for the faith: there will be to us no profit from
any. And these things it is not I that say, but he, the very nourisher
of Charity, knoweth these things. To him then let us be obedient; for
thus we shall be able to attain to the good things promised, of which
may we all be made partakers, by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom to the Father with the Holy Ghost, be the glory, now and for
ever and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[376:2766](1140101.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="v.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p12.1"></span>δυὸ πρόσωπα δεικνὺς, καὶ Θεὸν καὶ
ἄνθρωπον</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p12.2"></span>. That
is *both* two distinct Persons in the Godhead, and also the Divine and
human natures of the Christ. The corrector would seem to have understood
it</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p12.3"></span>two
Persons, both God and man</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p12.4"></span>; the common texts read</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p12.5"></span>δυὸ τὸν αὐτὸν δεικνὺς, κ. θ.
κ. ἀ</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p12.6"></span>showing
the same \[Person\] to be two, both God and man.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p12.7"></span> \[The first</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p12.8"></span>καὶ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p12.9"></span>may well be translated
*both* . It seems to have been omitted by the corrector simply as
superfluous, not as altering the sense.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[376:2767](1140101.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="v.vii-p12.10"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p13.1"></span>Sav. and Ben. omit</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p13.2"></span>̓</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p13.3"></span>Ιουδαίους</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p13.4"></span>. The teaching of Paul of
Samosata was regarded as closely connected with Judaism, and he and his
followers were called Jews.</span>

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[376:2768](1140101.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="v.vii-p13.5"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p14.1"></span>κατὰ τὴν ὑπόστασιν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p14.2"></span>, see above, pp. 370, 371,
notes.</span>

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[376:2769](1140101.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="v.vii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p16.1"></span>The Ben. editor observes that it had been said
that</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p16.2"></span>ὁ</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p16.3"></span>θεός</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p16.4"></span>with the article is used in
Scripture only of the Father, and that St. Chrys. here as in other
places argues that it is used of the Son.</span>

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[378:2770](1140101.htm#fr_2769) <span
id="v.vii-p32.5"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p33.1"></span>This last clause seems unconnected as it stands
here. If there were <span class="c11"><span
id="v.vii-p33.2"></span>ms.</span> authority one should be glad to
transfer it a few lines lower, after the management of Angels: </span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p33.3"></span>τὰ διὰ τῶν ἀγγέλων
οἰκονομηθέντα</span> <span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p33.4"></span>,
or to place here the words</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p33.5"></span>What shall we say,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p33.6"></span>down to</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p33.7"></span>thick darkness.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[378:2771](1140101.htm#fr_2770) <span
id="v.vii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p36.1"></span>See St. Chrys. on the passage,</span> <span
id="v.vii-p36.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p36.3"></span>[2 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span id="v.vii-p36.4"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p36.5"></span>\[p. 242, O.T.\]. The
expression</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p36.6"></span>captivity</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p36.7"></span>was the</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p36.8"></span>word of evil sound.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[378:2772](1140101.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="v.vii-p36.10"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p37"></span> <span id="v.vii-p37.1"></span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p37.2"></span>[Rom. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#027)<span
id="v.vii-p37.3"></span></span>

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[379:2773](1140101.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="v.vii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p40.1"></span>lit. *ferried* it over: </span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p40.2"></span>διεπόρθμευσεν</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p40.3"></span>, the word is specially
applied to messages between earth and heaven, by Pseudo-Dionys. *Areop.
de Celesti Hierarchia* , c. xv. 6. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p40.4"></span>The Angels are called Winds, to express their
rapid power of making things, how it reaches almost to all things
without time; and their motion in the manner of those who ferry over,
from above downwards, and again from the lower parts up the steep, both
drawing out the things of secondary order towards that loftier height,
and moving those of the first order to come forth in the way of sympathy
and care for their inferiors.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[379:2774](1140101.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="v.vii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p42.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p42.2"></span>πιστεύθη</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p42.3"></span>. Dunæus suggested</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p42.4"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p42.5"></span>πιστώθη</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p42.6"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p42.7"></span>it was accredited,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p42.8"></span>but there is no <span
class="c11"><span id="v.vii-p42.9"></span>ms.</span> authority for the
change.</span>

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[379:2775](1140101.htm#fr_2774) <span
id="v.vii-p42.10"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p43"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p43.1"></span>St. Chrys. seems to have had in view</span>
<span id="v.vii-p43.2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p43.3"></span>[2 Cor. 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span
id="v.vii-p43.4"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p43.5"></span>, where</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p43.6"></span>confirming</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p43.7"></span>is connected with the earnest of</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p43.8"></span>the Spirit.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p43.9"></span> \[The passage is,</span> “
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p43.10"></span>how he which
stablishes us with you in Christ, and hath anointed us, is God; who hath
also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p43.11"></span>—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[379:2776](1140101.htm#fr_2775) <span
id="v.vii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p47"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p47.1"></span>δυνάμεις</span>

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[380:2777](1140101.htm#fr_2776) <span
id="v.vii-p49.3"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p50"></span> <span id="v.vii-p50.1"></span> *<span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p50.2"></span>Hist. Sus</span>* <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.vii-p50.3"></span>. 42</span>

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[380:2778](1140101.htm#fr_2777) <span
id="v.vii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p54"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p54.1"></span>ὀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p54.2"></span>βολοὺς</span>

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[380:2779](1140101.htm#fr_2778) <span
id="v.vii-p57.4"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p58.1"></span>πολλάκις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p58.2"></span>, see Mr. Field’s note.</span>

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[381:2780](1140101.htm#fr_2779) <span
id="v.vii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="v.vii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.vii-p64.1"></span>His Homily on [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="v.vii-p64.2"></span> \[pp.
444 sqq. O.T.\] is referred to.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IV](1140102)
