[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140104)  [Next](1140106.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.xi"></span> <span id="v.xi-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_398">p. 398</span> <span id="v.xi-Page_398"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="v.xi-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="v.xi-p2"></span> <span id="v.xi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="v.xi-p2.2"></span>[Hebrews iv.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#011.md)<span
id="v.xi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="v.xi-p3"></span>“Let us labor therefore to enter into that
rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief. For the word
of God is quick \[i.e. living\] and powerful, and sharper than any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not
manifest in His sight, but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes
of Him with whom we have to do.”

<span id="v.xi-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xi-p4.1"></span>Faith</span> is indeed great and bringeth
salvation, and without it, it is not possible ever to be saved. It
suffices not however of itself to accomplish this, but there is need of
a right conversation also. So that on this account Paul also exhorts
those who had already been counted worthy of the mysteries; saying, “Let
us labor to enter into that rest.” “Let us labor” (he says), Faith not
sufficing, the life also ought to be added thereto, and our earnestness
to be great; for truly there is need of much earnestness too, in order
to go up into Heaven. For if they who suffered so great distress in the
Wilderness, were not counted worthy of \[the promised\] land, and were
not able to attain \[that\] land, because they murmured and because they
committed fornication: how shall we be counted worthy of Heaven, if we
live carelessly and indolently? We then have need of much earnestness.

<span id="v.xi-p5"></span>And observe, the punishment does not extend to
this only, the not entering in (for he said not, “Let us labor to enter
into the rest,” lest we fail of so great blessings), but he added what
most of all arouses men. What then is this? “Lest any man fall, after
the same example of unbelief.” What means this? It means that we should
have our mind, our hope, our expectation, yonder, lest we should fail.
For that \[otherwise\] we shall fail, the example shows, “lest \[&c.\]
after the same,” he says.

<span id="v.xi-p6"></span> \[2.\] In the next place, lest hearing \[the
words\] “after the same \[example\],” thou shouldest think that the
punishment is the same, hear what he adds; “For the Word of God is quick
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and pierceth even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow,
and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.” In these
words he shows that He, the Word of God, wrought the former things also,
and lives, and has not been quenched.  <span
id="fr_2828"></span>[2829](#fn_2828.md)

<span id="v.xi-p8"></span> Do not then when hearing the Word, think of
it lightly. For “He is sharper,” he says, “than a sword.” Observe His
condescension; and hence consider why the prophets also needed to speak
of saber  <span id="fr_2829"></span>[2830](#fn_2829.md) and bow and sword.
 <span id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830.md) “If ye turn not,” it is
said, “He will whet His sword, He hath bent His bow and made it ready.”
( [Ps. vii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#012.md) <span
id="v.xi-p10.3"></span> .) For if now, after so long a time, and after
their being perfected,  <span id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831.md) He
cannot smite down by the name of the <span class="c11"><span
id="v.xi-p11.7"></span>Word</span> alone, but needs these expressions in
order to show the superiority \[arising\] from the comparison \[of the
Gospel with the law\]: much more then \[of old\].

<span id="v.xi-p12"></span>“Piercing,” he says, “even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit.” What is this? He hinted at something more
fearful. Either that He divides the spirit from the soul, or that He
pierces even through them disembodied, not as a sword through bodies
only. Here he shows, that the soul also is punished, and that it
thoroughly searches out the most inward things, piercing wholly through
the whole man.

<span id="v.xi-p13"></span>“And is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart, neither is there any creature that is not manifest
in His sight.” In these words most of all he terrified them. For do not
(he says) be confident if ye still stand fast in the Faith, but without
full assurance. He judges the inner heart, for there He passes through,
both punishing and searching out.

<span id="v.xi-p14"></span>And why speak I of men? he says. For even if
thou speak of Angels, of Archangels, of the Cherubim, of the Seraphim,
even of any “creature” whatsoever: all things are laid open to that Eye,
all things are clear and manifest; there is nothing able to escape it;
“All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of Him, with whom we have
to do.”

<span id="v.xi-p15"></span> But what is “opened”  <span
id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832.md) ? \[It is\] a metaphor from the
skins which are drawn off from the victims. For as in that case, when a
man has killed them, and has drawn aside the skin from the flesh, he
lays open all the inward parts, and makes them manifest to our eyes; so
also do all things lie open before God. And observe, I pray thee, how he
constantly needs bodily im <span id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span
id="v.xi-Page_399"></span> ages; which arose from the weakness of the
hearers. For that they were weak, he made plain, when he said that they
were “dull,” and “had need of milk, not of strong meat.” “All things are
naked,” he says, “and opened unto the eyes of Him, with whom we have to
do.” ( [Heb. 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="v.xi-p16.2"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xi-p17"></span>\[3.\] But what is, “after the same example
of unbelief”? As if one should say, why did they of old not see the
land? They had received an earnest of the power of God; they ought to
have believed, but yielding too much to fear and imagining nothing great
concerning God, and being faint-hearted,—so they perished. And there is
also something more to be said, as, that after they had accomplished the
most part of the journey, when they were at the very doors, at the haven
itself, they were sunk into the sea. This I fear (he says) for you also.
This is \[the meaning of\] “after the same example of unbelief.”

<span id="v.xi-p18"></span>For that these also \[to whom he is writing\]
had suffered much, he afterwards testifies, saying, “Call to mind the
former days, in which after that ye had been enlightened, ye endured a
great fight of afflictions.” ( [Heb.
10.32](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#032)<span id="v.xi-p18.1"></span> ..md)
Let no man then be faint-hearted, nor fall down near the end through
weariness. For there are, there are those who at the beginning engage in
the fight with the full vigor of zeal; but a little after, not being
willing to add to all, they lose all. Your forefathers (he says) are
sufficient to instruct you not to fall into the same \[sins\], not to
suffer the same things which they suffered. This is, “After the same
example of unbelief.” Let us not faint, he means (which he says also
near the end \[of the Epistle\]. “Lift up the hands which hang down, and
the feeble knees”): “lest any man,” he says, “fall after the same
example.” ( [Heb. 12.12](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#012.md)<span
id="v.xi-p18.2"></span> .) For this is to fall indeed.

<span id="v.xi-p19"></span>Then, lest when thou hearest, “any man fall
after the same example,” thou shouldest conceive of the same death which
they also underwent, see what he says: “For the Word of God is quick and
powerful and sharper than any two-edged sword.” For the Word falls upon
the souls of these \[men\] more severely than any sword, causing
grievous wounds; and inflicts fatal blows. And of these things he need
not give the proof, nor establish them by argument, having a history so
fearful. For (he would say) what kind of war destroyed them? What sort
of sword? Did they not fall simply of themselves? For let us not be
careless because we have not suffered the same things. While “it is
called To-day,” it is in our power to recover ourselves.

<span id="v.xi-p20"></span> For lest on hearing the things that belong
to the soul we should grow negligent, he adds also what concerns the
body. For then it is as a king, when his officers are guilty of some
great fault, first strips them (say) of their command, and after
depriving them of their belt, and their rank, and their herald,  <span
id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833.md) then punishes them: so also in this
case the sword of the Spirit works.

<span id="v.xi-p22"></span>\[4.\] Next he discourses of the Son, “with
whom we have to do,” he says. What is “with whom we have to do”? To Him
(he would say) we have to render account for the things we have done?
Even so. How then \[must we act\] that we fall not, nor be
faint-hearted?

<span id="v.xi-p23"></span>These things indeed (he would say) are
sufficient to instruct us. But we have also “a great High Priest, that
is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God.” Because he added
\[it\], for this reason he went on, “For we have not an High Priest who
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities.” Therefore he
said above, “In that He hath suffered Himself being tempted, He is able
to succor them which are tempted.” See then how here also he does the
same. And what he says is to this effect: He went (he says) the road
which we also \[are going\] now, or rather even a more rugged one. For
He had experience of all human \[sufferings\].

<span id="v.xi-p24"></span>He had said above “There is no creature that
is not manifest in His sight,” intimating His Godhead; then, since he
had touched on the flesh, he again discourses more condescendingly,
saying ( [Heb. 4.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.xi-p24.1"></span> ), “Having then a great High Priest, that is
passed into the heavens”: and shows that His care is greater and that He
protects them as His own, and would not have them fall away. For Moses
indeed (he says) did not enter into the rest, while He \[Christ\] did
enter in. And it is wonderful how he has nowhere stated the same, lest
they might seem to find an excuse; he however implied it, but that he
might not appear to bring an accusation against the man,  <span
id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834.md) he did not say it openly. For if,
when none of these things had been said, they yet brought forward these
\[charges\], saying, This man hath spoken against Moses and against the
law (see [Acts 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#021.md),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#028)<span id="v.xi-p25.2"></span> .md);
much more, if he had said, It is not Palestine but Heaven,  <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835.md) would they have said stronger
things than these.

<span id="v.xi-p27"></span> \[5.\] But he attributes not all to the
Priest, but requires also what is \[to come\] from us, I mean our
profession. For “having,” he says, “a great High Priest, who is passed
into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession”
\[or “confession”  <span id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836.md) \]. What
sort <span id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span id="v.xi-Page_400"></span>
of profession does he mean? That there is a Resurrection, that there is
a retribution: that there are good things innumerable; that Christ is
<span class="c11"><span id="v.xi-p28.4"></span>God</span> , that the
Faith is right. These things let us profess, these things let us hold
fast. For that they are true, is manifest from the fact, that the High
Priest is within. We have not failed of \[our hopes\], let us confess;
although the realities are not present, yet let us confess: if already
they were present they were but a lie. So that this also is true, that
\[our good things\] are deferred. For our High Priest also is Great.

<span id="v.xi-p29"></span> [Heb.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md)<span id="v.xi-p29.1"></span> .
“For we have not an High Priest, who cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities.” He is not (he means) ignorant of what concerns us,
as many of the High Priests, who know not those in tribulations, nor
that there is tribulation at any time. For in the case of men it is
impossible that one should know the affliction of the afflicted who has
not had experience, and gone through the actual sensations. Our High
Priest endured all things. Therefore He endured first and then ascended,
that He might be able to sympathize with us.

<span id="v.xi-p30"></span> But was “in all points tempted like as we
are, yet without sin.” Observe how both above he has used the word “in
like manner,”  <span id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837.md) and here
“after the likeness.” ( [Heb.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span id="v.xi-p31.2"></span> ..md)
That is, He was persecuted, was spit upon, was accused, was mocked at,
was falsely informed against, was driven out, at last was crucified.

<span id="v.xi-p32"></span>“After our likeness, without sin.” In these
words another thing also is suggested, that it is possible even for one
in afflictions to go through them without sin. So that when he says also
“in the likeness of flesh” ( [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003) <span id="v.xi-p32.1"></span> .md), he
means not that He took on Him \[merely\] “the likeness of flesh,” but
“flesh.” Why then did he say “in the likeness”? Because he was speaking
about “sinful flesh”:  <span id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838.md) for it
was “like” our flesh, since in nature it was the same with us, but in
sin no longer the same.

<span id="v.xi-p34"></span>\[6.\] [Heb.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016.md)<span id="v.xi-p34.1"></span> .
“Let us come then boldly \[with confidence\] unto the throne of His
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need.”

<span id="v.xi-p35"></span>What “throne of grace” is he speaking of?
that royal throne concerning which it is said, “The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand.” ( [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001) <span id="v.xi-p35.1"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xi-p36"></span>What is “let us come boldly”? Because “we
have a sinless High Priest” contending with the world. For, saith He,
“Be of good cheer, I have overcome the world” ( [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033) <span id="v.xi-p36.1"></span> .md);
for, this is to suffer all things, and yet to be pure from sins.
Although we (he means) are under sin, yet He is sinless.

<span id="v.xi-p37"></span> How is it that we should “approach boldly”?
Because *now* it is a throne of Grace, not a throne of Judgment.
Therefore boldly, “that we may obtain mercy,” even such as we are
seeking. For the affair is \[one of\] munificence, a royal largess.

<span id="v.xi-p38"></span> “And may find grace to help in time of need
\[for help in due season\].” He well said, “for help in time of need.”
If thou approach now (he means) thou wilt receive both grace and mercy,
for thou approachest “in due season”; but if thou approach *then* ,
 <span id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839.md) no longer \[wilt thou
receive it\]. For *then* the approach is unseasonable, for it is not
“then a throne of Grace.” Till that time He sitteth granting pardon, but
when the end \[is come\], then He riseth up to judgment. For it is said,
“Arise, O God, judge the earth.” ( [Ps. lxxxii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008) <span id="v.xi-p39.20"></span> ..md)
(“Let us come boldly,” or he says again having no “evil conscience,”
that is, not being in doubt, for such an one cannot “come with
boldness.”) On this account it is said, “I have heard thee in an
accepted time and in a day of salvation have I succored thee.” ( [2 Cor.
vi. 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md) <span id="v.xi-p39.21"></span>
.) Since even *now* for those to find repentance who sin after baptism
is of grace.

<span id="v.xi-p40"></span> But lest when thou hearest of an High
Priest, thou shouldst think that He standeth, he forthwith leads to the
throne.  <span id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840.md) But a Priest doth
not sit, but stands. Seest thou that \[for Him\] to be made High Priest,
is not of nature,  <span id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841.md) but of
grace and condescension, and humiliation?

<span id="v.xi-p43"></span>This is it seasonable for us also now to say,
“Let us draw near” asking “boldly”: let us only bring Faith and He gives
all things. Now is the time of the gift; let no man despair of himself.
Then \[will be\] the time of despairing, when the bride-chamber is shut,
when the King is come in to see the guests, when they who shall be
accounted worthy thereof, shall have received as their portion the
Patriarch’s bosom: but now it is not as yet so. For still are the
spectators assembled, still is the contest, still is the prize in
suspense.

<span id="v.xi-p44"></span>\[7.\] Let us then be earnest. For even Paul
saith, “I so run not as uncertainly.” ( [1 Cor. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026) <span id="v.xi-p44.1"></span> ..md)
There is need of running, and of running vehemently. He that runneth \[a
race\] seeth none of those that meet him; whether he be passing through
meadows, or through dry places: he that runneth looketh not at the
specta <span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="v.xi-Page_401"></span> tors, but at the prize. Whether they be rich
or whether they be poor, whether one mock at him, or praise him, whether
one insult, or cast stones at him, or plunder his house, whether he see
children, or wife, or anything whatever. He is occupied in one thing
alone, in running, in gaining the prize. He that runneth, never standeth
still, since even if he slacken a little, he has lost the whole. He that
runneth, not only slackens nothing before the end, but then even
especially straineth his speed.

<span id="v.xi-p45"></span> This have I spoken for those who say; In our
younger days we used discipline,  <span
id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842.md) in our younger days we fasted,
*now* we are grown old. *Now* most of all it behooves you to make your
carefulness more intense. Do not count up to me the old things
especially done well: be now youthful and vigorous. For he that runneth
this bodily race, when gray hairs have overtaken him, probably is not
able to run as he did before: for the whole contest depends on the body;
but thou—wherefore dost thou lessen thy speed? For in this race there is
need of a soul, a soul thoroughly awakened: and the soul is rather
strengthened in old age; then it is in its full vigor, then is it in its
pride.

<span id="v.xi-p47"></span>For as the body, so long as it is oppressed
by fevers and by one sickness after another, even if it be strong, is
exhausted, but when it is freed from this attack, it recovers its proper
force, so also the soul in youth is feverish, and is chiefly possessed
by the love of glory, and luxurious living, and sensual lusts, and many
other imaginations; but old age, when it comes on, drives away all these
passions, some through satiety, some through philosophy. For old age
relaxes the powers of the body, and does not permit the soul to make use
of them even if it wish, but repressing them as enemies of various
kinds, it sets her in a place free from troubles and produces a great
calm, and brings in a greater fear.

<span id="v.xi-p48"></span>For if none else does, it is said, yet they
who are grown old know, that they are drawing to their end, and that
they certainly stand near to death. When therefore the desires of this
life are withdrawing, and the expectation of the judgment-seat is coming
on, softening the stubbornness of the soul, does it not become more
attentive, if one be willing?

<span id="v.xi-p49"></span>\[8.\] What then (you allege) when we see old
men more intractable than young ones? Thou tellest me of an excess of
wickedness. For in the case of madmen too, we see them going over
precipices, when no man pushes them. When therefore, an old man has the
diseases of the young, this is an excess of wickedness; besides not even
in youth would such an one have an excuse: since he is not able to say,
“Remember not the sins of my youth, and my ignorances.” ( [Ps. xxv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007) <span id="v.xi-p49.1"></span> ..md) For
he who in old age remains the same, shows that even in youth, he was
what he was not from ignorance, nor from inexperience, nor from the time
of life, but from slothfulness. For that man may say, “Remember not the
sins of my youth, and mine ignorances,” who does such things as become
an old man, who changes in old age. But if even in age he continue the
same unseemly courses, how can such an one be worthy of the name of an
old man, who has no reverence even for the time of life? For he who
says, “Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my ignorances,” utters
this, as one doing right in his old age. Do not then, by the deeds of
age, deprive thyself also of pardon for the sins of youth.

<span id="v.xi-p50"></span>For how can what is done be otherwise than
unreasonable, and beyond pardon? An old man sits in taverns. An old man
hurries to horse-races—an old man goes up into theaters, running with
the crowd like children. Truly it is a shame and a mockery, to be
adorned outside with gray hairs, but within to have the mind of a child.

<span id="v.xi-p51"></span>And indeed if a young man insult \[him\], he
immediately puts forward his gray hairs. Reverence them first thyself;
if however thou dost not reverence thy own even when old, how canst thou
demand of the young to reverence them? Thou dost not reverence the gray
hairs, but puttest them to shame. God hath honored thee with whiteness
of hairs: He hath given thee high dignity. Why dost thou betray the
honor? How shall the young man reverence thee, when thou art more wanton
than he? For the hoary head is then venerable, when it acts worthily of
the gray head; but when it plays youth, it will be more ridiculous than
the young. How then will you old men be able to give these exhortations
to the young man when you are intoxicated by your disorderliness?

<span id="v.xi-p52"></span> \[9.\] I say not these things as accusing
the old, but the young. For in my judgment they who act thus even if
they have come to their hundredth year, are young; just as the young if
they be but little children, yet if they are sober-minded, are better
than the old. And this doctrine is not my own, but Scripture  <span
id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843.md) also recognizes the same
distinction. “For,” it says, “honorable age is not that which standeth
in length of time, and an unspotted life is old age.” ( [Wis.
4:8](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#009)<span id="v.xi-p53.5"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xi-p54"></span>For we honor the gray hair, not because we
esteem the white color above the black, but because it is a proof of a
virtuous life; and when we see them we conjecture therefrom the inward
hoariness. But if men continue to do <span id="page_402">p. 402</span>
<span id="v.xi-Page_402"></span> what is inconsistent with the hoary
head, they will on that account become the more ridiculous. Since we
also honor the Emperor, and the purple and the diadem, because they are
symbols of his office. But if we should see him, with the purple,
spitted on, trodden under foot by the guards, seized by the throat, cast
into prison, torn to pieces, shall we then reverence the purple or the
diadem, and not rather weep over the pomp itself? Claim not then to be
honored for thy hoary head, when thou thyself wrongest it. For it ought
indeed itself to receive satisfaction from thee, because thou bringest
disgrace on a form so noble and so honorable.

<span id="v.xi-p55"></span>We say not these things against all \[old
persons\], nor is our discourse against old age simply (I am not so mad
as that), but against a youthful spirit bringing dishonor on old age.
Nor is it concerning those who are grown old that we sorrowfully say
these things, but concerning those who disgrace the hoary head.

<span id="v.xi-p56"></span>For the old man is a king, if you will, and
more royal than he who wears the purple, if he master his passions, and
keep them under subjection, in the rank of guards. But if he be dragged
about and thrust down from his throne, and become a slave of the love of
money, and vainglory, and personal adornment, and luxuriousness, and
drunkenness, anger, and sensual pleasures, and has his hair dressed out
with oil, and shows an age insulted by his way of life, of what
punishment would not such an one be worthy?

<span id="v.xi-p57"></span>\[10.\] But may ye not be such, O young men!
for not even for you is there the excuse for sinning. Why so? Because it
is possible to be old in youth: just as there are youths in old age, so
also the reverse. For as in the one case the white hair saves no one, so
in the other the black is no impediment. For if it is disgraceful for
the old man to do these things of which I have spoken, much more than
for the young man, yet still the young man is not freed from accusation.
For a young man can have an excuse only, in case he is called to the
management of affairs, when he is still inexperienced, when he needs
time and practice; but no longer when it is necessary to display
temperance and courage, nor yet when it is needful to keep his property.

<span id="v.xi-p58"></span>For it sometimes happens that the young man
is blamed more than the old. For the one needs much service, old age
making him feeble: but the other being able, if he will, to provide for
himself, what sort of excuse should he meet with, when he plunders more
than the old, when he remembers injuries, when he is contemptuous, when
he does not stand forward to protect others more than the old man, when
he utters many things unseasonably, when he is insolent, when he
reviles, when he is drunken?

<span id="v.xi-p59"></span> And if in the \[matter of\] chastity he
think that he cannot be impleaded,  <span
id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844.md) consider that here also he has many
helps, if he will. For although desire trouble him more violently than
it doth the old, yet nevertheless there are many things which he can do
more than an old man, and so charm that wild beast. What are these
things? Labors, readings, watchings through the night, fastings.

<span id="v.xi-p61"></span>\[11.\] What then are these things to us (one
says) who are not monastics? Sayest thou this to me? Say it to Paul,
when he says, “Watching with all perseverance and supplication” ( [Eph.
vi. 18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018.md) <span id="v.xi-p61.1"></span>
), when he says, “Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof.” ( [Rom. xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014.md) <span
id="v.xi-p61.2"></span> .) For surely he wrote not these things to
solitaries only, but to all that are in cities. For ought the man who
lives in the world to have any advantage over the solitary, save only
the living with a wife? In this point he has allowance, but in others
none, but it is his duty to do all things equally with the solitary.

<span id="v.xi-p62"></span>Moreover the Beatitudes \[pronounced\] by
Christ, were not addressed to solitaries only: since in that case the
whole world would have perished, and we should be accusing God of
cruelty. And if these beatitudes were spoken to solitaries only, and the
secular person cannot fulfill them, yet He permitted marriage, then He
has destroyed all men. For if it be not possible, with marriage, to
perform the duties of solitaries, all things have perished and are
destroyed, and the \[functions\] of virtue are shut up in a strait.

<span id="v.xi-p63"></span>And, how can marriage be honorable, which so
hinders us? What then? It is possible, yea very possible, even if we
have wives, to pursue after virtue, if we will. How? If having “wives,”
we “be as though we had none,” if we rejoice not over our “possessions,”
if we “use the world as not abusing it.” ( [1 Cor.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029.md),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span id="v.xi-p63.1"></span> ..md)

<span id="v.xi-p64"></span>And if any persons have been hindered by
marriage state, let them know that marriage is not the hindrance, but
their purpose which made an ill use of marriage. Since it is not wine
which makes drunkenness, but the evil purpose, and the using it beyond
due measure. Use marriage with moderation, and thou shalt be first in
the kingdom, and shalt enjoy all good things, which may we all attain by
the grace and love of our Lord Jesus Christ with whom to the Father
together with the Holy Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and for ever
and world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2828"></span>[398:2829](1140105.htm#fr_2828.md) <span
id="v.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p7.1"></span>\[St. Chrys. here understands the</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p7.2"></span>λόγος</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p7.3"></span>of the Second Person of the
Trinity. It is now generally interpreted as a personification of the
spoken or written word sent forth by Him.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2829"></span>[398:2830](1140105.htm#fr_2829.md) <span
id="v.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p9.1"></span>μάχαιραν</span>

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[398:2831](1140105.htm#fr_2830.md) <span
id="v.xi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p10.1"></span>ῥ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p10.2"></span>ομφαίαν</span>

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[398:2832](1140105.htm#fr_2831.md) <span
id="v.xi-p10.4"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p11.1"></span>μετὰ τελείωσιν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p11.2"></span>, i.e. by Baptism. \[The meaning of</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p11.3"></span>τελείωσις</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p11.4"></span>can hardly here be restricted
to the baptism of the individual, but rather refers to the perfection of
the means of salvation under the Gospel, which the Apostle so often
expresses in this Epistle by</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p11.5"></span>τελείωσις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p11.6"></span>.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[398:2833](1140105.htm#fr_2832.md) <span
id="v.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p16.1"></span>τετραχηλισμένα</span>

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[399:2834](1140105.htm#fr_2833.md) <span
id="v.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p21.1"></span>Having a</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p21.2"></span>κήρυξ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p21.3"></span>was a special mark of dignity, belonging to
certain offices. See Mr. Field’s notes.</span>

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[399:2835](1140105.htm#fr_2834.md) <span
id="v.xi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p25.1"></span>i.e. Moses.</span>

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[399:2836](1140105.htm#fr_2835.md) <span
id="v.xi-p25.3"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p26.1"></span>There are two points of superiority over Moses
implied in the words</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p26.2"></span>that is passed into the Heavens.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p26.3"></span> 1. That Christ entered into
the rest which He promised His people, while Moses did not. 2. That that
rest is Heaven, not the earthly Canaan.</span>

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[399:2837](1140105.htm#fr_2836.md) <span
id="v.xi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p28.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p28.2"></span>μολογία</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p28.3"></span>used of the Creed \[and more generally of the
profession of a Christian.—F.G.\].</span>

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[400:2838](1140105.htm#fr_2837.md) <span
id="v.xi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p31.1"></span>παραπλησίως</span>

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[400:2839](1140105.htm#fr_2838.md) <span
id="v.xi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p33.1"></span>The words of</span> <span id="v.xi-p33.2"></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p33.3"></span>[Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md)<span id="v.xi-p33.4"></span></span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p33.5"></span>, to which St. Chrys.
alludes, are</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p33.6"></span>God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p33.7"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[400:2840](1140105.htm#fr_2839.md) <span
id="v.xi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.1"></span>τότε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.2"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.3"></span>at the Day of Judgment,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.4"></span>opposed to</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.5"></span>now.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.6"></span> </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.7"></span>in this life</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.8"></span>; as</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.9"></span>ἐ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.10"></span>κεῖ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.11"></span>,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.12"></span>there,</span> ” “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.13"></span>yonder,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p39.14"></span>is the usual expression for
the future state, opposed to</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.15"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.16"></span>νταῦθα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.17"></span>,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.18"></span>here,</span> ” “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p39.19"></span>in this world.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[400:2841](1140105.htm#fr_2840.md) <span
id="v.xi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p41"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p41.1"></span>The throne of grace,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.xi-p41.2"></span>as he has said, is that of
Christ, on which He sits at the right hand of the Father.</span>

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[400:2842](1140105.htm#fr_2841.md) <span
id="v.xi-p41.3"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p42.1"></span>The Arians maintained that our Lord was Priest in
His Divine Nature antecedent to the Incarnation. See the Oxford
translation of St. Athanasius against Arianism, p. 292, note m. \[add p.
267. note l.; cf. also S. Cyril, Book 3 against Nestorius\].</span>

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[401:2843](1140105.htm#fr_2842.md) <span
id="v.xi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p46"></span> ἠ <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p46.1"></span>σκήσαμεν</span>

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[401:2844](1140105.htm#fr_2843.md) <span
id="v.xi-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p53.1"></span>\[</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p53.2"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p53.3"></span>γραφή</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p53.4"></span>, the same form of quotation as in the case of
the canonical Scriptures.—F.G.\]</span>

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[402:2845](1140105.htm#fr_2844.md) <span
id="v.xi-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.xi-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.xi-p60.1"></span>that is, if he have fallen into sin in this
respect.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VIII](1140106.md)
