[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140061)  [Next](1140063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lix"></span> <span id="iv.lix-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_202">p. 202</span> <span id="iv.lix-Page_202"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lix-p1.1"></span>Homily LVII.</span>

<span id="iv.lix-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lix-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lix-p2.2"></span>[John
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007)<span
id="iv.lix-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p3"></span>“When Jesus had thus spoken, He spat on the
ground, and made clay of the spittle, and He anointed the eyes of the
blind man with the clay, and said, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam.”

<span id="iv.lix-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lix-p4.1"></span>Those</span> who intend to gain any advantage
from what they read, must not pass by even any small portion of the
words; and on this account we are bidden to “search” the Scriptures,
because most of the words, although at first sight  <span
id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520) easy, appear to have in their depth
much hidden meaning. For observe of what sort is the present case.
“Having said these words,” It saith,“ He spat on the ground.” What
words? “That the glory of God should be made manifest,” and that, “I
must work the works of Him that sent Me.” For not without a cause hath
the Evangelist mentioned to us His words, and added that, “He spat,” but
to show that He confirmed His words by deeds. And why used He not water
instead of spittle for the clay? He was about to send the man to Siloam:
in order therefore that nothing might be ascribed to the fountain, but
that thou mightest learn that the power proceeding from His mouth, the
same both formed and opened the man’s eyes, He “spat on the ground”;
this at least the Evangelist signified, when he said, “And made clay of
the spittle.” Then, that the successful issue might not seem to be of
the earth, He bade him wash. But wherefore did He not this at once,
instead of sending him to Siloam? That thou mayest learn the faith of
the blind man, and that the obstinacy of the Jews might be silenced: for
it was probable that they would all see him as he departed, having the
clay spread upon his eyes, since by the strangeness of the thing he
would attract to himself all, both those who did and those who did not
know him, and they would observe him exactly. And because it is not easy
to recognize a blind man who hath recovered sight, He first maketh by
the length of way many to be witnesses, and by the strangeness of the
spectacle exact observers, that being more attentive they may no longer
be able to say, “It is he: it is not he.” Moreover, by sending him to
Siloam, He desireth to prove that He is not estranged from the Law and
the Old (Covenant), nor could it afterwards be feared that Siloam would
receive the glory, since many who had often washed their eyes there
gained no such benefit; for there also it was the power of Christ that
wrought all. On which account the Evangelist addeth for us the
interpretation of the name; for having said, “in Siloam,” he addeth,

<span id="iv.lix-p6"></span> “Which is,  <span
id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521) Sent.”

<span id="iv.lix-p8"></span>That thou mayest learn that there also it
was Christ who healed him. As Paul saith, “They drank of that spiritual
Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.” ( [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004) <span id="iv.lix-p8.1"></span> .) As
then Christ was the spiritual Rock, so also was He the spiritual Siloam.
To me also the sudden  <span id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522) coming
in of the water seems to hint an ineffable mystery. What is that? The
unlooked for (nature) of His appearance, beyond all expectation.

<span id="iv.lix-p10"></span>But observe the mind of the blind man,
obedient in everything. He said not, “If it is really the clay or the
spittle which gives me eyes, what need of Siloam? Or if there be need of
Siloam, what need of the clay? Why did he anoint me? Why bid me wash?”
But he entertained no such thoughts, he held himself prepared for one
thing only, to obey in all things Him who gave the command, and nothing
that was done offended him. If any one ask, “How then did he recover his
sight, when he had removed the clay?” he will hear no other answer from
us than that we know not the manner. And what wonder if we know it not,
since not even the Evangelist knew, nor the very man that was healed?
What had been done he knew, but the manner of doing it he could not
comprehend. So when he was asked he said, that “He put clay upon mine
eyes, and I washed, and do see”; but how this took place he cannot tell
them, though they ask ten thousand times.

<span id="iv.lix-p11"></span> [John
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#009)<span id="iv.lix-p11.1"></span> .
“The neighbors therefore, and they which  <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) had seen him, that he was a beggar,
 <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524) said, Is not this he that
sat and begged? Some said, This is he.”

<span id="iv.lix-p14"></span> The strangeness of what had been brought
to pass led them even to unbelief, though so much had been contrived
 <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) that they might not
disbelieve. They said, “Is not this he that sat and begged?” O the
lovingkindness of God! Whither did He descend, when with great kindness
He healed even beggars, and so silenced the Jews, because He deemed not
the illustrious, nor the distinguished, nor the rulers, but men <span
id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span id="iv.lix-Page_203"></span> of no
mark to be fit objects of the same Providence. For He came for the
salvation of all.

<span id="iv.lix-p16"></span>And what happened in the case of the
paralytic, happened also with this man, for neither did the one or the
other know who it was that healed him. And this was caused by the
retirement of Christ, for Jesus when He healed always retired, that all
suspicion might be removed from the miracles. Since how could they who
knew not who He was flatter Him, or join in contriving what had been
done? Neither was this man one of those who went about, but of those who
sat at the doors of the Temple. Now when all were doubting concerning
him, what saith he?

<span id="iv.lix-p17"></span>“I am he.”

<span id="iv.lix-p18"></span>He was not ashamed of his former blindness,
nor did he fear the wrath of the people, nor did he decline showing
himself that he might proclaim his Benefactor.

<span id="iv.lix-p19"></span> [John
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#011)<span id="iv.lix-p19.1"></span> .
“They said unto him, How were thine eyes opened? He answered and said, A
man that is called Jesus.”

<span id="iv.lix-p20"></span>What sayest thou? Doth “a man” work such
deeds? As yet he knew nothing great concerning Him.

<span id="iv.lix-p21"></span>“A man that is called Jesus made clay, and
anointed mine eyes.”

<span id="iv.lix-p22"></span>\[2.\] Observe how truthful he is. He saith
not whence He made it, for he speaks not of what he doth not know; he
saw not that He spat on the ground, but that He spread it on he knew
from sense and touch.

<span id="iv.lix-p23"></span>“And said unto me, Go, wash in the pool of
Siloam.”

<span id="iv.lix-p24"></span>This too his hearing witnessed to him. But
how did he recognize His voice? From His conversation with the
disciples. And saying all this, and having received the witness by the
works, the manner (of the cure) he cannot tell.  Now if faith is needed
in matters which are felt and handled, much more in the case of things
invisible.

<span id="iv.lix-p25"></span> [John
9.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#012)<span id="iv.lix-p25.1"></span> .
“They said unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.”

<span id="iv.lix-p26"></span> They said, “Where is he?” having already
murderous intentions against Him. But observe the modesty  <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526) of Christ, how He continued not
with those who were healed; because He neither desired to reap glory,
nor to draw a multitude, nor to make a show of Himself. Observe too how
truthfully the blind man maketh all his answers. The Jews desired to
find Christ to bring Him to the priests, but when they did not find Him,
they brought the blind man to the Pharisees, as to those who would
question him more severely. For which reason the Evangelist remarks,
that it was “the Sabbath” ( [John
9.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#014)<span id="iv.lix-p27.2"></span> ),
in order to point out their wicked thoughts, and the cause for which
they sought Him, as though forsooth they had found a handle, and could
disparage the miracle by means of what appeared to be a transgression of
the Law. And this is clear from their saying immediately on seeing him
nothing but, “How opened he thine eyes?”  <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527) Observe also the manner of their
speech; they say not, “How didst thou receive thy sight?” but, “How
opened he thine eyes?” thus affording him an excuse for slandering
Jesus, because of His having worked. But he speaks to them shortly, as
to men who had already heard; for without mentioning His name, or that
“He said unto me, Go, wash,” he at once saith,

<span id="iv.lix-p29"></span> [John
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#015)<span id="iv.lix-p29.1"></span> .
“He put clay upon my eyes, and I washed, and do see.”

<span id="iv.lix-p30"></span>Because the slander was now become great,
and the Jews had said, “Behold what work Jesus doth on the Sabbath day,
he anointeth with clay!” But observe, I pray you, how the blind man is
not disturbed. When being questioned he spake in the presence of those
others without danger, it was no such great thing to tell the truth, but
the wonder is, that now when he is placed in a situation of greater
fear, he neither denies nor contradicts what he had said before. What
then did the Pharisees, or rather what did the others also? They had
brought him (to the Pharisees), as being about to deny; but, on the
contrary, that befell them which they desired not, and they learned more
exactly. And this they everywhere have to endure, in the case of
miracles; but this point we will more clearly demonstrate in what
follows. What said the Pharisees?

<span id="iv.lix-p31"></span> [John
9.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#016)<span id="iv.lix-p31.1"></span> .
“Some said,” (not all, but the more forward,) “This man is not of God,
because he keepeth not the Sabbath day; others said, How can a man that
is a sinner do such miracles?”

<span id="iv.lix-p32"></span> Seest thou that they were led up  <span
id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) by the miracles? For hear what they
say now, who before this had sent to bring Him. And if all did not so,
(for being rulers through vainglory they fell into unbelief,) yet still
the greater number even of the rulers believed on Him, but confessed Him
not. Now the multitude was easily overlooked, as being of no great
account in their synagogue, but the rulers being more conspicuous had
the greater difficulty in speaking boldly, or some the love of rule
restrained, others cowardice, and the fear of the many. Wherefore also
He said, “How can ye believe who receive honor from men?”  <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) ( [John
5.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044)<span id="iv.lix-p34.3"></span> .)
And these who were seeking to kill Him unjustly said that they <span
id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span id="iv.lix-Page_204"></span> were of
God, but that He who healed the blind could not be of God, because He
kept not the Sabbath; to which the others objected, that a sinner could
not do such miracles. Those first maliciously keeping silence about what
had taken place, brought forward the seeming transgression; for they
said not, “He healeth on the Sabbath day,” but, “He keepeth not the
Sabbath.” These, on the other hand, replied weakly, for when they ought
to have shown that the Sabbath was not broken, they rely only upon the
miracles; and with reason, for they still thought that He was a man. If
this had not been the case, they might besides have urged in His
defense, that He was Lord of the Sabbath which Himself had made, but as
yet they had not this opinion. Anyhow, none of them dared to say what he
wished openly, or in the way of an assertion, but only in the way of
doubt, some from not having boldness of speech, others through love of
rule.

<span id="iv.lix-p35"></span>“There was therefore a division among
them.” This division first began among the people, then later among the
rulers also, and some said, “He is a good man”; others, “Nay, but he
deceiveth the people.” ( [John
7.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#012)<span id="iv.lix-p35.1"></span> .)
Seest thou that the rulers were more void of understanding than the
many, since they were divided later than they? and after they were
divided, they did not exhibit any noble feeling, when they saw the
Pharisees pressing upon them. Since had they been entirely separated
from them, they would soon have known the truth. For it is possible to
do well in separating. Wherefore also Himself hath said, “I am come not
to bring peace upon the earth but a sword.” ( [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034) <span id="iv.lix-p35.2"></span> .)
For there is an evil concord, and there is a good disagreement. Thus
they who built the tower ( [Gen. xi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004)
<span id="iv.lix-p35.3"></span> ), agreed together to their own hurt;
and these same again were separated, though unwillingly, yet for their
good. Thus also Corah and his company agreed together for evil,
therefore they were separated for good; and Judas agreed with the Jews
for evil. So division may be good, and agreement may be evil. Wherefore
It saith, “If thine eye offend thee, smite it out,  <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) if thy foot, cut it off.” ( [Matt.
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029), [Matt.
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#008)<span id="iv.lix-p36.3"></span> .)
Now if we must separate ourselves from an ill-joined limb, must we not
much more from friends united to us for evil  <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) ? So that agreement is not in all
cases a good, just as division is not in all cases an evil.

<span id="iv.lix-p38"></span> \[3.\] These things I say, that we may
shun wicked men, and follow the good; for if in the case of our limbs we
cut off that which is rotten and incurable, fearing lest the rest of the
body should catch the same disease, and if we do this not as having no
care for that part, but rather as desiring to preserve the remainder,
how much more must we do this in the case of those who consent with us
for evil? If we can set them right without receiving injury ourselves,
we ought to use every means to do so; but if they remain incorrigible
and may injure us, it is necessary to cut them off and cast them away.
For so they will often be  <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532)
gainers rather (than losers). Wherefore also Paul exhorted, saying, “And
ye shall put away from among yourselves that wicked person”; and, “that
he that hath done this deed may be put away from among you.” ( [1 Cor.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#002)<span id="iv.lix-p39.3"></span> .) A
dreadful thing, dreadful indeed, is the society of wicked men; not so
quickly doth the pestilence seize or the itch infect those that come in
contact with such as are under the disease, as doth the wickedness of
evil men. For “evil communications corrupt good manners.” ( [1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033) <span id="iv.lix-p39.4"></span> .)
And again the Prophet saith, “Come out from among them, and be ye
separate.” ( [Isa. lii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011) <span
id="iv.lix-p39.5"></span> .) Let no one then have a wicked man for his
friend. For if when we have bad sons we publicly disclaim them, without
regarding nature or its laws, or the constraint which it lays upon us,
much more ought we to fly from our companions and acquaintances when
they are wicked. Because even if we receive no injury from them, we
shall anyhow not be able to escape ill report, for strangers search not
into our lives, but judge us from our companions. This advice I address
to young men and maidens. “Providing,”  <span
id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) It saith, “things honest,” not only
in the sight of the Lord, but also “in the sight of all men.” ( [Rom.
xii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017) <span
id="iv.lix-p40.3"></span> .) Let us then use every means that our
neighbor be not offended. For a life, though it be very upright, if it
offend others hath lost all. But how is it possible for the life that is
upright to offend? When the society of those that are not upright
invests it with an evil reputation; for when, trusting in ourselves, we
consort with bad men, even though we be not harmed, we offend others.
These things I say to men and women and maidens, leaving it to their
conscience to see exactly how many evils are produced from this source.
Neither I, perhaps, nor any of the more perfect, suspect any ill; but
the simpler brother is harmed by occasion of thy perfection; and thou
oughtest to be careful also for his infirmity. And even if he receive no
injury, yet the Greek is harmed. Now Paul biddeth us be “without
offense, both to Jews and Greeks, and to the Church of God.” ( [1 Cor.
x. 32](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#032) <span id="iv.lix-p40.4"></span>
.) (I think no evil of the virgin, for I love virginity, and “love
thinketh no evil” ( [1 Cor. xiii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)
<span id="iv.lix-p40.5"></span> ); I am a great admirer of that state of
life,  <span id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) and I cannot have so
much as an unseemly thought about it.) How shall we per <span
id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span id="iv.lix-Page_205"></span> suade
those that are without? For we must take forethought for them also. Let
us then so order what relates to ourselves, that none of the unbelievers
may be able even to find a just handle of accusation against us. For as
they who show forth a right life glorify God, so they who do the
contrary cause Him to be blasphemed. May no such persons be among  <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) us: but may our works so shine,
that our Father which is in Heaven may be glorified, and that we may
enjoy the honor which is from Him. To which may we all attain, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom and with
whom, to the Father and the Holy Ghost, be glory forever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[202:1521](1140062.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="iv.lix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p5.1"></span>αὐτόθεν</span>

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[202:1522](1140062.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="iv.lix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p7"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p7.1"></span>is being interpreted,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lix-p7.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[202:1523](1140062.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="iv.lix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p9.1"></span>τὸ ἀθρόον τῆς παρουσίας</span>

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[202:1524](1140062.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="iv.lix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p12"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p12.1"></span>which before,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lix-p12.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[202:1525](1140062.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="iv.lix-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p13"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p13.1"></span>was blind,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p13.2"></span>N.T. Vulgate,</span> *mendicus erat*

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[202:1526](1140062.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="iv.lix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p15.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p15.2"></span>dispensed.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[203:1527](1140062.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="iv.lix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p27.1"></span>τὸ ἀκόμπαστον</span>

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[203:1528](1140062.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="iv.lix-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p28.1"></span>These words occur later,</span> [John
9.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#026)<span
id="iv.lix-p28.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p28.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p28.4"></span>. The account of the *first* examination of the
blind man is different;</span> [John
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.lix-p28.5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p28.6"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p28.7"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p28.8"></span>Then again the Pharisees asked him how he had
received his sight.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[203:1529](1140062.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="iv.lix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p33.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p33.2"></span>taught.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[203:1530](1140062.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="iv.lix-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p34"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p34.1"></span>one of another,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lix-p34.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[204:1531](1140062.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iv.lix-p35.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p36"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p36.1"></span>pluck it out,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lix-p36.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[204:1532](1140062.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iv.lix-p36.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p37.1"></span>κακῶς ἡνωμένων</span>

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[204:1533](1140062.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iv.lix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p39.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p39.2"></span>often are.</span> ”

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[204:1534](1140062.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="iv.lix-p39.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p40"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p40.1"></span>provide,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p40.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[204:1535](1140062.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="iv.lix-p40.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p41"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p41.1"></span>πολιτείας</span>

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[205:1536](1140062.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="iv.lix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lix-p42"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p42.1"></span>Morel.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lix-p42.2"></span>from among.</span> ”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 9.17,18](1140063)
