[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140083)  [Next](1140085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.lxxxi"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxi-p0.1"></span><span
id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span id="iv.lxxxi-Page_289"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p1.1"></span>Homily LXXIX.</span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p2"></span> <span id="iv.lxxxi-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p2.2"></span>[John
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#017)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p3"></span> *“A little while, and ye shall not see*
 <span id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259) *Me: and again, a little
while, and ye shall see Me, because I go to the Father. Then said some
of His disciples among themselves, What is this that He saith?” \[And
what follows.  <span id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260) \]*

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p6"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p6.1"></span>Nothing</span> is wont so to cast down the
soul that is anguished and possessed by deep despondency, as when words
which cause pain are continually dwelt upon. Why then did Christ, after
saying, “I go,” and, “Hereafter I will not speak with you,” continually
dwell on the same subject, saying, “A little while, and ye shall not see
Me, because I go to Him that sent Me”?  <span
id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) When He had recovered them by His
words concerning the Spirit, He again casteth down their courage.
Wherefore doth He this? He testeth their feelings, and rendereth them
more proved, and well accustometh them by hearing sad things, manfully
to bear separation from Him; for they who had practiced this when spoken
of in words, were likely in actions also, easily to bear it afterwards.
And if one enquire closely, this very thing is a consolation,  <span
id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262) the saying that, “I go to the
Father.” For it is the expression of One, who declares that He shall not
perish, but that His end is a kind of translation. He addeth too another
consolation; for He saith not merely, “A little while, and ye shall not
see Me,” but also, “A little while, and ye shall see Me”; showing that
He will both come to them again, and that their separation would be but
for a little while, and His presence with them continual. This, however,
they did not understand. Whence one may with reason wonder how, after
having often heard these things, they doubt, as though they had heard
nothing. How then is it that they did not understand? It was either
through grief, as I suppose, for that drove what was said from their
understanding; or through the obscurity of the words. Because He seemed
to them to set forth two contraries, which were not contrary. “If,”
saith one of them, “we shall see Thee, whither goest Thou? And if Thou
goest, how shall we see Thee?” Therefore they say, “We cannot tell what
He saith.” That He was about to depart, they knew; but they knew not
that He would shortly come to them. On which account He rebuketh them,
because they did not understand His saying. For, desiring to infix in
 <span id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) them the doctrine concerning
His death, what saith He?

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p10"></span> [John
16.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#020)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p10.1"></span>
.  <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264) “Verily, verily, I say
unto you, That ye shall weep and lament”—which belonged to the Death and
the Cross—“but the world shall rejoice.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p12"></span>Because by reason of their not desiring
His death, they quickly ran into the belief that He would not die, and
then when they heard that He would die, cast about, not knowing what
that “little” meant, He saith, “Ye shall mourn and lament.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p13"></span> “But your sorrow shall be turned into
joy.”  <span id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265) Then having shown that
after grief comes joy, and that grief gendereth joy, and that grief is
short, but the pleasure endless, He passeth to a common  <span
id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266) example; and what saith He?

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p16"></span> [John
16.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p16.1"></span>
. “A woman when she is in travail hath sorrow.”  <span
id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p18"></span> And He hath used a comparison which the
Prophets also use continually, likening despondencies to the exceeding
pains of childbirth. But what He saith is of this kind: “Travail pains
shall lay hold on you, but the pang of childbirth is the cause of joy”;
both confirming His words relative to the Resurrection, and showing that
the departing hence is like passing from the womb into the light of day.
As though He had said, “Marvel not that I bring you to your advantage
through such sorrow, since even a mother to become a mother, passeth in
like manner through pain.” Here also He implieth something mystical,
that He hath loosened the travail pangs of death, and caused a new man
to be born of them.  <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268) And He
said not, that the pain shall pass away only, but, “she doth not even
remember it,” so great is the joy which succeedeth; so also shall it be
with the Saints. And yet the woman doth not rejoice because “a man hath
come into the world,” but because a son hath been born to her; since,
had this been the case, nothing would have hindered the barren from
rejoicing over another who beareth.  <span id="page_290">p. 290</span>
<span id="iv.lxxxi-Page_290"></span> Why then spake He thus? Because He
introduced this example for this purpose only, to show that sorrow is
for a season, but joy lasting: and to show that (death) is a translation
unto life; and to show the great profit of their pangs. He said not, “a
child hath been born,” but, “A man.” For to my mind He here alludeth to
His own Resurrection, and that He should be born not unto that death
which bare the birth-pang, but unto the Kingdom. Therefore He said not,
“a child hath been born unto her,” but, “A man hath been born into the
world.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p20"></span> [John
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p20.1"></span> .
 <span id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269) “And ye now therefore have
sorrow—\[but I will see you again, and your sorrow shall be turned into
joy\].”  <span id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) Then, to show that
He shall die no more, He saith, “And no man taketh it from you. And in
that day ye shall ask Me nothing.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p23"></span>Again He proveth nothing else by these
words, but that He is from God. “For then ye shall for the time to come
know all things.” But what is, “Ye shall not ask Me”? “Ye shall need no
intercessor, but it is sufficient that ye call on My Name, and so gain
all things.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p24"></span> “Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Whatsoever ye shall ask My Father in My Name.”  <span
id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p26"></span> He showeth the power of His Name, if at
least being neither seen nor called upon, but only named, He even maketh
us approved  <span id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272) by the Father.
But where hath this taken place? Where they say, “Lord, behold their
threatenings, and grant unto Thy servants that with boldness they may
speak Thy word” ( [Acts 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#029),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p27.3"></span>
), “and work miracles in Thy Name.” “And the place was shaken where they
were.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p28"></span> [John
16.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#024)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p28.1"></span>
. “Hitherto ye have asked nothing.”  <span
id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p30"></span>\[2.\] Hence He showeth it to be good
that He should depart, if hitherto they had asked nothing, and if then
they should receive all things whatsoever they should ask. “For do not
suppose, because I shall no longer be with you, that ye are deserted; My
Name shall give you greater boldness.” Since then the words which He had
used had been veiled, He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p31"></span> [John
16.25](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p31.1"></span>
. “These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs, but the time cometh
when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p32"></span>“There shall be a time when ye shall know
all things clearly.” He speaketh of the time of the Resurrection.
“Then,”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p33"></span>“I shall tell you plainly of the Father.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p34"></span>(For He was with them, and talked with
them forty days, being assembled with them, and speaking of the things
concerning the kingdom of God— [Acts
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p34.1"></span>
,)—“because now being in fear, ye give no heed to My words; but then
when ye see Me risen again, and converse with Me, ye will be able to
learn all things plainly, for the Father Himself will love you, when
your faith in Me hath been made firm.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p35"></span> [John
16.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#026)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p35.1"></span>
. “And I will not ask the Father.”  <span
id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p37"></span>“Your love for Me sufficeth to be your
advocate.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p38"></span> [John
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p38.1"></span> .
“Because  <span id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275) ye have loved Me,
and have believed that I came out from God. I came forth from the
Father, and am come into the world; again I leave the world, and go to
the Father.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p40"></span>For since His discourse concerning the
Resurrection, and together with this, the hearing that “I came out from
God, and thither I go,” gave them no common comfort, He continually
handleth these things. He gave a pledge, in the first place, that they
were right in believing on Him; in the second, that they should be in
safety. When therefore He said, “A little while, and ye shall not see
Me; and again a little while, and ye shall see Me” ( [John
16.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#017)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p40.1"></span>
), they with reason did not understand Him. But now it is no longer so.
What then is, “Ye shall not ask Me”? “Ye shall not say, ‘Show us the
Father,’ and, ‘Whither goest Thou?’ for ye shall know all knowledge, and
the Father shall be disposed towards you even as I am.” It was this
especially which made them breathe again, the learning that they should
be the Father’s friends wherefore they say,

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p41"></span> [John
16.30](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#030)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p41.1"></span>
.  <span id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) “Now we know that Thou
knowest all things.”

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p43"></span> Seest thou that He made answer to what
was secretly harboring  <span id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277) in
their minds?

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p45"></span> “And needest not that any man should ask
Thee.”  <span id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p47"></span>That is, “Before hearing, Thou knowest
the things which made us stumble, and Thou hast given us rest, since
Thou hast said, ‘The Father loveth you, because ye have loved Me.’”
After so many and so great matters, they say, “Now we know.” Seest thou
in what an imperfect state they were? Then, when, as though conferring a
favor upon Him, they say, “Now we know,” He replieth, “Ye still require
many other things to come to perfection; nothing is as yet achieved by
you. Ye shall presently betray Me to My enemies, and such fear shall
seize you, that ye shall not even be able to retire one with another,
yet from this I shall suffer nothing dreadful.” Seest thou again how con
<span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span id="iv.lxxxi-Page_291"></span>
descending His speech is? And indeed He makes this a charge against
them, that they continually needed condescension. For when they say,
“Lo, now Thou speakest plainly, and speakest no parable” ( [John
16.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#029)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p47.1"></span>
), “and therefore we believe Thee,” He showeth them that now, when they
believe, they do not yet believe, neither doth He accept their words.
This He saith, referring them to another season. But the,

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p48"></span> [John
16.32](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#032)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p48.1"></span>
.  <span id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279) “The Father is with Me,”
He hath again put on their account; for this they  <span
id="fr_2280"></span>[2281](#fn_2280) everywhere wished to learn. Then,
to show that He did not give them perfect knowledge by saying this, but
in order that their reason might not rebel, (for it was probable that
they might form some human ideas, and think that they should not enjoy
any assistance from Him,) He saith,

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p51"></span> [John
16.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p51.1"></span>
. “These things I have spoken unto you, that in Me ye might have peace.”
 <span id="fr_2281"></span>[2282](#fn_2281)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p53"></span> That is, “that ye should not cast Me
from your thoughts, but receive Me.” Let no one, then, drag these words
into a doctrine; they are spoken for our comfort and love. “For not even
when we suffer such things as I have mentioned shall your troubles stop
there,  <span id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282) but as long as ye are
in the world ye shall have sorrow, not only now when I am betrayed, but
also afterwards. But rouse your minds, for ye shall suffer nothing
terrible. When the master hath gotten the better of his enemies, the
disciples must not despond.” “And how,” tell me, “hast Thou ‘conquered
the world’?” I have told you already, that I have cast down its ruler,
but ye shall know hereafter, when all things yield and give place to
you.

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p55"></span> \[3.\] But it is permitted to us also to
conquer, looking to the Author of our faith, and walking on that road
which He cut for us. So neither shall death get the mastery of us. “What
then, shall we not die?” saith some one. Why, from this very thing
 <span id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283) it is clear that he shall
not gain the mastery over us. The champion truly will then be glorious,
not when he hath not closed with his opponent, but when having closed he
is not holden by him. We therefore are not mortal, because of our
struggle with death, but immortal, because of our victory; then should
we have been mortal, had we remained with him always. As then I should
not call the longest-lived animals immortal, although they long remain
free from death, so neither him who shall rise after death mortal,
because he is dissolved by death. For, tell me, if a man blush a little,
should we say that he was continually ruddy? Not so, for the action is
not a habit. If one become pale, should we call him jaundiced? No, for
the affection is but temporary. And so you would not call him mortal,
who hath been for but a short time in the hands of death. Since in this
way we may speak of those who sleep, for they are dead, so to say, and
without action. But doth death corrupt our bodies? What of that? It is
not that they may remain in corruption, but that they be made better.
Let us then conquer the world, let us run to immortality, let us follow
our King, let us too set up a trophy,  <span
id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284) let us despise the world’s
pleasures. We need no toil to do so; let us transfer our souls to  <span
id="fr_2285"></span>[2286](#fn_2285) heaven, and all the world is
conquered. If thou desirest it not, it is conquered; if thou deride it,
it is worsted. Strangers are we and sojourners, let us then not grieve
at any of its painful things. For if, being sprung from a renowned
country, and from illustrious ancestors, thou hadst gone into some
distant land, being known to no one, having with thee neither servants
nor wealth, and then some one had insulted thee, thou wouldest not
grieve as though thou hadst suffered these things at home. For the
knowing clearly that thou wast in a strange and foreign land, would
persuade thee to bear all easily, and to despise hunger, and thirst, and
any suffering whatever. Consider this also now, that thou art a stranger
and a sojourner, and let nothing disturb thee in this foreign land; for
thou hast a City whose Artificer and Creator is God, and the  <span
id="fr_2286"></span>[2287](#fn_2286) sojourning itself is but for a
short and little time. Let whoever will strike, insult, revile; we are
in a strange land, and live but meanly; the dreadful thing would be, to
suffer so in our own country, before our fellow-citizens, then is the
greatest unseemliness and loss. For if a man be where he had none that
knows him, he endures all easily, because insult becomes more grievous
from the intention of those who offer it. For instance, if a man insult
the governor, knowing that he is governor, then the insult is bitter;
but if he insult, supposing him to be a private man, he cannot even
touch him who undergoeth the insult. So let us reason also. For neither
do our revilers know what we are, as, that we are citizens of heaven,
registered for the country which is above, fellow-choristers of the
Cherubim. Let us not then grieve nor deem their insult to be insult; had
they known, they would not have insulted us. Do they deem us poor and
mean?  Neither let us count this an insult. For tell me, if a traveler
having got before his servants, were sitting a little space in the inn
waiting for them, and then the innkeeper, or some travelers, should
behave rudely to him, and revile him, would he not laugh at the other’s
<span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span id="iv.lxxxi-Page_292"></span>
ignorance? would not their mistake rather give him pleasure? would he
not feel a satisfaction as though not he but some one else were
insulted? Let us too behave thus. We too sit in an inn, waiting for our
friends who travel the same road; when we are all collected, then they
shall know whom they insult. These men then shall hang  <span
id="fr_2287"></span>[2288](#fn_2287) their heads; then they shall say,
“This is he whom we” fools “had in derision.” ( [Wisd. v.
3](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#003) <span id="iv.lxxxi-p60.3"></span> .)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p61"></span>\[4.\] With these two things then let us
comfort ourselves, that we are not insulted, for they know not who we
are, and that, if we wish to obtain satisfaction, they shall hereafter
give us a most bitter one. But God forbid that any should have a soul so
cruel and inhuman. “What then if we be insulted by our kinsmen? For this
is the burdensome thing.” Nay, this is the light thing. “Why, pray?”
Because we do not bear those whom we love when they insult us, in the
same way as we bear those whom we do not know. For instance, in
consoling those who have been injured, we often say, “It is a brother
who hath injured you, bear it nobly; it is a father; it is an uncle.”
But if the name of “father” and “brother” puts you to shame, much more
if I name to you a relationship more intimate than these; for we are not
only brethren one to another, but also members, and one body. Now if the
name of brother shame you, much more that of member. Hast thou not heard
that Gentile proverb, which saith, that “it behooveth to keep friends
with their defects”? Hast thou not heard Paul say, “Bear ye one
another’s burdens”? Seest thou not lovers? For I am compelled, since I
cannot draw an instance from you, to bring my discourse to that ground
of argument. This also Paul doth, thus saying, “Furthermore we have had
fathers in our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence.” (
[Heb. xii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#009) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p61.1"></span> .) Or rather, that is more apt which he
saith to the Romans, “As ye have yielded your members servants to
uncleanness and to iniquity unto iniquity, even so now yield your
members servants to righteousness.” For this reason let us confidently
keep hold of  <span id="fr_2288"></span>[2289](#fn_2288) the
illustration. Now dost thou not observe lovers, what miseries these
suffer when inflamed with desire for harlots, cuffed, beaten, and
laughed at, enduring a harlot, who turns away from and insults them in
ten thousand ways; yet if they see but once anything sweet or gentle,
all is well to do with them, all former things are gone, all goes on
with a fair wind, be it poverty, be it sickness, be it anything else
besides these. For they count their own life as miserable or blessed,
according as they may have her whom they love disposed towards them.
They know nothing of mortal honor or disgrace, but even if one insult,
they bear all easily through the great pleasure and delight which they
receive from her; and though she revile, though she spit in their face,
they think, when they are enduring this, that they are being pelted with
roses. And what wonder, if such are their feelings as to her person? for
her very house they think to be more splendid than any, though it be but
of mud, though it be falling down. But why speak I of walls? when they
even see the places which they frequent in the evening, they are
excited. Allow me now for what follows to speak the word of the Apostle.
As he saith, “As ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness,
so yield your members servants unto righteousness”; so in like manner
now I say, “as we have loved these women, let us love one another, and
we shall not think that we suffer anything terrible.”  <span
id="fr_2289"></span>[2290](#fn_2289) And why say I, “one another”? Let
us so love God. Do ye shudder, when ye hear that I require as much love
in the case of God, as we have shown towards a harlot? But I shudder
that we do not show even thus much. And, if you will, let us go on with
the argument, though what is said be very painful. The woman beloved
promises her lovers nothing good, but dishonor, shame, and insolence.
For this is what the waiting upon a harlot makes a man, ridiculous,
shameful, dishonored. But God promiseth us heaven, and the good things
which are in heaven; He hath made us sons, and brethren of the
Only-begotten, and hath given thee ten thousand things while living, and
when thou diest, resurrection, and promiseth that He will give us such
good things as it is not possible even to imagine, and maketh us honored
and revered. Again, that woman compels her lovers to spend all their
substance for the pit and for destruction; but God biddeth us sow the
heaven, and giveth us an hundred-fold, and eternal life. Again, she uses
her lover like a slave, giving commands more hardly than any tyrant; but
God saith, “I no longer call you servants, but friends.” ( [John
15.15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="iv.lxxxi-p63.2"></span>
.)

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p64"></span> \[5.\] Have ye seen the excess both of
the evils here and the blessings there  <span
id="fr_2290"></span>[2291](#fn_2290) ? What then comes next? For this
woman’s sake, many lie awake, and whatever she commands, readily obey;
give up house, and father, and mother, and friends, and money, and
patronage, and leave all that belongs to them in want and desolation;
but for the sake of God, or rather for the sake of ourselves, we often
do not choose to expend even the third portion of our substance, but we
look on the hungry, we overlook him, and run past the naked, and do not
even bestow a word upon him. But the lovers, if they see but a little
servant girl of their mistress, and her <span id="page_293">p.
293</span> <span id="iv.lxxxi-Page_293"></span> a barbarian, they stand
in the middle of the market-place, and talk with her, as if they were
proud and glad to do so, unrolling an interminable round of words;
 <span id="fr_2291"></span>[2292](#fn_2291) and for her sake they count
all their living as nothing, deem rulers and rule nothing, (they know
it, all who have had experience of the malady,) and thank her more when
she commands, than others when they serve. Is there not with good reason
a hell? Are there not with good reason ten thousand punishments? Let us
then become sober, let us apply to the service of God as much, or half,
or even the third part of what others supply to the harlot. Perhaps
again ye shudder; for so do I myself. But I would not that ye should
shudder at words only, but at the actions; as it is, here indeed our
 <span id="fr_2292"></span>[2293](#fn_2292) hearts are made orderly, but
we go forth and cast all away. What then is the gain? For there, if it
be required to spend money, no one laments his poverty, but even borrows
it to give, perchance, when smitten. But here, if we do but mention
almsgiving, they pretend to us children, and wife, and house, and
patronage, and ten thousand excuses. “But,” saith some one, “the
pleasure is great there.” This it is that I lament and mourn. What if I
show that the pleasure here is greater? For there shame, and insult, and
expense, cut away no little of the pleasure, and after these the
quarreling and enmity; but here there is nothing of the kind. What is
there, tell me, equal to this pleasure, to sit expecting heaven and the
kingdom there, and the glory of the saints, and the life that is
endless? “But these things,” saith some one, “are in expectation, the
others in experience.” What kind of experience? Wilt thou that I tell
thee the pleasures which are here also by experience? Consider what
freedom thou enjoyest, and how thou fearest and tremblest at no man when
thou livest in company with virtue, neither enemy, nor plotter, nor
informer, nor rival in credit or in love, nor envious person, nor
poverty, nor sickness, nor any other human thing. But there, although
ten thousand things be according to thy mind, though riches flow in as
from a fountain, yet the war with rivals, and the plots, and ambuscades,
will make more miserable than any the life of him who wallows with those
women.  <span id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293) For when that
abominable one is haughty, and insolent, you needs must kindle quarrel
to flatter her. This therefore is more grievous than ten thousand
deaths, more intolerable than any punishment. But here there is nothing
of the kind. For “the fruit,” it saith, “of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace.” ( [Gal. v. 22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p68.3"></span> .) Here is no quarreling, nor unseasonable
pecuniary expense, nor disgrace and expense too; and if thou give but a
farthing, or a loaf, or a cup of cold water, He will be much beholden to
thee, and He doth nothing to pain or grieve thee, but all so as to make
thee glorious, and free thee from all shame. What defense therefore
shall we have, what pardon shall we gain, if, leaving these things, we
give ourselves up to the contrary, and voluntarily cast ourselves into
the furnace that burns with fire? Wherefore I exhort those who are sick
of this malady, to recover themselves, and return to health, and not
allow themselves to fall into despair. Since that son  <span
id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294) also was in a far more grievous
state than this, yet when he returned to his father’s house, he came to
his former honor, and appeared more glorious than him who had ever been
well-pleasing. Let us also imitate him, and returning to our Father,
even though it be late, let us depart from that captivity, and transfer
ourselves to freedom, that we may enjoy the Kingdom of heaven, through
the grace and lovingkindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[289:2260](1140084.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p4.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p4.2"></span>ye no longer see.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[289:2261](1140084.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p5.1"></span>Part of</span> [John
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#018)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p5.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p5.3"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p5.4"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p5.5"></span>A little while, and ye shall not see Me: and
again, a little while, and ye shall see Me: and, Because I go to the
Father. They said therefore, What is this that He saith, A little while?
we cannot tell what He saith.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[289:2262](1140084.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p7"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p7.1"></span>to the Father,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p7.2"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[289:2263](1140084.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p8.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p8.2"></span>is of consolation.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[289:2264](1140084.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p9.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p9.2"></span>to strike into.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[289:2265](1140084.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p11"></span> [John
16.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#019)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p11.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p11.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p11.3"></span>, omitted. </span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p11.4"></span>Now Jesus knew that they
were desirous to ask Him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among
yourselves of that I said, A little while, and ye shall not see Me: and
again, a little while, and ye shall see Me?</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p11.5"></span>N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[289:2266](1140084.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p14"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p14.1"></span>And ye shall be sorrowful, but,</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p14.2"></span>&c., N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[289:2267](1140084.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p15.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p15.2"></span>worldly.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[289:2268](1140084.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p17"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p17.1"></span>hath sorrow, because her hour is come; but as
soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p17.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[289:2269](1140084.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p19.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p19.2"></span>πογεννηθῆναι</span>

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[290:2270](1140084.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p21"></span> [John
16.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#022)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p21.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p21.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p21.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p21.4"></span>And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I will
see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man,</span>
” <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p21.5"></span>&c.</span>

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[290:2271](1140084.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p21.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p22.1"></span>from</span> [John
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#010)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p22.2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p22.3"></span></span>

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[290:2272](1140084.htm#fr_2271) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p25"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p25.1"></span>In My Name, He will give it you.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p25.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[290:2273](1140084.htm#fr_2272) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p27.1"></span>lit.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p27.2"></span>admired.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[290:2274](1140084.htm#fr_2273) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p29"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p29.1"></span>nothing in My Name; ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p29.2"></span>N.T. The words,</span> “ <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p29.3"></span>Hitherto,</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p29.4"></span>&c., are inserted by
Savile.</span>

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[290:2275](1140084.htm#fr_2274) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p36"></span> [John
16.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#026)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p36.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p36.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p36.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p36.4"></span>At that day ye shall ask in My Name; and I
say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p36.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[290:2276](1140084.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p39"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p39.1"></span>For the Father Himself loveth you,
because,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p39.2"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[290:2277](1140084.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p42"></span> [John
16.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#029)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p42.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p42.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p42.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p42.4"></span>His disciples said unto Him, Lo, now speakest
Thou plainly, and speakest no parable.</span> ” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p42.5"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[290:2278](1140084.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p44.1"></span>ὑ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p44.2"></span>φορμοῦν</span>

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[290:2279](1140084.htm#fr_2278) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p46"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p46.1"></span>ask Thee; by this we believe that Thou camest
forth from God.</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p46.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[291:2280](1140084.htm#fr_2279) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p49"></span> [John
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#032)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p49.1"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p49.2"></span></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p49.3"></span>. </span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p49.4"></span>Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?
Behold, the hour cometh, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered
every man to his own, and shall leave Me alone; but I am not alone,
because,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p49.5"></span>&c. N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2280"></span>[291:2281](1140084.htm#fr_2280) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p49.6"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p50"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p50.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p50.2"></span>he,</span> ” <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p50.3"></span>or,</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p50.4"></span>one.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2281"></span>[291:2282](1140084.htm#fr_2281) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p52"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p52.1"></span>have peace. In the world ye shall have
tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.</span> ”
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p52.2"></span> N.T.</span>

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[291:2283](1140084.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p54"></span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p54.1"></span>shall I stay your dangers.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[291:2284](1140084.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p56.1"></span>i.e. our death.</span>

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[291:2285](1140084.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p57"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p57.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p57.2"></span>a trophy for Him.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2285"></span>[291:2286](1140084.htm#fr_2285) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p57.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p58"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p58.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p58.2"></span>into.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2286"></span>[291:2287](1140084.htm#fr_2286) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p59.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p59.2"></span>and if the.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2287"></span>[292:2288](1140084.htm#fr_2287) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p59.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p60.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p60.2"></span>then hang.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2288"></span>[292:2289](1140084.htm#fr_2288) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p62"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p62.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p62.2"></span>we touch.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2289"></span>[292:2290](1140084.htm#fr_2289) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p62.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p63.1"></span>i.e. in being insulted.</span>

<span id="fn_2290"></span>[292:2291](1140084.htm#fr_2290) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p65"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p65.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p65.2"></span>thence.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2291"></span>[293:2292](1140084.htm#fr_2291) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p65.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p66"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p66.1"></span>μακρῶν λόγων ἀνελίττοντες διαύλους</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p66.2"></span>. The</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p66.3"></span>δίαυλος</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p66.4"></span>was the double course,
which ended where it began.</span>

<span id="fn_2292"></span>[293:2293](1140084.htm#fr_2292) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p66.5"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p67"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p67.1"></span>al.</span> “ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p67.2"></span>your.</span> ”

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[293:2294](1140084.htm#fr_2293) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p68"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p68.1"></span>This seems to be the meaning of</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.lxxxi-p68.2"></span>τοῦ μετ̓ ἐκείνων
πλυνομένου</span>

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[293:2295](1140084.htm#fr_2294) <span
id="iv.lxxxi-p68.4"></span>

<span id="iv.lxxxi-p69"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.lxxxi-p69.1"></span>the prodigal, [Luke
xv.](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#000)<span
id="iv.lxxxi-p69.2"></span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 17.1](1140085)
