[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1140027)  [Next](1140029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xxv"></span> <span id="iv.xxv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c15"><span
id="iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Homily XXIII.</span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p2"></span> <span id="iv.xxv-p2.1"></span> <span
class="c1"><span id="iv.xxv-p2.2"></span>[John ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.xxv-p2.3"></span></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p3"></span>“This beginning of miracles did Jesus in
Cana of Galilee.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p4"></span> \[1.\] <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxv-p4.1"></span>Frequent</span> and fierce is the devil in his
attacks, on all sides besieging our salvation; we therefore must watch
and be sober, and everywhere fortify ourselves against his assault, for
if he but gain some slight vantage ground,  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587) he goes on to make for himself a broad
passage, and by degrees introduces all his forces. If then we have any
care at all for our salvation, let us not allow him to make his
approaches even in trifles, that thus we may check him beforehand in
important matters; for it would be the extreme of folly, if, while he
displays such eagerness to destroy our souls, we should not bring even
an equal amount in defense of our own salvation.

<span id="iv.xxv-p6"></span> I say not this without a cause, but because
I fear lest that wolf be even now standing unseen by us in the midst of
the fold,  <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) and some sheep become
a prey to him, being led astray from the flock and from hearkening by
its own carelessness and his craft. Were the wounds  <span
id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589) sensible, or did the body receive the
blows, there would be no difficulty in discerning his plots; but since
the soul is invisible, and since that it is which receives the wounds,
we need great watchfulness that each may prove himself; for none knoweth
the things of a man as the spirit of a man that is in him. ( [1 Cor. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011) <span id="iv.xxv-p8.1"></span> .)
The word is spoken indeed to all, and is offered as a general remedy to
those who need it, but it is the business of every individual hearer to
take what is suited to his complaint. I know not who are sick, I know
not who are well. And therefore I use every sort of argument, and
introduce remedies suited to all maladies,  <span
id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590) at one time condemning covetousness,
after that touching on luxury, and again <span id="page_79">p. 79</span>
<span id="iv.xxv-Page_79"></span> on impurity, then composing something
in praise of and exhortation to charity, and each of the other virtues
in their turn. For I fear lest when my arguments are employed on any one
subject, I may without knowing it be treating you for one disease while
you are ill of others. So that if this congregation were but one person,
I should not have judged it so absolutely necessary to make my discourse
varied; but since in such a multitude there are probably also many
maladies, I not unreasonably diversify my teaching, since my discourse
will be sure to attain its object when it is made to embrace you all.
For this cause also Scripture is something multiform,  <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591) and speaks on ten thousand matters,
because it addresses itself to the nature of mankind in common, and in
such a multitude all the passions of the soul must needs be; though all
be not in each. Let us then cleanse ourselves of these, and so listen to
the divine oracles, and with contrite heart  <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) hear what has been this day read to
us.

<span id="iv.xxv-p12"></span> And what is that? “This beginning of
miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee.” I told you the other day, that
there are some who say that this is not the beginning. “For what,” says
one, “if ‘Cana of Galilee’ be added? This shows that this was ‘the
beginning’ He made ‘in Cana.’”  <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593)
But on these points I would not venture to assert anything exactly. I
before have shown that He began His miracles after His Baptism, and
wrought no miracle before it; but whether of the miracles done after His
Baptism, this or some other was the first, it seems to me unnecessary to
assert positively.

<span id="iv.xxv-p14"></span>“And manifested forth His glory.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p15"></span>“How?” asks one, “and in what way? For only
the servants, the ruler of the feast, and the bridegroom, not the
greater number of those present, gave heed to what was done.” How then
did he “manifest forth His glory”? He manifested it at least for His own
part, and if all present hear not of the miracle at the time, they would
hear of it afterwards, for unto the present time it is celebrated, and
has not been unnoticed. That all did not know it on the same day is
clear from what follows, for after having said that He “manifested forth
His glory,” the Evangelist adds,

<span id="iv.xxv-p16"></span>“And His disciples believed on Him.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p17"></span> His disciples, who even before this
regarded Him with wonder.  <span id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594) Seest
thou that it was especially necessary to work the miracles at times when
men were present of honest minds, and who would carefully give heed to
what was done? for these would more readily believe, and attend more
exactly to the circumstances. “And how could He have become known
without miracles?” Because His doctrine and prophetic powers were
sufficient to cause wonder in the souls of His hearers, so that they
took heed to what He did with a right disposition, their minds being
already well affected towards Him. And therefore in many other places
the Evangelists say, that He did no miracle on account of the perversity
of the men who dwelt there. ( [Matt.
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038), [Matt.
13:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#058)<span id="iv.xxv-p18.2"></span> ,
&c.)

<span id="iv.xxv-p19"></span> [John
2.12](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012)<span id="iv.xxv-p19.1"></span> .
“After this He went down to Capernaum, He, and His mother, and His
brethren, and His disciples; and they continued there not many days.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p20"></span>Wherefore comes He with “His mother to
Capernaum”? for He hath done no miracle there, and the inhabitants of
that city were not of those who were rightminded towards Him, but of the
utterly corrupt. And this Christ declared when He said, “And thou,
Capernaum, which are exalted to heaven, shall be thrust down to hell.” (
[Luke x. 15](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#015) <span
id="iv.xxv-p20.1"></span> .) Wherefore then goes He? I think it was,
because He intended a little after to go up to Jerusalem, that He then
went to Capernaum, to avoid leading about  <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595) everywhere with Him, His mother and
His brethren. And so, having departed and tarried a little while to
honor His mother, He again commences His miracles after restoring to her
home her who had borne Him. Therefore the Evangelist says, After “not
many days,”

<span id="iv.xxv-p22"></span> [John
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013)<span id="iv.xxv-p22.1"></span> .
“He went up to Jerusalem.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p23"></span>He received baptism then a few days before
the passover. But on going up to Jerusalem, what did He, a deed full of
high authority; for He cast out of the Temple those dealers and money
changers, and those who sold doves, and oxen, and sheep, and who passed
their time there for this purpose.

<span id="iv.xxv-p24"></span> \[2.\] Another Evangelist writes, that as
He cast them out, He said, Make not my Father’s house  <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596) “a den of thieves,” but this one,

<span id="iv.xxv-p26"></span> [John
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#016)<span id="iv.xxv-p26.1"></span> .
(“Make not My Father’s house) an house of merchandise.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p27"></span> They do not in this contradict each other,
but show that he did this a second time, and that both these expressions
were not used on the same occasion, but that He acted thus once at the
beginning of His ministry, and again when He had come to the very time
of His Passion. Therefore, (on the latter occasion,) employing more
strong expressions, He spoke of it as  <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597) (being made) “a den of thieves,” but
here at the commencement of His miracles He does not so, but uses a more
gentle rebuke; from <span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span
id="iv.xxv-Page_80"></span> which it is probable that this took place
 <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598) a second time.

<span id="iv.xxv-p30"></span>“And wherefore,” says one, “did Christ do
this same, and use such severity against these men, a thing which He is
nowhere else seen to do, even when insulted and reviled, and called by
them ‘Samaritan’ and ‘demoniac’? for He was not even satisfied with
words only, but took a scourge, and so cast them out.” Yes, but it was
when others were receiving benefit, that the Jews accused and raged
against Him; when it was probable that they would have been made savage
by His rebukes, they showed no such disposition towards Him, for they
neither accused nor reviled Him. What say they?

<span id="iv.xxv-p31"></span> [John
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018)<span id="iv.xxv-p31.1"></span> .
“What sign showest Thou unto us, seeing that Thou doest these things?”

<span id="iv.xxv-p32"></span>Seest thou their excessive malice, and how
the benefits done to others incensed them more (than reproofs)?

<span id="iv.xxv-p33"></span> At one time then He said, that the Temple
was made by them “a den of thieves,” showing that what they sold was
gotten by theft, and rapine, and covetousness, and that they were rich
through other men’s calamities; at another, “a house of merchandise,”
pointing to their shameless traffickings. “But wherefore did He this?”
Since he was about to heal on the Sabbath day, and to do many such
things which were thought by them transgressions of the Law, in order
that He might not seem to do this as though He had come to be some rival
God  <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599) and opponent of His Father,
He takes occasion hence to correct any such suspicion of theirs. For One
who had exhibited so much zeal for the House was not likely to oppose
Him who was Lord of the House, and who was worshiped in it. No doubt
even the former years during which He lived according to the Law, were
sufficient to show His reverence for the Legislator, and that He came
not to give contrary laws; yet since it was likely that those years were
forgotten through lapse of time, as not having been known to all because
He was brought up in a poor and mean dwelling, He afterwards does this
in the presence of all, (for many were present because the feast was
nigh at hand,) and at great risk. For he did not merely “cast them out,”
but also “overturned the tables,” and “poured out the money,” giving
them by this to understand, that He who threw Himself into danger for
the good order of the House could never despise his Master. Had He acted
as He did from hypocrisy, He should only have advised them; but to place
Himself in danger was very daring. For it was no light thing to offer
Himself to the anger of so many market-folk,  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) to excite against Himself a most
brutal mob of petty dealers by His reproaches and His blows, this was
not the action of a pretender, but of one choosing to suffer everything
for the order of the House.

<span id="iv.xxv-p36"></span> And therefore not by His actions only, but
by His words, He shows his agreement with the Father;  <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601) for He saith not “the Holy House,” but
“My Father’s House.” See, He even calls Him, “Father,” and they are not
wroth; they thought He spoke in a general way:  <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602) but when He went on and spoke more
plainly, so as to set before them the idea of His Equality, then they
become angry.

<span id="iv.xxv-p39"></span> And what say they? “What sign showest Thou
unto us, seeing that Thou doest these things?” Alas for their utter
madness! Was there need of a sign before they could cease their evil
doings, and free the house of God from such dishonor? and was it not the
greatest sign of His Excellence that He had gotten such zeal for that
House? In fact, the well-disposed  <span
id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603) were distinguished by this very thing,
for “They,” His disciples, it says,

<span id="iv.xxv-p41"></span> [John
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017)<span id="iv.xxv-p41.1"></span> .
“Remembered that it is written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me
up.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p42"></span>But the Jews did not remember the Prophecy,
and said, “What sign showest Thou unto us?” ( [Ps. lxix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009) <span id="iv.xxv-p42.1"></span> ),
both grieving that their shameful traffic was cut off, and expecting by
these means to stop Him, and also desiring to challenge Him to a
miracle, and to find fault with what He was doing. Wherefore He will not
give them a sign; and before, when they came and asked Him, He made them
the same answer, “A wicked and adulterous generation seeketh after a
sign; and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the
prophet Jonas.” ( [Matt. xvi. 4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004) <span
id="iv.xxv-p42.2"></span> .) Only then the answer was clear, now it is
more ambiguous. This He doth on account of their extreme insensibility;
for He who prevented  <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604) them
without their asking, and gave them signs, would never when they asked
have turned away from them, had He not seen that their minds were wicked
and false, and their intention treacherous.  <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605) Think how full of wickedness the
question itself was at the outset. When they ought to have applauded Him
for His earnestness and zeal, when they ought to have been astonished
that He cared so greatly for the House, they reproach Him, saying, that
it was lawful to traffic, and unlawful for any to stop their traffic,
except he should show them a sign. What saith Christ?

<span id="iv.xxv-p45"></span> [John
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="iv.xxv-p45.1"></span> .
“Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p46"></span>Many such sayings He utters which were not
intelligible to His immediate hearers, but which <span id="page_81">p.
81</span> <span id="iv.xxv-Page_81"></span> were to be so to those that
should come after. And wherefore doth He this? In order that when the
accomplishment of His prediction should have come to pass, He might be
seen to have foreknown from the beginning what was to follow; which
indeed was the case with this prophecy. For, saith the Evangelist,

<span id="iv.xxv-p47"></span> [John
2.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022)<span id="iv.xxv-p47.1"></span> .
“When He was risen from the dead, His disciples remembered that He had
said this; and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had
said.”

<span id="iv.xxv-p48"></span>But at the time when this was spoken, the
Jews were perplexed as to what it might mean, and cast about to
discover, saying,

<span id="iv.xxv-p49"></span> [John
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#020)<span id="iv.xxv-p49.1"></span> .
“Forty and six years was this Temple in building, and wilt thou rear it
up in three days?”

<span id="iv.xxv-p50"></span>“Forty and six years,” they said, referring
to the latter building, for the former was finished in twenty years’
time. ( [Ezra vi. 15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015) <span
id="iv.xxv-p50.1"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xxv-p51"></span> \[3.\] Wherefore then did He not resolve
the difficulty and say, “I speak not of that Temple, but of My flesh”?
Why does the Evangelist, writing the Gospel at a later period, interpret
the saying, and Jesus keep silence at the time? Why did He so keep
silence? Because they would not have received His word; for if not even
the disciples were able to understand the saying, much less were the
multitudes. “When,” saith the Evangelist, “He was risen from the dead,
then they remembered, and believed the Scripture and His word.” There
were two things that hindered  <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606)
them for the time, one the fact of the Resurrection, the other, the
greater question whether He was God  <span
id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607) that dwelt within; of both which
things He spake darkly when He said, “Destroy this Temple, and I will
rear it up in three days.” And this St. Paul declares to be no small
proof of His Godhead, when he writes, “Declared to be the Son of God
with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the Resurrection
from the dead.” ( [Rom. i. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004) <span
id="iv.xxv-p53.4"></span> .)

<span id="iv.xxv-p54"></span> But why doth He both there, and here, and
everywhere, give this for a sign, at one time saying,  <span
id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608) “When ye have lifted up the Son of
Man, then ye shall know that I Am” ( [John
8.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#028)<span id="iv.xxv-p55.3"></span> );
at another, “There shall no sign be given you  <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) but the sign of the prophet Jonas” (
[Matt. xii. 39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039) <span
id="iv.xxv-p56.3"></span> ); and again in this place, “In three days I
will raise it up”? Because what especially showed that He was not a mere
man, was His being able to set up a trophy of victory over death, and so
quickly to abolish His long enduring tyranny, and conclude that
difficult war. Wherefore He saith, “Then ye shall know.” “Then.” When?
When after My Resurrection I shall draw (all) the world to Me, then ye
shall know that I did these things as God, and Very Son of God, avenging
the insult offered to My Father.

<span id="iv.xxv-p57"></span>“Why then, instead of saying, ‘What need is
there of “signs” to check evil deeds?’ did He promise that He would give
them a sign?” Because by so doing He would have the more exasperated
them; but in this way He rather astonished them. Still they made no
answer to this, for He seemed to them to say what was incredible, so
that they did not stay even to question Him upon it, but passed it by as
impossible. Yet had they been wise, though it seemed to them at the time
incredible, still when He wrought His many miracles they would then have
come and questioned Him, would then have intreated that the difficulty
might be resolved to them; but because they were foolish, they gave no
heed at all to part of what was said, and part they heard with evil
frame of mind. And therefore Christ spoke to them in an enigmatical way.

<span id="iv.xxv-p58"></span>The question still remains, “How was it
that the disciples did not know that He must rise from the dead?” It
was, because they had not been vouchsafed the gift of the Spirit; and
therefore, though they constantly heard His discourses concerning the
Resurrection, they understood them not, but reasoned with themselves
what this might be. For very strange and paradoxical was the assertion
that one could raise himself, and would raise himself in such wise. And
so Peter was rebuked, when, knowing nothing about the Resurrection, he
said, “Be it far from Thee.” ( [Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022) <span id="iv.xxv-p58.1"></span> .)
And Christ did not reveal it clearly to them before the event, that they
might not be offended at the very outset, being led to distrust His
words on account of the great improbability of the thing, and because
they did not yet clearly know Him, who He was. For no one could help
believing what was proclaimed aloud by facts, while some would probably
disbelieve what was told to them in words. Therefore He at first allowed
the meaning of His words to be concealed; but when by their experience
He had verified His sayings, He after that gave them understanding of
His words, and such gifts of the Spirit that they received them all at
once. “He,” saith Jesus, “shall bring all things to your remembrance.” (
[John 14.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span
id="iv.xxv-p58.2"></span> .) For they who in a single night cast off all
respect for Him, and fled from and denied that they even knew Him, would
scarcely have remembered what He had done and said during the whole
time, unless they had enjoyed much grace of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.xxv-p59"></span>“But,” says one, “if they were to hear from
the Spirit, why needed they to accompany Christ when they would not
retain His words?” Be <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span
id="iv.xxv-Page_82"></span> cause the Spirit taught them not, but called
to their mind what Christ had said before; and it contributes not a
little to the glory of Christ, that they were referred to the
remembrance of the words He had spoken to them. At the first then it was
of the gift of God that the grace of the Spirit lighted upon them so
largely and abundantly; but after that, it was of their own virtue that
they retained the Gift. For they displayed a shining life, and much
wisdom, and great labors, and despised this present life, and thought
nothing of earthly things, but were above them all; and like a sort of
light-winged eagle, soaring high by their works; reached  <span
id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) to heaven itself, and by these
possessed the unspeakable grace of the Spirit.

<span id="iv.xxv-p61"></span>Let us then imitate them, and not quench
our lamps, but keep them bright by alms-doing, for so is the light of
this fire preserved. Let us collect the oil into our vessels whilst we
are here, for we cannot buy it when we have departed to that other
place, nor can we procure it elsewhere, save only at the hands of the
poor. Let us therefore collect it thence very abundantly, if, at least,
we desire to enter in with the Bridegroom. But if we do not this, we
must remain without the bridechamber, for it is impossible, it is
impossible, though we perform ten thousand other good deeds, to enter
the portals of the Kingdom without alms-doing. Let us then show forth
this very abundantly, that we may enjoy those ineffable blessings; which
may it come to pass that we all attain, by the grace and lovingkindness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_587"></span>[78:588](1140028.htm#fr_587) <span
id="iv.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p5.2"></span>φορμῆς</span> .

<span id="fn_588"></span>[78:589](1140028.htm#fr_588) <span
id="iv.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p7"></span> or “sacred enclosure,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p7.1"></span>σηκῶ</span> .

<span id="fn_589"></span>[78:590](1140028.htm#fr_589) <span
id="iv.xxv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p8"></span> al. “words.”

<span id="fn_590"></span>[78:591](1140028.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iv.xxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p9"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxv-p9.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodl. read the passage thus: 
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p9.2"></span>κινῶ, πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις
ὁμοίως ἀρμόζοντα, καὶ πᾶσιν ἐπιτήδειον πάθεσιν</span> .

<span id="fn_591"></span>[79:592](1140028.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iv.xxv-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p10.1"></span>πολυειδὴς</span> .

<span id="fn_592"></span>[79:593](1140028.htm#fr_592) <span
id="iv.xxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p11"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxv-p11.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodleian read:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p11.2"></span>οὕτω τοῖς θείοις λόγοις
προσβάλλωμεν, καὶ οὕτω μετὰ συντετριμμένης σφόδρα τῆς διανοίας
κ.τ.λ</span> .

<span id="fn_593"></span>[79:594](1140028.htm#fr_593) <span
id="iv.xxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p13"></span> Morel. and <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxv-p13.1"></span>ms.</span> in Bodleian read:  <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p13.2"></span>τὶ γὰρ ἄτοπον προσκεῖσθαι
ἐν Κανᾷ, καὶ μὴ ἀρχὴν εἶναι ταύτην τῶν τοῦ ̓Ιησοῦ σημείων</span> .

<span id="fn_594"></span>[79:595](1140028.htm#fr_594) <span
id="iv.xxv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p18"></span> \[admired and believed\] Morel. and <span
class="c11"><span id="iv.xxv-p18.1"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_595"></span>[79:596](1140028.htm#fr_595) <span
id="iv.xxv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p21.2"></span>πισύρεσθαι</span> .

<span id="fn_596"></span>[79:597](1140028.htm#fr_596) <span
id="iv.xxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p25"></span> [Luke xix.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#046) <span id="iv.xxv-p25.1"></span> ,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p25.2"></span>ὑ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p25.3"></span>μεῖς ἐποιήσατε κ.τ.λ</span>
. G. T.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[79:598](1140028.htm#fr_597) <span
id="iv.xxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p28"></span> lit. “called it.”

<span id="fn_598"></span>[80:599](1140028.htm#fr_598) <span
id="iv.xxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p29"></span> Or, “that He did this.” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p29.1"></span>ὅ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p29.2"></span>θεν εἰκὸς δεύτερον τοῦτο
γεγενῆσθαι</span> . al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p29.3"></span>πεποιηκέναι</span>

<span id="fn_599"></span>[80:600](1140028.htm#fr_599) <span
id="iv.xxv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p34"></span> or, “adversary of God.”

<span id="fn_600"></span>[80:601](1140028.htm#fr_600) <span
id="iv.xxv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p35"></span> or, “base persons,” <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p35.1"></span>ἀ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xxv-p35.2"></span>γοραίων</span> .

<span id="fn_601"></span>[80:602](1140028.htm#fr_601) <span
id="iv.xxv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p37.1"></span>τὴν πρὸς αὐτὸν συμφωνίαν</span> .

<span id="fn_602"></span>[80:603](1140028.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iv.xxv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p38.1"></span>ἁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p38.2"></span>πλῶς</span> .

<span id="fn_603"></span>[80:604](1140028.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iv.xxv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p40.1"></span>εὐγνώμονες</span> .

<span id="fn_604"></span>[80:605](1140028.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iv.xxv-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p43"></span> al. “took to Him.”

<span id="fn_605"></span>[80:606](1140028.htm#fr_605) <span
id="iv.xxv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p44"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p44.1"></span>ὕ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p44.2"></span>πουλον</span> .

<span id="fn_606"></span>[81:607](1140028.htm#fr_606) <span
id="iv.xxv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p52"></span> al. “were proposed to.”

<span id="fn_607"></span>[81:608](1140028.htm#fr_607) <span
id="iv.xxv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p53"></span> Savile, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p53.1"></span>̔</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p53.2"></span>Ο Θεὸς</span> , “whether He was the One God”;
but the article is not found in Ben. Morel. or <span class="c11"><span
id="iv.xxv-p53.3"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_608"></span>[81:609](1140028.htm#fr_608) <span
id="iv.xxv-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p55"></span> \[ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p55.1"></span>ὅ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p55.2"></span>ταν ὑψωθῶ</span> \] Ben.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[81:610](1140028.htm#fr_609) <span
id="iv.xxv-p55.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p56"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p56.1"></span>αὐτῇ</span> \[ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xxv-p56.2"></span>γενεᾷ</span> \] G. T.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[82:611](1140028.htm#fr_610) <span
id="iv.xxv-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xxv-p60"></span> al. “were drawn away.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John 2.23](1140029)
