[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# A BUDDHIST GENESIS

### (*from* Dîgha Nikâya 27)

### translated by Albert J. Edmunds

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE MONIST

 

<span class="small">A QUARTERLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### DEVOTED TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE

 

 

#### Volume XIV

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1904

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002. The \~m sequence in this file represents an m-tilde in the original.}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

## A BUDDHIST GENESIS.<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>

   THIS document is translated from the twenty-seventh Dialogue of the
Long Collection (*Dîgha-Nikâyo*). It occurs in a discussion on the caste
question; but that it is a book in itself is clear from the fact that a
rival recension of the Scriptures has transmitted it in a different
connection, and with a different title. This rival recension is that of
the Sublime Story (*Mahâvastu*), an expanded portion of the Book of
Discipline belonging to the sect called the Transcendentalists or
Docetists (*Lokottaravâdino*), which is a branch of the Great Council
School (*Mahâsa\~mghiko*). Now the Great Council was the rival sect of
the School of the Elders (*Theravâdo*) who have preserved the Scriptures
in Pâli. The Great Council preserved them in some kind of Prâkrit, which
has since been partiaily Sanskritised. We have therefore this old
Buddhist Genesis in two different Indian languages (to say nothing of a
fifth-century translation into Chinese); transmitted by two different
sects which parted company in the pre-Christian period of Buddhism; and
in two different portions of the Canon: viz., the Book of Dialogues
(*Sutta-Pi.takam*) and the Book of Discipline (*Vinaya-Pi.takam*). In
the former (in Pâli) it is entitled the Dialogue Primeval
(*Aggañña-suttam*) and in the latter, The History of Kings. These two
ancient recensions agree in the main, but are verbally different. When
an old document has such a transmission, its antiquity is well
established.

   The Buddhist Genesis was epitomised by Robert Spence Hardy in his
*Manual of Budhism* (*sic*) published at London in 1853. But

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Translated from the Pâli by Albert J. Edmunds, Philadelphia.\]

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span> Hardy translated not from the Pâli
texts, but from mediæval Singhalese commentaries, which in turn are
based upon Pâli texts and commentaries combined. Therefore we can never
be sure, when reading Spence Hardy, how much of a narrative is from the
primitive text and how much has been expanded or exaggerated from
commentaries in Pâli and Singhalese.

   An account of the Great Council version has been given in French by
Émile Senart, in the Introduction to Vol. I. of his splendid edition of
the Mahâvastu (Paris, 1882). So corrupt and difficult is the text that
even this learned Prâkrit scholar shrank from giving a verbal
translation, but contented himself with an epitome.

   A brief account in English, based upon the Pâli recension, has been
given by Rhys Davids, in his *Dialogues of the Buddha* (London, 1899,
[p. 105](../../bud/dob/dob-03in.htm#page_105)). Samuel Beal translates
two versions from the Chinese, the second one being from the Long
Collection. (*Four Lectures*: London, 1882, pp. 151-155.)

   The present is the first translation of the text itself, and is made
from the King-of-Siam's edition, printed in Siamese characters, in Vol.
XI. of his thirty-nine volumes of the Pâli Canon, which was published at
his capital in 1894, and in 1895 distributed throughout the world to
universities and libraries. There are two copies in Philadelphia: viz.,
at the University of Pennsylvania and the Mercantile Library. In 1905 it
is expected that the Pâli Text Society of London will print our present
Genesis text in Roman letters, when it will be much easier to read.

   We cannot here discuss the many questions raised by this ancient
book. Suffice it to say that the idea of Genesis as a fall is ancient,
and the interpretation of Paradise as a spiritual state instead of a
material one is now regarded by a high authority to be the original
conception of Eden in the Babylonian mythology.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> The Christian student will be aware
that such an interpretation was given to the Hebrew Genesis by Philo the
Jew of Alexandria, at the time of Christ; by Origen of Alexandria, in
the third century;

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. *Babylonian and Hebrew Genesis*. By Heinrich Zimmern. London, 1901,
p. 33.\]

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span> by Jacob Boehme of Görlitz in the
sixteenth, and by Emanuel Swedenborg of Stockholm, in the eighteenth.

   The exact date of our document cannot be fixed, but after years of
research I am satisfied that the Pâli Canon existed, in its main
constituents, if not in its present form, at the Council of
Va.t.tagâmini, about B.C. 40,<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup>
in the ancient capital of Ceylon. At this Council the sacred lore, which
had hitherto been oral, was committed to writing, say the Ceylon
Chronicles; and a number of facts, which cannot be detailed here, give
probability to the statement. Even if only the older parts of the Canon
existed then, the Genesis document was certainly among them, because
transmitted by a branch of the rival sect which had split off from the
sect of Ceylon (the Schoo1 of the Elders) some centuries before. The
Buddhist tradition maintains that this document, together with most of
the Dialogues and Discipline, was fixed in its present form by the
Council of Râjagaha, upon Buddha's decease in the fifth century before
Christ. But while criticism allows that something was settled then, it
cannot admit so early a redaction for a literature bearing all the marks
of long development. We may safely say, then, that the Buddhist Genesis
was composed between the fifth and the first centuries before Christ.
How far the main idea of our document can be regarded as compatible with
the underlying philosophy of the teachings of Buddha himself, does not
fall within the scope of our investigation.

ALBERT J. EDMUNDS.      

   EASTER, 1902.

 

THE DIALOGUE PRIMEVAL (AGGAÑÑA-SUTTAM).<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup>

   O Vâse.t.thâ,<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup> there is a
season, at vast intervals in the lapse of time, when this world is
dissolved; and upon the world's dissolution, the inhabitants are mostly
brought together in the heaven of

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. Kern's corrected date.

2\. The discussion on caste, which precedes, is omitted, being no part
of the Genesis document.

3\. The plural name of two Brahmin disciples to whom Gotamo addresses
account. Hereafter we omit it: it occurs In every paragraph.\]

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span> the Radiant, and there they dwell for
a long, long period, mind-made, feeders on joy, self-resplendent,
traversing the sky, and abiding in goodness.

   Again, there is a season, at vast intervals in the lapse of time,
when this world is re-evolved; and upon the world's evolution, people
disappear from the host of the Radiant and come down hither.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> And they are mind-made, feeders on joy,
self-resplendent, traversing the sky, and abiding in goodness. \[And
so\] do they dwell for a long, long period.

   Now at that season there is gloom and darkness universally: moon and
sun are known not; stars and constellations are not known; nor night and
day, nor month and fortnight, nor seasons of the year. Women and men are
known not, but people say: "Sentient beings only are
considered."<sup><span class="small">\[2\]</span></sup>

   Now for those beings there arises, after a vast interval in the lapse
of time, a savory earth everywhere upon the water. Even as the tree of
paradise on high is to a self-restrained one who is reaching Nirvâna,
such does it appear. It was endowed with color, scent, and savor like
unto ghee and butter: such was its color. And even as a little honey
undefiled, such was its taste. Then some luxurious person saying, "Oh!
What can this be?" tasted with his finger the savory earth, and as soon
as he had done so, craving<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup>
therefor became clothed and entered in. Others also, following the
example of that being, tasted the savory earth with a finger. When they
had done so, craving became clothed and entered in.

   Then people approached the luxurious savory earth, to partake of it
with their hands, and forthwith their self-radiance disappeared. When
their self-radiance was gone, the moon and sun were manifested,

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. A corrupt change in the Prâkrit, of the Pâli words *itthatta\~m
âgacchanti* into *iccha-svam-âgacchanti*, has given rise to the idea, in
the Mahâvastu, that they go whither they please. Then a gloss adds that
this is always the rule: they always go whither they desire.

2\. The word rendered "inhabitants," "people," and "sentient beings" is
the same in the Pâli.

3\. Craving, literally thirst. It is a technical term in Buddhist
metaphysics for the will to live, which necessitates personal
existence.\]

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span> and with them the stars and
constellations. With these again came night and day, and with night and
day the months and the fortnights, and with the last the seasons of the
year. Thus was this world again evolved.

   Now people remained a long, long time enjoying the savory earth for
their food and support; and so long as they did thus, mere coarseness
entered into their bodies and differences of caste arose.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> Some people were beautiful and others
were ugly. Then those who were beautiful despised the ugly ones and
said: "We are handsomer than these, they are uglier than we." And by
reason of their conceit of color the savory earth disappeared among
those born with pride and conceit. When the savory earth had vanished,
they met together and lamented, saying: "Oh, the savor! oh, the savor!"
Even now, when men have taken some surpassing<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> dainty they say the same: "Oh, the
savor! Oh, the savor!" In this they imitate exactly the ancient primeval
men, but know not the meaning thereof.

   After the savory earth had disappeared, there sprang up for those
people a fine kind of moss. It was somewhat like a mushroom, and in
color, scent, and savor was like unto ghee or butter. And even as a
little honey undefiled, such was its taste.

   <sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup>Then, as before, they ate
the fine moss and lived a long time thereon, while coarseness entered
still more into their bodies, and differences of caste arose. Also, as
before, the beautiful despised the ugly, whereupon the fine moss
disappeared. When it was gone a sweet creeper sprang up, which was
somewhat like the cadamba, and in color, scent, savor, and taste, as the
other foods before. The same experience was repeated, and the sweet
creeper vanished away. Then they met together and lamented, saying:
"Alas for us! Alas! the sweet creeper has failed us!" Even now, when

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. The word caste is simply color or complexion.

2\. The word "surpassing" is literally *divine* or *angelic*. As in the
Old Testament, this word is used to mean great or fine.

3\. Here and in following paragraphs the exact phraseology of the
preceding narrative is tediously repeated in the Pâli, but it is no part
of a translator's business to perpetuate these mannerisms. Their use is
to preserve the text from corruption.\]

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span> men are touched by some divine
catastrophe, they say the same: "Alas for us! Alas, it has failed us!"
They recall the very letter of the ancient primeval men, but know not
the meaning thereof.

   Now, when the sweet creeper had gone from those people, a delicate
rice appeared, without coating or husk, pure, sweet-scented, and with
the fruit already winnowed. They fetched food at evening for supper, and
in the morning it was ripe and grown again. They fetched food in the
morning for breakfast, and at evening it was ripe and grown again. It
was not known to fail. Then the people lived a long, long time, enjoying
the delicate rice for their food and support; and so long as they did
thus, mere coarseness entered more and more into their bodies and
differences of caste arose.

   Then the organ of womanhood appeared in the woman and the organ of
manhood in the man. And the woman offered to the man strong drink in
excess, and the man unto the woman. And as they did so, passion arose,
and suffering entered into their bodies. By reason of the suffering they
indulged in the act of sex. Then, when people saw them in those days,
indulging thus, some threw dust and others ashes, and others cow-dung,
saying: "Perish, vile wench! Perish, vile wench!" And again: "How can
one being do such a thing unto another?" Even now, in some country
places, when a murderess is being executed, some people throw dust,
others ashes, and others cow-dung.<sup><span
class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> They recall the very letter of the
ancient primeval men, but know not the meaning thereof.

   O Vâse.t.thâ! that was an impious practice in those days, but now it
is a pious one. People who, in those days, indulged in the act of sex,
were not allowed to return to town or village for two months and three.
When those people had fallen into exceeding mischief in that impiety,
they began to make houses, in order to hide the impiety. Then it
occurred to some idle person: "Why should I be troubled to bring rice at
evening for supper and at morning for breakfast? Suppose I now bring it
only once every

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. The Sanskrit here reads: "Monks, just as now, when a maiden is
being married, they throw a stick or a clod," etc. This is doubtless the
true sense, and the Pâli is probably corrupt.\]

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> evening for breakfast." He accordingly
did so, and then some one approached him and said:

   "Come, fellow-being! let us go and bring some rice."

   "Enough, O fellow-being! I only fetch rice once every evening for
breakfast."

   Thereupon that other, following his example, said: "It would be good
indeed to bring the rice only once in two days." Just then some one else
approached that person and asked him likewise to go for rice, and he
gave the same answer as the first, whereupon the other, following his
example, said: "It would be good indeed to bring the rice only once in
four days." When another person invited the last one to bring some, he
was told about the four-day plan, and forthwith suggested once in eight
days as enough. So soon as those people began to eat stored-up rice,
then was the grain enveloped by the red coating and the husk; no harvest
was reaped; failure ensued, and there were groves on groves of standing
rice.

   Then the people met together and lamented, saying: "Alas! Evil things
have appeared among beings; for of yore we were mind-made, feeders on
joy, self-radiant, traversing the sky and abiding in goodness, and so
did we long remain. Then, after a vast period, arose the savory earth
upon the water, and we ate thereof and lost our splendor, till moon and
sun came forth, and stars and starry forms. So night and day, month and
half-month and seasons yearly rolled, and we enjoyed the savory earth
for long, until by the appearance among us of things wicked and
demeritorious the savory earth did fail. Then the fine moss came round,
and we lost it likewise; and the sweet creeper and the huskless rice.
The rice we gathered morn and even for our meals, a daily harvest;
failure was unknown; and so we stayed for long, till for wicked and
demeritorious things a coating and a husk did wrap the grain; no harvest
was there reaped; failure ensued, and groves on groves are standing. Let
us now divide the rice and set a boundary."

   So they divided the rice and a boundary did they set.

   Now a certain greedy person, while keeping his own share, took a
share not given him, and enjoyed it. They arrested him <span
id="page_214">p. 214</span> and said: "Alas! O being, thou hast done a
wicked thing, in that thou hast, while keeping thine own share, taken
and enjoyed a share ungiven. O being, thou shouldest not do thus."

   "Be it so," replied that being to the others. But a second time he
stole likewise, and a third; whereupon, after the same reproof, some
struck him with their hands, some with clods, and others with staves.
And so theft came first to be known, and upbraiding, and lying, and
violence.

   Then the best people met together, and lamented, saying: "Alas! Evil
things have appeared among beings, in that theft has come to be known,
and upbraiding, and lying, and violence. Suppose we now elect one being
and tell him: 'Do thou rebuke whomsoever is rightly deserving of rebuke,
and upbraid or expel whomsoever is rightly deserving thereof; but we
will provide for thy share of the rice.'"

   Thereupon the people approached a person who was finer, handsomer,
pleasanter, and more commanding than the rest, and said: "Come,
fellow-being! Rebuke whomsoever is rightly deserving of rebuke, and
upbraid or expel whomsoever is rightly deserving thereof; but we will
provide for your share of the rice."

   "Be it so," replied that person to the rest; and so he rebuked,
upbraided, or expelled those rightly deserving thereof, while they
provided for his share of the rice.

   Now because he was the great man elected by the race, there arose the
first title<sup><span class="small">\[1\]</span></sup> of "Great Elect."
And because he was lord of the fields,<sup><span
class="small">\[2\]</span></sup> there arose the second the of
"Nobleman." And because he reconciles others by justice, there arose the
third title of "King." Such was the origin of this circle of Nobles by
an ancient primeval title; yea, and of those very people who, though
different, are alike and not dissimilar, by virtue of justice, not by
injustice. Justice, O Vâse.t.thâ! is best for the human race in this
world and the next.<sup><span class="small">\[3\]</span></sup>

<span class="small">\[End of the Genesis document common to the Pâli
Aggañña-suttam and the Prâkrit Mahâvastu.\]</span>

<span class="small"></span>

\[1. "Title" is *akkharam*, the regular word for a letter of the
alphabet. Its literal meaning is "imperishable."

2\. There is here, and also in the words "reconcile" and "king," a
punning etymology: "field" is *khettam*, and "nobleman" is *Khattiyo*.

3\. The closing passage about justice (or religion) is not in the
Mahâvastu, being part of the discussion about caste which is now resumed
in the Pâli dialogue. In like manner there is frequent divergence of
words and sentences between the two recensions, but agreement in the
main story.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small">{The following note is from the April, 1904 issue,
Vol. XIV, No. 3}</span>

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

NOTE ON "A BUDDHIST GENESIS."

<span class="small"></span>

   Since my translation of the Buddhist Genesis document appeared in the
January *Monist*, I have found that Rockhill rendered it from the
Tibetan in 1884. (*Life of the Buddha and Early History of His Order*.
Translated from the Tibetan. By W. Woodville Rockhill. London, Trübner's
Oriental Series, 1884). I had known this book for years, but it escaped
me when making the Genesis translation and also in my *Buddhist
Bibliography* (London, 1903). In Rockhill's volume the Genesis document
comes at the very beginning. Like the Sanskritised Prâkrit version used
by me, it belongs to the Vinaya Pitaka. The Tibetan Canon is that of the
sect of Realists (*Sarvastivada*), whose account of the compilation of
the Scriptures was translated by Suzuki, also in the January *Monist*.
There are two versions of the Genesis document in the Tibetan Vinaya
Pitaka: A short one in the Vinaya-vastu (corresponding in part to the
Pâli Mahâvaggo), and a long one (translated by Rockhill) in the
Vinaya-Vibhâga (Pâli Bhikkhu-Vibhanga). The Theravâda sect, who have
handed down the Pâli Tripitaka, do not place this document in the
Vinaya, but in the Sûtra Pitaka. Thus do we prove the truth of the
Island Chronicle of Ceylon, which says that the Realists, the Great
Council, and many other sects, made recensions of the Canon to suit
themselves. We must never forget that the Pâli, though the oldest
version of the Canon known, is by no means the only one. The
Mahâsamghika (Great Council) school also claims to be the oldest, and
their Book of Discipline has come down to us in a fifth-century Chinese
translation. Suzuki also gave us extracts from this, and we saw
therefrom that they had no Abhidharma. This looks as if their Canon
belonged to an earlier period than the Pâli, for the Abhidharma was in
the nature of commentary, and was compiled after the Buddhists had split
up into sects. We <span id="page_473">p. 473</span> know that one
ancient sect, the Sautrântikas (i.e., Sûtra-men) refused to admit the
canonicity of the Abhidharma and were content with the Sûtra-Pitaka.
Moreover, the Great Council sect not only tabooed the Abhidharma, but
they also had a very short recension of the Fifth Nikâya. This
collection, known as the Khuddaka (Short) in Pâli, was called the
Miscellaneous Pitaka by other sects, and consisted largely of
commentaries. The Great Council refused to canonize these commentaries,
but admitted into it only the Udâna, the Itivuttka and the Nidâna.

   It is high time that Japanese scholars translated the books of this
early rival sect, which may yet be proved to be older than the Pâli.

ALBERT J. EDMUNDS.      

   PHILADELPHIA, PA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index)
