[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Chinese
Articles](../../cfu/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# THE "HOLY EDICT" OF K'ANG-HI

### translated by Paul Carus, with (Daisetz) Teitaro Suzuki

##### {K'ang-Hi was the second Manchu Emperor of China. He ascended to the throne in 1662 at age 8 on the death of his father Shun Chih and was succeeded by his son Yung-Ching in 1722.}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE MONIST

 

<span class="small">A QUARTERLY MAGAZINE</span>

 

### DEVOTED TO THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE

 

 

#### Volume XIV

 

#### CHICAGO

##### THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY

##### 1904

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, April 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_733">p. 733</span>

## THE "HOLY EDICT" OF K'ANG-HI.

A CHINESE ANTI-MACHIAVELLI.

   SHORTLY before Frederick the Great ascended the throne, he wrote a
criticism of Machiavelli's doctrines of statecraft, which in those times
were considered the sum-total of political wisdom, in a treatise
entitled *Anti-Machiavelli*. Machiavelli, an Italian statesman, educated
in the school of Italian politics with its intrigues and *coups d'état*,
advised princes to maintain their sovereignty by crooked means, by
treachery, and violence, but the young Crown Prince of Prussia condemned
the book not only as immoral but also as very unwise,—in a word, as
absolutely wrong; and he stated his own views that a prince could
maintain himself best by serving the people with ability and honesty.
"Government is needed," the young Frederick argued, "and so long as a
prince will do his duty, his people will need him and will be grateful
for the service he gives." In contrast to the notion of Louis XIV. of
France, who said; "*L'état c'est moi*," Frederick's maxim was that a
king is, and should consider himself, "the first servant of his people."
The statesmen of Europe smiled at the ingenuity of the fantastic
idealist, as which they regarded him, but Frederick proved to them by
deeds that his maxims were superior to the intricate wiles of the old
diplomacy.

   It is interesting to learn that in China too there lived a sovereign
who came to the conclusion that honesty is the best policy, and whose
main maxim of government may be summed up in the principle, to serve the
interests of the people. The man of whom <span id="page_734">p.
734</span> we speak is K'ang-Hi, and the famous document which expresses
his views on the subject is called the "Holy Edict."

 

THE HOLY EDICT OF K'ANG-HI.

   K'ang-Hi \#\#\#, the second emperor of the present dynasty called
Ch'ing, was distinguished not only in the field as a successful general,
but also as a good ruler by the wisdom of his government. He published
in the latter part of his glorious reign an advice to government
officials in sixteen maxims, known under the name *Shêng Yü* \#\#\#,
i.e., "Holy Edict." They were written on slips of wood and hung up in
all the imperial offices of the country.

   Yung-Ching, the son and successor of K'ang-Hi, republished his
father's edict with a preface and amplifications of his own. He says in
the preface:

   "Our sacred father, the benevolent emperor, for a long period taught
the method of a perfect reform. His virtue was as wide as the ocean, and
his mercy extended to the boundaries of heaven. His benevolence
sustained the world, and his righteousness guided the teeming multitudes
of his people. For sixty years, in the morning and in the evening, even
while eating and dressing, his sole care was to rouse all, both his own
subjects and those living outside his domain, to exalt virtue, to rival
with each other in liberal-mindedness and in keeping engagements with
fidelity. His aim was that all should cherish the spirit of kindness and
meekness, and that they should enjoy a reign of eternal peace.

   "With this purpose in view, he graciously published an edict
consisting of sixteen maxims, wherein he informed the soldiers of the
Tartar race (at the capital), and also the soldiers and people of the
various provinces, of their whole duty concerning the practice of the
essential virtues, the duties of husbandry and the culture of cotton and
silk, labor and rest, common things and ideal aspirations, public and
private affairs, great things and small, and whatever was proper for the
people to do; all this he elucidated thoughtfully. He looked upon his
people as his own children. His sacred <span id="page_735">p. 735</span>
instructions are like the sayings of the ancient sages, for they point
out the right way of assured safety.

   "Ten thousand generations should practise his maxims. To improve them
is impossible.

   "Since we succeeded to the charge of this great empire and are ruling
now over the millions of people, we have conformed our mind to the mind
of our sacred father and our government to his, morning and evening, and
with untiring<span id="page_735_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_735_note_1) energy, we endeavor to
conform to the ancient traditions and customs. . . .

   "With great reverence, we publish the sixteen maxims of the Sacred
Edict on the principles of which we have deeply meditated. We have
amplified them by an addition of ten thousand characters, explaining
them with similes from things far and near, quoting ancient books in
order to fully explain their meaning."

   The preface is signed "Yung Ching," bearing the date of the second
year of his rule, the second day of the second month. His seal consists
of two impressions: one shows the characters "Attend to the people," the
other "Venerate heaven."

   My source of the Chinese text is a manuscript copy, written by an
unknown Sinologist as marginal notes in an old translation of the Sacred
Edict by the Rev. Willliam Milne, Protestant Missionary at Malacca,
printed in 1817 at London for Black, Kingsbury & Allen, Booksellers for
the Hon. East India Co. The handwriting of the Chinese characters is
awkward but clear, obviously made with a Western pen, not a native's
brush. It contains two mistakes, which were corrected by Mr. Teitaro
Suzuki, who also assisted me in the translation.

   The copy here reproduced has been written by Mr. Kentok Hori of San
Francisco, California, well known among his countrymen for his elegant
penmanship.

<span id="page_736">p. 736</span>

 

TEXT OF THE SIXTEEN MAXIMS.<span id="page_736_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_736_note_1)

<img src="kang-hi.jpg" style="height:100.0%" />

<span id="page_737">p. 737</span>

 

TRANSLATION OF THE HOLY EDICT.

 

[MAXIM](#commI) <span id="I">I</span>.

   Cultivate filial piety and brotherly love, for thereby will be
honored social morality.

 

MAXIM <span id="II">II</span>.

   Render family relations<span id="page_737_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_737_note_1) cordial, for thereby
appears the bliss of harmony.

 

[MAXIM](#commIII) <span id="III">III</span>.

   Let concord prevail among neighbors,<span
id="page_737_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_737_note_2) for thereby you prevent
quarrels and law suits.

 

[MAXIM](#commIV) <span id="IV">IV</span>.

   Honor husbandry and silk industry, for thereby is supplied raiment
and food.

 

MAXIM <span id="V">V</span>.

   Esteem thrift and economy,<span id="page_737_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_737_note_3) for thereby is saved
money in business.

 

[MAXIM](#commVI) <span id="VI">VI</span>.

   Promote academic institutions, for thereby are established scholarly
habits.

 

[MAXIM](#commVII) <span id="VII">VII</span>.

   Do away with heretical systems, for thereby is exalted the orthodox
doctrine.

 

[MAXIM](#commVIII) <span id="VIII">VIII</span>.

   Explain laws and ordinances,<span
id="page_737_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_737_note_4) for thereby are warned
the foolish and obstinate.

<span id="page_738">p. 738</span>

 

MAXIM <span id="IX">IX</span>.

   Recommend polite manners, for thereby is refined the social
atmosphere.<span id="page_738_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_738_note_1)

 

MAXIM <span id="X">X</span>.

   Develop legitimate business, for thereby the people's desire is
rendered pacific.

 

MAXIM <span id="XI">XI</span>.

   Instruct the youth,<span id="page_738_fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#page_738_note_2) for thus you prevent
crime.

 

[MAXIM](#commXII) <span id="XII">XII</span>.

   Suppress false denunciations, for thereby you protect the good and
the worthy.<span id="page_738_fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#page_738_note_3)

 

MAXIM <span id="XIII">XIII</span>.

   Warn those who conceal deserters, for thereby they escape being
entangled in their fate.<span id="page_738_fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#page_738_note_4)

 

[MAXIM](#commXIV) <span id="XIV">XIV</span>.

   Enforce the payment<span id="page_738_fr_5"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">5</span></sup>](#page_738_note_5) of taxes,<span
id="page_738_fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#page_738_note_6) for thereby you avoid
the imposition of fines.

 

MAXIM <span id="XV">XV</span>.

   Keep disciplined the police forces,<span
id="page_738_fr_7"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">7</span></sup>](#page_738_note_7) for thereby are
prevented thefts and robberies.

 

[MAXIM](#commXVI) <span id="XVI">XVI</span>.

   Settle enmities and dissensions, for thereby you protect human
lives.<span id="page_738_fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#page_738_note_8)

<span id="page_739">p. 739</span>

 

   Each maxim of the Holy Edict consists of seven characters, and
exhibits the same grammatical construction. The first three characters
express the advice given; the fourth character is uniformly the same
word, *i* which means "thereby," "thus," or "so that": the concluding
three characters contain the result to be obtained.

   The style of the Holy Edict will naturally appear pedantical to a
Western reader, but if we consider its contents and the spirit in which
it is written, we must grant that it is a remarkable document which
reveals to us the inmost thought of a great Chinese ruler.

 

YUNG CHING'S AMPLIFICATIONS.

   Yung Ching, the son of K'ang-Hi and his successor, adds to the
sixteen Maxims of his father his amplifications, as he styles them,
which may be characterised as sermons on the bliss of virtue and the
curse of evil-doing.

<span id="commI"></span>   Yung Ching's comments on the [first
Maxim](#I) are typical Chinese expositions of the significance of \#\#\#
*hsiao*, i.e., "filial piety," the cardinal virtue of Confucian ethics.
It reads as follows:

<span class="small"></span>

   "Filial piety is the unalterable statute of heaven, the corresponding
operations of earth, and the common obligations of all people. Have
those who are void of filial piety never reflected on the natural
affection of parents to their children?

   "Before leaving the parental bosom, if hungry, you could not feed
yourselves; if cold, you could not put on clothes. Parents judge by the
voice and anxiously watch the features of their children; their smiles
create joy, their weeping, grief. On beginning to walk they leave not
their steps; when sick, they do not sleep or eat; thus they nourish and
teach them. When they come to years they give them wives, and settle
them in business, exhausting their minds by planning and their strength
by labor. Parental virtue is truly great and exhaustless as that of
heaven.

   "The son of man that would recompense one in ten thousand of favors
of his parents, should at home exhaust his whole heart, abroad exert his
whole strength. Watch over his person, practise economy, diligently
labor for, and dutifully nourish them. Let him not gamble, drink,
quarrel, or privately hoard up riches for his own sake! Though his
external manners may not be perfect, yet there should be abundant
sincerity!

<span id="page_740">p. 740</span>

   "Let us enlarge a little here by quoting what Tsang-Tsze says: 'To
move unbecomingly is unfilial; to serve the prince without fidelity is
unfilial; to act disrespectful as a mandarin is unfilial; to be
insincere to a friend is unfilial; to be cowardly in battle is also
unfilial.' These things are comprehended in the duty of an obedient son.

   "Again, the father's elder son is styled viceroy of the family; and
the younger brothers \[after the father's death\] give him honorable
appellation of family superior.

   "Daily, in going out and coming in, whether in small or great
affairs, the younger branches of his family must ask his permission. In
eating and drinking, they must give him the preference; in conversation,
yield to him; in walking, keep a little behind him; in sitting and
standing, take the lower place. These are illustrative of the duties of
the younger brothers.

   "If I meet a stranger, ten years older than myself, I would treat him
as an eIder brother; if one five years older, I would walk with my
shoulder a little behind his; how much more then ought I to act thus
towards him who is of the same blood with myself!

   "Therefore, undutifulness to parents and unbrotherly conduct are
intimately connected. To serve parents and elder brothers are things
equally important.

   "The dutiful child will also be the affectionate brother; the dutiful
child and affectionate brother will, in the country, be a worthy member
of the community; in the camp, a faithful and bold soldier. You,
soldiers and people, know that children should act filially and brothers
fraternally; but we are anxious lest the thing, becoming to you all,
should not be borne in mind, and you thus trespass the bounds of the
human relations."

<span id="commIII"></span>   In his amplification of the [third
Maxim](#III), Yung Ching quotes a saying of his father, which reads:

<span class="small"></span>

   "By concord, litigation may be nipped in the bud."

   Yung Ching's further comments on Maxim III are a sermon on concord:

<span class="small"></span>

   "It is evident that a man should receive all, both relatives and
indifferent persons, with mildness; and manage all, whether great or
small affairs, with humility. Let him not presume on his riches, and
despise the poor; not pride himself of his illustrious birth, and
contemn the ignoble; not arrogate wisdom to himself and impose on the
simple; not rely on his own courage and shame the weak; but let him, by
suitable words, compose differences; kindly excuse people's errors; and,
though wrongfully offended, settle the matter according to reason. . . .
.

<span id="page_741">p. 741</span>

   "Let the aged and the young in the village be united as one body, and
their joys and sorrows viewed as those of one family. When the
husbandman and the merchant mutually lend, and when the mechanic and the
shopman mutually yield, then the people will harmonise with the people.
. . . . When the the soldiers exert their strength to protect the
people, let the people nourish that strength. When the people spend
their money to support the soldiers, let the soldiers be sparing of that
money; thus both soldiers and people will harmonise together. . . . .

   "The whole empire is an aggregate of villages; hence you ought truly
to conform yourselves to the sublime instructions of our sacred father
and honor the excellent spirit of concord: then, indeed, filial and
fraternal duties would be more attended to, kindred more respected, the
virtue of villages become more illustrious, approximating habitations
prosper, litigations cease, and man enjoy repose through the age of
ages! The union of peace will extend to myriads of countries, and
superabounding harmony diffuse itself through the universe!"

<span id="commIV"></span>   Concerning the [fourth Maxim](#IV), Yung
Ching writes:

<span class="small"></span>

   "Of old time the emperors themselves ploughed, and their empresses
cultivated the mulberry tree. Though supremely honorable, they disdained
not to labor, in order that, by their example, they might excite the
millions of the people to lay due stress on the essential principles of
political economy."

<span id="commVI"></span>   Learning is perhaps more highly honored in
China than in any other country. Yung Ching amplifies the [sixth
Maxim](#VI) in a sermon on the duties of a scholar:

<span class="small"></span>

   "The scholar is the head of the four classes of people. The respect
that others show to him should teach him to respect himself, and not
degrade his character. When the scholar's practice is correct, the
neighborhood will consider him as a model of manners. Let him,
therefore, make filial and fraternal duties the beginning and talent the
end; place enlarged knowledge first and literary ornaments last. Let the
books he reads be all orthodox, and the companions he chooses all men of
approved character. Let him adhere rigorously to propriety, and
watchfully preserve decency, lest he ruin himself, and disgrace the
walls of his college, and lest that, after having become famous, the
shadows of conscious guilt and shame should haunt him under the bed
cover.

   "He who can act according to this maxim is a true scholar.

   "But there are some who keenly contend for fame and gain, act
contrary to their instructions, learn strange doctrines and crooked
sciences, <span id="page_742">p. 742</span> not knowing the exalted
doctrine. Giving wild liberty to their words, they talk bigly, but
effect nothing. Ask them for words, and they have them; search for the
reality, and they are void of it. . . . .

   "With respect to you, soldiers and people, it is to be feared that
you are not aware of the importance of education, and suppose that it is
of no consequence to you. But though not trained up in the schools, your
nature is adapted to the common relations. Mung-Tsze said: 'Carefully
attend to the instructions of the schools—repeatedly inculcate filial
and fraternal duties.' He also said: 'When the common relations are
fully understood by superiors, affection and kindness will be displayed
among inferiors.' Then it is evident that the schools were not intended
for the learned only, but for the instruction of the people also."

<span id="commVII"></span>   As to the [seventh Maxim](#VII), we find
what may be considered as a suppression of religious liberty in China,
and such it is in a certain way and with certain limitations.

   Professor De Groot has devoted an elaborate essay<span
id="page_742_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_742_note_1) on the subject which we
have reviewed in *The Monist* for January, 1904. The present edict truly
expresses the spirit of the Chinese government in matters of religion.
The great emperor K'ang-Hi is anxious to establish the orthodox religion
of China which is practically Confucianism, but he tolerates Taoism and
Buddhism. His son, Emperor Yung Ching, amplifies his father's maxim by
saying that it discriminates only against the corruptors of the
doctrines of Confucius, Lao-Tze, and Buddha, and also condemns secret
fraternities, such as exist all over China and become easily centers of
sedition, as we have seen in the Boxer movement which has recently
originated.

   <span class="small">\[As a rule religions are tolerated until they
come in conflict with the basic principle of Confucianism, which is
expressed in that one syllable *hsiao*, i.e., "filial piety." There are
millions of Muhammedans in China who are practically unmolested in their
faith. The Muhammedan rebellion in 1865 was a purely political affair
and had nothing to do with religion. Further the Jews lived in China
undisturbed for many centuries; they could build synagogues and worship
God in their own way without any interference from the government. The
fact is that both Muhammedans and Jews complied with the main request of
Confucianism and inculcated reverence for parents and a recognition of
the emperor's authority. The Nestorians met with a hearty welcome from
the government and flourished for some time. Marco Polo tells us how
much Kublai Khan was interested in Christianity, and that he wrote a
letter to the Pope which, however, was never delivered, requesting him
to send missionaries to China. The great K'ang-Hi, the author of the
Holy Edict, favored the Jesuits and not only allowed them to preach
Christianity, but did not hesitate to entrust them with high and
important government positions. The animosity against Christianity is of
recent date and is mainly based upon the notion that native Christians
must despise the sages of yore, that they must repudiate their family
(which is frequently demanded by missionaries on account of the ritual
of ancestor worship), and that they place the authority of Christ (which
practically means the church) above the authority of their parents, as
indicated in the passage ([Luke xiv. 26](../../bib/kjv/luk.htm#14:26))
where Christ says: "If any man come to me and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his
own life also, he cannot be my disciple." The very words "to hate father
and mother," whatever the interpretation may be, jars on the ear of the
Chinese. This verse in combination with denunciations of missionaries
who call Buddha "the night of Asia," Confucius "a blind leader of the
blind," etc., has done much harm to Christianity.\]</span>

   Yung Ching says:

<span class="small"></span>

   "From of old three sects have been delivered down. Beside the sect of
the learned, there are those of Tao and Fŭh. Chu-Tsze says: 'The sect of
Fŭh regard not heaven, earth, or the four quarters, but attend only to
the heart; the sect of Lao exclusively to the preservation of the animal
spirits.' This definition of Chu-Tsze is correct and impartial and shows
what Fŭh and Tao originally aimed at.

   "Afterwards, however, there arose a class of wanderers, who, void of
any source of dependence, stole the names of these sects, but corrupted
their principles.

   "And what is still worse, lascivious and villainous persons creep in
secretly among them; form brotherhoods, bind themselves to each other by
oath, meet in the night and disperse at the dawn, violate the laws,
corrupt the age, and impose on the people,—and behold! one morning the
whole business comes to light. They are seized according to law, their
innocent neighbors injured—their own families involved—and the chief of
their cabal punished with extreme rigor. What they vainly thought would
prove the source of their felicity becomes the cause of their misery. .
.

   "By his benevolence, our sacred father, the benevolent Emperor,
refined the people; by his rectitude he polished them; by his most
exalted talents he set forth in order the common relations and radical
virtues. His sublime and luminous instructions form the plan by which to
rectify the hearts of the men of the age. A plan the most profound and
excellent! . . . .

   "The injury of torrents, flames, robbers, and thieves, terminates on
the body; but that of false religions extends to the human heart. Man's
heart is originally upright and without corruption; and, were there firm
resolution, <span id="page_744">p. 744</span> men would not be seduced.
A character, square and upright, would appear. All that is corrupt would
not be able to overcome that which is pure. In the family there would be
concord; and, on meeting with difficulties, they would be converted into
felicities.

   "He who dutifully serves his father and faithfully performs the
commands of his prince, completes the whole duty of man, and collects
celestial favor. He who seeks not a happiness beyond his own sphere and
rises not up to evil, but attends diligently to the duties proper for
him, will receive prosperity from the gods.

   "Attend to your agriculture and to your tactics. Be satisfied in the
pursuit of the cloth and the grain, which are the common necessaries.
Obey this true, equitable, and undeviating doctrine. Then false
religions will not wait to be driven away: they will retire of their own
accord."

<span id="commVIII"></span>   Concerning the [knowledge of laws](#VIII),
Yung Ching says:

<span class="small"></span>

   "Though the law has a thousand chapters and ten thousand sections,
yet it may be summed up in this sentence: 'It agrees with common sense,
and its norm is reason.' Heavenly reason and man's common sense can be
understood by all. When the heart is directed by common sense and by
reason, the body will never be subject to punishment."

<span id="commXII"></span>   In the amplification to [Maxim XII](#XII)
we find the following exhortation:

<span class="small"></span>

   "The commandment is exalted and most perspicuous, yet there are some
who dare presume to transgress. The lust of gain having corrupted their
hearts, and their nature being moulded by deceit, they spurt out the
poison lodged within, vainly hoping that the law will excuse them. But
they consider not that, if a false statement be once discovered, it can
by no means pass with impunity. To move to litigations with the view of
entrapping others, is the same as to dig a pit into which they
themselves shall fall."

<span id="commXIV"></span>   Yung Ching's sermon on the [fourteenth
Maxim](#XIV) on taxes shows that the Chinese officials had sometimes
great trouble in collecting the taxes. He says:

<span class="small"></span>

   "Since our dynasty established its rule, the proportions of the
revenue have been fixed by a universally approved statute; and all the
other unjust items have been completely cancelled: a thread or a hair
too much is not demanded from the people.

   "In the days of our sacred father, the benevolent Emperor, his
abounding benevolence and liberal favor fed this people for upwards of
sixty years. Thinking daily how to promote the abundance and happiness
of the people, he greatly diminished the revenue. . . . .

<span id="page_745">p. 745</span>

   "Pay in all the terms and wait not to be urged. Then you may take
what is over and nourish your parents, complete the marriage ceremonies
of your sons and daughters, satisfy your own morning and evening wants,
and prepare for the annual feasts and sacrifices. The district officers
may then sleep at ease in their public halls. The villages will no more
be teased in the night by the calls of the tax-gatherers. Above you or
below you none will be evolved. Your wives and children will be easy and
at rest. There is no joy greater than this.

   "If you be not aware of the importance of the revenue to the
government, and that the law cannot dispense with it, perhaps you will
positively refuse or deliberately put off the payment. The mandarins,
being obliged to balance their accounts, and give in their reports at
the stated times, must be rigorously severe.

   "The collectors will have to apply the whip, cannot avoid pressing
their demands for money on you. Knocking on your doors, like hungry
hawks, they will devise numerous methods of getting a supply of their
wants. These nameless ways of spending will probably amount to more than
the sum which ought to have been paid; and after all, the tax cannot be
dispensed with.

   "We know not what benefit can accrue from this. Rather than to give
presents to satisfy the rapacity of the police officers, how much better
would it be to clear off the just demands of the nation! Rather than
prove yourselves to be obstinate, refusing the payment of the revenue,
would it not be better to keep the law as a peace-abiding people? Every
one, even the most stupid, knows this. . . . .

   "Try to think that the daily and nightly vexations and labors of the
palace are all in the service of the people. When there is an
inundation, dykes must be raised to keep it off. When the demon of
drought appears, prayer must be offered for rain; when there are
locusts, they must be destroyed. If fortunately the calamity be averted,
you all enjoy the profits. When unfortunately it comes, your taxes are
remitted and alms liberally dealt out to you.

   "If it be thus, and the people still can suffer thernselves to evade
the payment of taxes, and hinder the supply of the wants of the
govemment, ask yourselves how it is possible for you to be at ease? This
may be compared to the conduct of an undutiful son: while with his
parents he receives his share of the property, and ought afterwards to
nourish them, and thus discharge his duty; the parents also manifest the
utmost affection, diligence, and anxiety, and leave none of their
strength unexerted; yet the son appropriates their money to his own
private use; diminishes their savory food; and feeds them with reluctant
and obstinate looks. Can such a person be called a child of a human
being?

<span id="page_746">p. 746</span>

   "We use these repeated admonitions, solely wishing you, soldiers and
people, to think of the army and the nation above you; and of your
persons and families below you. Then abroad you will have the fame of
having faithfully exerted your ability, and at home, peacefully enjoy
the fruits of it. The mandarins will neither trouble you, nor the clerks
vex you—what joy equal to this!"

<span id="commXVI"></span>   The [sixteenth Maxim](#XVI) is practically
a sermon on anger. Yung Ching says:

<span class="small"></span>

   "Our sacred father, the benevolent Emperor, in consequence of
desiring to manifest regard to you, closed the sixteen maxims of the
admonitory Edict by teaching to respect life. The heart of heaven and
earth delights in animated nature; but fools regard not themselves. The
government of a good prince loves to nourish, but multitudes of the
ignorant lightly value life. If the misery rise not from former
animosities, it proceeds from momentary anger. The violent, depending on
the strength of their backbone, kill others, and throw away their own
lives. . . . .

   "Cherish mildness, disperse passion; then you need not wait for the
mediation of others: habits of contention will cease of their own
accord. How excellent would such manners be!

   "Kung-Tsze said, 'When anger rises, think of the consequences.'
Mung-Tsze said, 'He that repeatedly treats one rudely is a fool.' The
doctrines delivered down by these sages, from more than a thousand years
ago, correspond exactly with those explained in the Edict by our sacred
father, the benevolent Emperor.

   "Soldiers and people, respectfully obey this: disregard it not. Then
the people in their cottages will be protected; the soldiers in the camp
enjoy repose; below you will support your family character, and above
reward the nation. Comfortable and easy in days of abundance, all will
advance to a virtuous old age. Does not this illustrate the advantages
of settling animosities?"

EDITOR.   

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Chinese Articles](../../cfu/etc/index)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_735">p. 735</span>

<span id="page_735_note_1"></span>[1](#page_735_fr_1). The larva of the
mosquito is an animalcule which is constantly wriggling in the water. It
has a name of its own in Chinese, being called *Chieh-Chieh*, which
serves as a well-known symbol of an indefatigable activity. For the sake
of simplicity, we have simp1y translated it "untiring."

<span id="footnotes_page_736">p. 736</span>

<span id="page_736_note_1"></span>[1](#page_736_fr_1). The text of the
Holy Edict has been incorporated in an edition of the *T'ai Shang Kan
Ying P'ien*, published by the Association of the Middle Flower, a
Chinese society at Yokohama. The text agrees wlth the present one with
the exception of two cases, viz., Maxim II, word 7, and Maxim XIII, word
2, which are replaced by homonyms, and in Maxim XII the order of the
characters 6 and 7 is inverted. Our translation is as literal as
possible.

<span id="footnotes_page_737">p. 737</span>

<span id="page_737_note_1"></span>[1](#page_737_fr_1). Literally: "Make
cordial \|\|relatives\|\| \[and\] kin."—Here as well as elsewhere, two
synonyms are used to express one idea. They had perhaps been better
translated by one word.

<span id="page_737_note_2"></span>[2](#page_737_fr_2). Literally:
"Harmonise \|\|the village's\|\| inhabitants."

<span id="page_737_note_3"></span>[3](#page_737_fr_3). See [note to
Maxim II](#page_737_note_1).

<span id="page_737_note_4"></span>[4](#page_737_fr_4). See [note to
Maxim II](#page_737_note_1).

<span id="footnotes_page_738">p. 738</span>

<span id="page_738_note_1"></span>[1](#page_738_fr_1). Literally: "Wind
and habits"; \#\#\# *Feng* = "wind," means also "climate," and
"atmosphere." Both characters together are best translated "social
atmosphere."

<span id="page_738_note_2"></span>[2](#page_738_fr_2). Literally: "Boys
and youngsters." See [note to Maxim II](#page_737_note_1).

<span id="page_738_note_3"></span>[3](#page_738_fr_3). See [note to
Maxim II](#page_737_note_1).

<span id="page_738_note_4"></span>[4](#page_738_fr_4). Literally:
"Escape bush entanglement," which means "being entangled in the (same)
bush," i.e., "being caught with criminals."

<span id="page_738_note_5"></span>[5](#page_738_fr_5). Literally:
"Complete," which means "be punctual in collecting."

<span id="page_738_note_6"></span>[6](#page_738_fr_6). The term "taxes"
means in Chinese "cash payments and food products," because the tax
payers have their choice to pay either in coin or in produce.

<span id="page_738_note_7"></span>[7](#page_738_fr_7). Literally:
"Protecting armies."

<span id="page_738_note_8"></span>[8](#page_738_fr_8). Literally:
"Persons and their destinies."

<span id="footnotes_page_742">p. 742</span>

<span id="page_742_note_1"></span>[1](#page_742_fr_1). *Sectarianism and
Religious Persecution in China*. Amsterdam: Johannes Müller.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
