<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/005) 
[Pickthall](../pick/005)  [Palmer Part I (SBE06)](../sbe06/005)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/00501)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq005)   
[Previous](009)  [Next](qridx) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA V.--THE TABLE \[CXIV.\]

MEDINA.--120 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

O BELIEVERS! be faithful to your engagements. You are allowed the flesh
of cattle other than what is hereinafter recited, except game, which is
not allowed you while ye are on pilgrimage. Verily, God ordaineth what
he pleaseth.

O Believers! violate neither the rites of God, nor the sacred month
Muharram, nor the offering, nor its ornaments <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1](#fn_1261), nor those who press on to the sacred
house seeking favour from their Lord and his good pleasure in them.

But when all is over <span id="fr_1262"></span>[2](#fn_1262), then take
to the chase: and let not ill will at those <span
id="fr_1263"></span>[3](#fn_1263) who would have kept you from the
sacred mosque lead you to transgress <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[4](#fn_1264), but rather be helpful to one another
according to goodness and piety, but be not helpful for evil and malice:
and fear ye God. Verily, God is severe in punishing!

That which dieth of itself, and blood, and swine's flesh, and all that
hath been sacrificed under the invocation of any other name than that of
God, and the strangled, and the killed by a blow, or by a fall, or by
goring <span id="fr_1265"></span>[5](#fn_1265), and that which hath been
eaten by beasts of prey, unless ye make it clean by giving the
death-stroke yourselves, and that which hath been sacrificed on the
blocks of stone <span id="fr_1266"></span>[6](#fn_1266), is forbidden
you: and to make division of the slain by consulting the arrows, <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[7](#fn_1267) is impiety in you. Woe this day on
those who forsake your religion! And fear them not, but fear Me.

This day have I perfected your religion for you, and have filled up the
measure of my favours upon you: and it is my pleasure that Islam be your
religion; but whoso without wilful leanings to wrong shall be forced by
hunger to transgress, to him,verily, will God be Indulgent, Merciful.

They will ask thee what is made lawful for them. Say: Those things which
are good <span id="fr_1268"></span>[8](#fn_1268) are legalised to you,
and the prey of beasts of chase which ye have trained like dogs,
teaching them as God hath taught you. Eat, therefore, of what they shall
catch for you, and make mention of the name of God over it, and fear
God: Verily, Swift is God to reckon:

This day, things healthful are legalised to you, and the meats of those
who have received the Scriptures are allowed to you, as your meats are
to them. And you are permitted to marry virtuous women who are
believers, and virtuous women of those who have received the Scriptures
before you, when you shall have provided them their portions, living
chastely with them without fornication, and without taking concubines.
Vain the works of him who shall renounce the faith! and in the next
world he shall be of the lost.

O Believers! when ye address yourselves to prayer, wash your faces, and
your hands up to the elbow, and wipe your heads, and your feet to the
ankles.

And if ye have become unclean, then purify yourselves. But if ye are
sick, or on a journey, or if one of you come from the place of
retirement, or if ye have touched women, and ye find no water, then take
clean sand and rub your faces and your hands with it. <span
id="fr_1269"></span>[9](#fn_1269) God desireth not to lay a burden upon
you, but he desireth to purify you, and He would fill up the measure of
His favour upon you, that ye may be grateful.

And remember the favour of God upon you, and His covenant which He hath
covenanted with you, when ye said, "We have heard and will obey;" <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[10](#fn_1270) and fear God; verily, God knoweth the
very secrets of the breast.

O Believers! stand up as witnesses for God by righteousness: and let not
ill- will at any, induce you not to act uprightly. Act uprightly. Next
will this be to the fear of God. And fear ye God: verily, God is
apprised of what ye do.

God hath promised to those who believe, and do the things that are
right, that for them is pardon and a great reward.

But they who are Infidels and treat our signs as lies--these shall be
mated with Hell fire.

O Believers! recollect God's favour upon you, when <span
id="fr_1271"></span>[11](#fn_1271) certain folk were minded to stretch
forth their hands against you, but He kept their hands from you. Fear
God then: and on God let the faithful trust.

Of old did God accept the covenant of the children of Israel, <span
id="fr_1272"></span>[12](#fn_1272) and out of them we raised up twelve
leaders, and God said, "Verily, I will be with you. If ye observe prayer
and pay the obligatory alms, and believe in my Apostles and help them,
and lend God a liberal loan, I will surely put away from you your evil
deeds, and I will bring you into gardens 'neath which the rivers flow!
But whoso of you after this believeth not, hath gone astray from the
even path."

But for their breaking their covenant we have cursed them, and have
hardened their hearts. They shift the words of Scripture from their
places, and have forgotten part of what they were taught. Thou wilt not
cease to discover deceit on their part, except in a few of them. But
forgive them, and pass it over: verily, God loveth those who act
generously!

And of those who say, "We are Christians," have we accepted the
covenant. But they too have forgotten a part of what they were taught;
wherefore we have stirred up enmity and hatred among them that shall
last till the day of the Resurrection; and in the end will God tell them
of their doings.

O people of the Scriptures! now is our Apostle come to you to clear up
to you much that ye concealed of those Scriptures, and to pass over many
things. Now hath a light and a clear Book come to you from God, by which
God will guide him who shall follow after his good pleasure, to paths of
peace, and will bring them out of the darkness to the light, by his
will: and to the straight path will he guide them.

Infidels now are they who say, "Verily God is the Messiah Ibn Maryam
(son of Mary)! SAY: And who could aught obtain from God, if he chose to
destroy the Messiah Ibn Maryam, and his mother, and all who are on the
earth together?

For with God is the sovereignty of the Heavens and of the Earth, and of
all that is between them! He createth what He will; and over all things
is God potent.

Say the Jews and Christians, "Sons are we of God and his beloved." SAY:
Why then doth he chastise you for your sins? Nay! ye are but a part of
the men whom he hath created! He will pardon whom he pleaseth, and
chastise whom he pleaseth, and with God is the sovereignty of the
Heavens and of the Earth, and of all that is between them, and unto Him
shall all things return.

O people of the Book! now hath our Apostle come to you to clear up to
you the cessation <span id="fr_1273"></span>[13](#fn_1273) of Apostles,
lest you should say, "There hath come to us no bearer of good tidings,
nor any warner." But now hath a bearer of good tidings and a warner
reached you. And God is Almighty.

And remember when Moses said to his people, "O my people! call to mind
the goodness of God towards you when he appointed Prophets among you,
and appointed you kings, and gave you what never had been given before
to any human beings:

Enter, O my people! the holy land which God hath destined for you. Turn
not back, lest ye be overthrown to your ruin."

They said, "O Moses! Therein are men of might. And verily, we can by no
means enter it till they be gone forth. But if they go forth from it,
then verily will we enter in."

Then said two men of those who feared their Lord and to whom God had
been gracious, "Enter in upon them by the gate: and when ye enter it, ye
overcome! If ye be believers, put ye your trust in God."

They said, "O Moses! never can we enter while they remain therein. Go
thou and thy Lord and fight; for here will we sit us down."

He said, "O my Lord, Verily of none am I master but of myself and my
brother: put thou therefore a difference between us and this ungodly
people."

He said, "Verily the land shall be forbidden them forty years: they
shall wander in the earth perplexed. Fret not thyself therefore for the
ungodly people."

Relate to them exactly the story of the sons of Adam <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[14](#fn_1274) when they each offered an offering;
accepted from the one of them, and not accepted from the other. The one
said, "I will surely slay thee." Said the other, "God only accepted from
those that fear Him.

"Even if thou stretch forth thine hand against me to slay me, I will not
stretch forth my hand against thee to slay thee. Truly I fear God the
Lord of the Worlds.

"Yea, rather would I that thou shouldest bear my sin <span
id="fr_1275"></span>[15](#fn_1275) and thine own sin, and that thou
become an inmate of the Fire: for that is the recompense of the unjust
doers."

And his passion led him to slay his brother: and he slew him; and he
became one of those who perish.

And God sent a raven which scratched upon the ground, to shew him <span
id="fr_1276"></span>[16](#fn_1276) how he might hide his brother's
wrong. <span id="fr_1277"></span>[17](#fn_1277) He said: "O woe is me!
am I too weak to become like this raven, and to hide away my brother's
wrong?" And he became one of the repentant.

For this cause have we ordained to the children of Israel that he who
slayeth any one, unless it be a person guilty of manslaughter, or of
spreading disorders in the land, shall be as though he had slain all
mankind; but that he who saveth a life, shall be as though he had saved
all mankind alive. <span id="fr_1278"></span>[18](#fn_1278)

Of old our Apostles came to them with the proofs of their mission; then
verily after this most of them committed excesses in the land.

Only, the recompense of those who war against God and his Apostle, and
go about to commit disorders on the earth, shall be that they shall be
slain or crucified, or have their alternate hands and feet cut off, or
be banished the land: This their disgrace in this world, and in the next
a great torment shall be theirs--

Except those who, ere you have them in your power, shall repent; for
know that God is Forgiving, Merciful.

O ye who believe! fear God. Desire union with Him. Contend earnestly on
his path, that you may attain to happiness.

As to the infidels--if that they had twice the riches of the earth to be
their ransom from torment on the day of resurrection, it should not be
accepted from them! And a dolorous torment shall be their's.

Fain would they come forth from the Fire; but forth from it they shall
not come: and a lasting torment shall be their's.

As to the thief, whether man or woman, cut ye off their hands in
recompense for their doings. <span id="fr_1279"></span>[19](#fn_1279)
This is a penalty by way of warning from God himself. And God is Mighty,
Wise.

But whoever shall turn him to God after this his wickedness, and amend,
God truly will be turned to him: for God is Forgiving, Merciful.

Knowest thou not that the sovereignty of the Heavens and of the Earth is
God's? He chastiseth whom He will, and whom He will He forgiveth. And
God hath power over all things.

O Apostle! let not those who vie with one another in speeding to
infidelity vex thee;--of those who say with their mouths, "We believe,"
but whose hearts believe not;--or of the Jews listeners to a
lie--listeners to others--but who come not to thee. They shift the words
of the law from their places, and say, "If this be brought to you,
receive it; but if this be not brought to you, then beware of it." For
him whom God would mislead, thou canst in no wise prevail with God! They
whose hearts God shall not please to cleanse, shall suffer disgrace in
this world, and in the next a grievous punishment;

Listeners to a falsehood and greedy devourers of the forbidden! <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[20](#fn_1280) If, therefore, they have recourse to
thee, then judge between them, or withdraw from them. If thou withdraw
from them, then can they have no power to injure thee. But if thou
judge, then judge between them with equity. Verily, God loveth those who
deal equitably.

But how shall they make thee their judge, since they possess already the
Law, in which are the behests of God, and have not obeyed it? After
this, they will turn their backs; but such are not believers.

Verily, we have sent down the law (Towrat) wherein are guidance and
light. By it did the prophets who professed Islam judge the Jews; and
the doctors and the teachers judged by that portion of the Book of God,
of which they were the keepers and the witnesses. Therefore, O Jews!
fear not men but fear Me; and barter not away my signs for a mean price!
And whoso will not judge by what God hath sent down--such are the
Infidels.

And therein <span id="fr_1281"></span>[21](#fn_1281) have we enacted for
them, "Life for life, and eye for eye, and nose for nose, and ear for
ear, and tooth for tooth, and for wounds retaliation:"--Whoso shall
compromise it as alms shall have therein the expiation of his sin; and
whoso will not judge by what God hath sent down-- such are the
transgressors.

And in the footsteps of the prophets caused we Jesus, the son of Mary,
to follow, confirming the law which was before him: and we gave him the
Evangel with its guidance and light, confirmatory of the preceding Law;
a guidance and warning to those who fear God;--

And that the people of the Evangel may judge according to what God hath
sent down therein. And whoso will not judge by what God hath sent
down--such are the perverse.

And to thee we have sent down the Book of the Koran with truth,
confirmatory of previous Scriptures, and their safeguard. Judge
therefore between them by what God hath sent down, and follow not their
desires by deserting the truth which hath come unto thee. To every one
of you have we given a rule and a beaten track.

And if God had pleased He had surely made you all one people; but He
would test you by what He hath given to each. Be emulous, then, in good
deeds. To God shall ye all return, and He will tell you concerning the
subjects of your disputes.

Wherefore do thou judge between them, by what God hath sent down, and
follow not their wishes! but be on thy guard against them lest they
beguile thee from any of those precepts which God hath sent down to
thee; and if they turn back, then know thou that for some of their
crimes doth God choose to punish them: for truly most men are perverse.

Desire they, therefore, the judgments of the times of(pagan) ignorance?
But what better judge can there be than God for those who believe
firmly?

O Believers! take not the Jews or Christians <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[22](#fn_1282) as friends. They are but one
another's friends. If any one of you taketh them for his friends, he
surely is one of them! God will not guide the evil doers.

So shalt thou see the diseased at heart speed away to them, and say, "We
fear lest a change of fortune befall us." But haply God will of himself
bring about some victory or event of His own ordering: then soon will
they repent them of their secret imaginings.

Then will the faithful say, "What! are these they who swore, by their
most solemn oath, that they were surely with you?" Vain their works; and
themselves shall come to ruin.

O ye who believe! should any of you desert His religion, God will then
raise up a people loved by Him, and loving Him, lowly towards the
faithful, haughty towards the Infidels. For the cause of God will they
contend, and not fear the blame of the blamer. This is the Grace of God!
On whom He will He bestoweth it! God is Vast, Omniscient!

Verily, your protector is God and His Apostle, and those who believe,
who observe prayer, and pay the alms of obligation, and who bow in
worship.

And whoso take God and His Apostle, and those who believe for friends,
they truly are the people of God; they shall have the upper hand.

O ye who believe! take not such of those who have received the
Scriptures before you, as scoff and jest at your religion, or the
Infidels, for your friends, but fear God if ye are believers:

Nor those who when ye call to prayer, make it an object of raillery and
derision. This they do because they are a people who understand not.

SAY: <span id="fr_1283"></span>[23](#fn_1283) O people of the Book! do
ye not disavow us only because we believe in God, and in what He hath
sent down to us, and in what He hath sent down aforetime, and because
most of you are doers of ill?

SAY: Can I announce to you any retribution worse than that which
awaiteth them with God? They whom God hath cursed and with whom He hath
been angry-- some of them hath He changed into apes and swine; and they
who worship Thagout are in evil plight, and have gone far astray from
the right path!

When they presented themselves to you they said, "We believe;" but
Infidels they came in unto you, and Infidels they went forth! God well
knew what they concealed.

Many of them shalt thou see hastening together to wickedness and malice,
and to eat unlawful things. Shame on them for what they have done!

Had not their doctors and teachers forbidden their uttering wickedness,
and their eating unlawful food, bad indeed would have been their doings!

"The hand of God," say the Jews, "is chained up." <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[24](#fn_1284) Their own hands shall be chained
up--and for that which they have said shall they be cursed. Nay!
outstretched are both His hands! At His own pleasure does He bestow
gifts. That which hath been sent down to thee from thy Lord will surely
increase the rebellion and unbelief of many of them; and we have put
enmity and hatred between them that shall last till the day of the
Resurrection. Oft as they kindle a beacon fire for war shall God quench
it! and their aim will be to abet disorder on the earth: but God loveth
not the abettors of disorder.

But if the people of the Book believe and have the fear of God, we will
surely put away their sins from them, and will bring them into gardens
of delight: and if that they observe the law and the Evangel, and what
hath been sent down to them from their Lord, they shall surely have
their fill of good things from above them and from beneath their feet.
Some there are among them who act aright; but many of them--how evil are
their doings!

O Apostle! proclaim all that hath been sent down to thee from thy Lord:
for if thou do it not, thou hast not proclaimed His message at all. And
God will protect thee from evil men: verily, God guideth not the
unbelievers.

SAY: O people of the Book! ye have no ground to stand on, until ye
observe the Law and the Evangel, and that which hath been sent down to
you from your Lord. <span id="fr_1285"></span>[25](#fn_1285) The Book
which hath been sent down to thee from thy Lord will certainly increase
the rebellion and unbelief of many of them; but, be not thou troubled
for the unbelievers.

Verily, they who believe, and the Jews, and the Sabeites, <span
id="fr_1286"></span>[26](#fn_1286) and the Christians--whoever of them
believeth in God and in the last day, and doth what is right, on them
shall come no fear, neither shall they be put to grief.

Of old we accepted the covenant of the children of Israel, and sent
Apostles to them. Oft as an Apostle came to them with that for which
they had no desire, some they treated as liars, and some they
slew; <span id="fr_1287"></span>[27](#fn_1287)

And they reckoned that no harm would come of it:--but they became blind
and deaf! Then was God turned unto them: then many of them again became
blind and deaf! but God beheld what they did.

Infidels now are they who say, "God is the Messiah, Son of Mary;" for
the Messiah said, "O children of Israel! worship God, my Lord and your
Lord." Whoever shall join other gods with God, God shall forbid him the
Garden, and his abode shall be the Fire; and the wicked shall have no
helpers.

They surely are Infidels who say, "God is the third of three:" for there
is no God but one God: and if they refrain not from what they say, a
grievous chastisement shall light on such of them as are Infidels.

Will they not, therefore, be turned unto God, and ask pardon of Him?
since God is Forgiving, Merciful!

The Messiah, Son of Mary, is but an Apostle; other Apostles have
flourished before him; and his mother was a just <span
id="fr_1288"></span>[28](#fn_1288) person: they both ate food. <span
id="fr_1289"></span>[29](#fn_1289) Behold! how we make clear to them the
signs! then behold how they turn aside!

SAY: Will ye worship, beside God, that which can neither hurt nor help?
But God! He only Heareth, Knoweth.

SAY: O people of the Book! outstep not bounds of truth in your religion;
neither follow the desires of those who have already gone astray, and
who have caused many to go astray, and have themselves gone astray from
the evenness of the way.

Those among the children of Israel who believed not were cursed by the
tongue of David, <span id="fr_1290"></span>[30](#fn_1290) and of Jesus,
Son of Mary. This, because they were rebellious, and became
transgressors: they forbade not one another the iniquity which they
wrought! detestable are their actions!

Thou shalt see many of them make friends of the infidels. Evil the
actions which their own passions have sent on beforehand; for God is
angry with them, and in torment shall they abide for ever:

But, if they had believed in God, and the Prophet, and the Koran which
hath been sent down to him, they had not taken them for their friends;
but perverse are most of them.

Of all men thou wilt certainly find the Jews, and those who join other
gods with God, to be the most intense in hatred of those who believe;
and thou shalt certainly find those to be nearest in affection to them
who say, "We are Christians." This, because some of them are priests and
monks, <span id="fr_1291"></span>[31](#fn_1291) and because they are
free from pride.

And when they hear that which hath been sent down to the Apostle, thou
seest their eyes overflow with tears at the truth they recognise
therein, saying, "O our Lord! we believe; write us down therefore with
those who bear witness to it.

And why should we not believe in God, and in the truth which hath come
down to us, and crave that our Lord would bring us into Paradise with
the Just?"

Therefore hath God rewarded them for these their words, with gardens
'neath which the rivers flow; they shall abide therein for ever: this
the reward of the righteous! But they who believe not and treat our
signs as lies shall be the inmates of Hell-fire.

O ye who believe! interdict not the healthful viands which God hath
allowed you; go not beyond this limit. God loveth not those who outstep
it. <span id="fr_1292"></span>[32](#fn_1292)

And eat of what God hath given you for food, that which is lawful and
wholesome: and fear God, in whom ye believe.

God will not punish you for a mistaken word in your oaths: but he will
punish you in regard to an oath taken seriously. <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[33](#fn_1293) Its expiation shall be to feed ten
poor persons with such middling food as ye feed your own families with,
or to clothe them; or to set free a captive. But he who cannot find
means, shall fast three days. This is the expiation of your oaths when
ye shall have sworn. Keep then your oaths. Thus God maketh his signs
clear to you, that ye may give thanks.

O believers! surely wine and games of chance, <span
id="fr_1294"></span>[34](#fn_1294) and statues, and the divining arrows,
are an abomination of Satan's work! Avoid them, that ye may prosper.

Only would Satan sow hatred and strife among you, by wine and games of
chance, and turn you aside from the remembrance of God, and from prayer:
will ye not, therefore, abstain from them? Obey God and obey the
Apostle, and be on your guard: but if ye turn back, know that our
Apostle is only bound to deliver a plain announcement.

No blame shall attach to those who believe and do good works, in regard
to any food they have taken, in case they fear God and believe, and do
the things that are right, and shall still fear God and believe, and
shall still fear him, and do good; for God loveth those who do good.

O ye who believe! God will surely make trial of you with such game as ye
may take with your hands, or your lances, that God may know who feareth
him in secret: and whoever after this transgresseth, shall suffer a
grievous chastisement.

O believers! <span id="fr_1295"></span>[35](#fn_1295) kill no game while
ye are on pilgrimage. Whosoever among you shall purposely kill it, shall
comsent pensate for it in domestic animals of equal value (according to
the judgment of two just persons among you), to be brought as an
offering to the Caaba; or in expiation thereof shall feed the poor; or
as the equivalent of this shall fast, that he may taste the ill
consequence of his deed. God forgiveth what is past; but whoever doth it
again, God will take vengeance on him; for God is mighty and vengeance
is His.

It is lawful for you to fish in the sea, and to eat fish, as provision
for you and for those who travel; but it is unlawful for you to hunt by
land while ye are still on pilgrimage: fear ye God, therefore, before
whom ye shall be assembled.

God hath appointed the Caaba, <span id="fr_1296"></span>[36](#fn_1296)
the sacred house, to be a station for mankind, and the sacred month, and
the offering, and its ornaments. This, that ye may know that God knoweth
all that is in the heavens and on the earth, and that God hath knowledge
of everything. Know that God is severe in punishing, and that God is
Forgiving, Merciful.

The Apostle is only bound to preach: and God knoweth what ye bring to
light, and what ye conceal.

SAY: The evil and the good shall not be valued alike, even though the
abundance of evil please thee; therefore fear God, O ye of
understanding! that it may be well with you.

O believers! ask us not of things which if they were told might only
pain you; but if ye ask of such things when the entire Koran shall have
been sent down, they will be declared to you: God will pardon you for
this, for God is Forgiving, Gracious. They who were before you, asked
concerning such things, and afterwards quickly disbelieved therein

God hath not ordained anything on the subject. of Bahira, or Saïba, or
Wasila, or Hami; <span id="fr_1297"></span>[37](#fn_1297) but the
unbelievers have invented this lie against God: and most of them had no
understanding.

And when it was said to them, "Accede to that which God hath sent down,
and to the Apostle:" they said, "Sufficient for us is the faith in which
we found our fathers." What! though their fathers knew nothing, and had
no guidance?

O believers! take heed to yourselves. <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[38](#fn_1298) He who erreth shall not hurt you when
ye have the "guidance:" to God shall ye all return, and He will tell you
that which ye have done.

O believers! let there be witnesses between you, when death draweth nigh
to any of you, at the time of making the testament; two witnesses--just
men from among yourselves, or two others of a different tribe from
yourselves--if ye be journeying in the earth, and the calamity of death
surprise you. Ye shall shut them both up, after the prayer; and if ye
doubt them, they shall swear by God, "We will not take a bribe though
the party be of kin to us, neither will we conceal the testimony of God,
for then we should be among the wicked."

But if it shall be made clear that both have been guilty of a falsehood,
two others of those who have convicted them thereof, the two nearest in
blood shall stand up in their place, and they shall swear by God,
"Verily our witness is more true than the witness of these two; neither
have we advanced anything untrue, for then should we be of the unjust."

Thus will it be easier for men to bear a true <span
id="fr_1299"></span>[39](#fn_1299) witness, or fear lest after their
oath another oath be given. Therefore fear God and hearken; for God
guideth not the perverse.

One day will God assemble the Apostles, and say, "What reply was made to
you?" They shall say, "We have no knowledge, but Thou art the Knower of
Secrets."

When He shall say: O Jesus! Son of Mary! call to mind my favour upon
thee and upon thy mother, when I strengthened thee with the Holy Spirit,
that thou shouldest speak <span id="fr_1300"></span>[40](#fn_1300) to
men alike in the cradle, and when grown up;--

And when I taught thee the Scripture, and Wisdom, and the Law, and the
Evangel: and thou didst create of clay, as it were, the figure of a
bird, by my leave, and didst breathe into it, and by my leave it became
a bird; and thou didst heal the blind and the leper, by my leave; and
when, by my leave, thou didst bring forth the dead; and when I withheld
the children of Israel from thee, when thou hadst come to them with
clear tokens: and such of them as believed not said, "This is nought but
plain sorcery;" <span id="fr_1301"></span>[41](#fn_1301)

And when I revealed unto the Apostles, "Believe on me and on my Sent
One," they said, "We believe; and bear thou witness that we are
Muslims."

Remember when the Apostles <span id="fr_1302"></span>[42](#fn_1302)
said--"O Jesus, Son of Mary! is thy Lord able to send down a furnished
TABLE to us out of Heaven?" He said--"Fear God if ye be believers."

They said--"We desire to eat therefrom, and to have our hearts assured;
and to know that thou hast indeed spoken truth to us, and to be
witnesses thereof."

Jesus, Son of Mary, said--"O God, our Lord! send down a table to us out
of Heaven, that it may become a recurring festival to us, to the first
of us and to the last of us, and a sign from thee; and do thou nourish
us, for thou art the best of nourishers."

And God said--Verily, I will cause it to descend unto you; but whoever
among you after that shall disbelieve, I will surely chastise him with a
chastisement, wherewith I will not chastise any other creature. <span
id="fr_1303"></span>[43](#fn_1303)

And when God shall say--"O Jesus, Son of Mary: hast thou said unto
mankind-- 'Take me and my mother as two Gods, beside God?"' He shall
say--"Glory be unto Thee! it is not for me to say that which I know to
be not the truth; had I said that, verily thou wouldest have known it:
Thou knowest what is in me, but I know not what is in Thee; for Thou
well knowest things unseen!

"I spake not to them aught but that which thou didst bid me--'Worship
God, my Lord and your Lord;' and I was a witness of their actions while
I stayed among them; but since thou hast taken me to Thyself, Thou hast
Thyself watched them, and Thou art witness of all things:

"If Thou punish them, they are Thy servants, and if Thou forgive them. .
. . <span id="fr_1304"></span>[44](#fn_1304) Thou, verily, art the
Mighty, the Wise!"

God will say--This day shall their truth advantage the truthful. Gardens
shall they have 'neath which the rivers flow, and remain therein for
ever: God is well pleased with them and they with Him. This shall be the
great bliss.

Unto God belongeth the sovereignty of the Heavens and of the Earth, and
of all that they contain; and He hath power over all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[1](005.htm#fr_1261) The garlands, etc.,
attached to the victims offered at Mecca.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[2](005.htm#fr_1262) When you have again
returned to your common and everyday life by laying aside the ihram, or
pilgrim's robe. This generally consists of two pieces of cotton, or
linen, or woollen cloth, without seam or ornament, one of which is
wrapped round the loins, and the other thrown over the shoulders. The
instep, heel, and head must be bare.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[3](005.htm#fr_1263) The Koreisch sent to meet
Muhammad, who was on his way to visit the Caaba with 1400 men, at
Hudaibiya (An. Hej. 6) to prohibit his nearer approach. A truce for ten
years was ultimately concluded.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[4](005.htm#fr_1264) By making war in the holy
month.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[5](005.htm#fr_1265) Comp. Tract Cholin, c. 3.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[6](005.htm#fr_1266) Lit. on blocks or shafts
of stone. These were set up by the pagan Arabs in front of their houses
for the purpose of sacrificing thereon. See Freytag's Einl. p. 462, and
Tr. Cholin, p. 39, 40, 41.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[7](005.htm#fr_1267) It was the custom to draw
lots for joints of a camel with arrows, some feathered and others
unfeathered, kept for this purpose in the temple of Mecca. See Pocock,
Spec. Hist. Ar., under the word Hobal.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[8](005.htm#fr_1268) In the sense of sound,
healthful.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[9](005.htm#fr_1269) Thus Talm. Tr. Berachoth,
46.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[10](005.htm#fr_1270) This refers to the oath
of fidelity which Muhammad's followers took at Al Akaba. Abulf.
Vit.Moh.p.43.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[11](005.htm#fr_1271) It is quite uncertain to
what events this refers. The commentators narrate, and have doubtless
invented, various incidents as having occasioned it.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[12](005.htm#fr_1272) Verses 15-38 belong
probably to the period shortly before the taking of Chaibar in the
beginning of Hej. 7. It is remarkable that Muhammad, although he has
invented these twelve leaders of tribes, should nowhere mention the
number of the Apostles. There is no doubt, however, from the ancient
biographies, that he chose twelve assistants for the propagation of
Islam. See Gagnier, Vie de M. ii. xvi.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[13](005.htm#fr_1273) The space between the
mission of different prophets.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[14](005.htm#fr_1274) Called by the Arabians
Habeel and Kabeel. The dialogue between Cain and Abel is slightly varied
from that given in Targ. Jerus. on Gen. iv. 8, and Jonath. Ben Uzziel.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[15](005.htm#fr_1275) Or, the sin against me,
i.e. of slaying me.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[16](005.htm#fr_1276) In the Jewish tradition
the raven shews the mode of burial to Adam, not to Cain. Pirke R.
Elieser, c. 21. Midr. fol. II ap. Weil (Legenden, p. 39).

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[17](005.htm#fr_1277) Or, corpse.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[18](005.htm#fr_1278) Thus Mischn. Sanhedr.
iv. 5, "We find it said in the case of Cain who murdered his
brother--'The voice of thy brother's bloods crieth'--It is not said,
blood of thy brother, but bloods, i.e. his blood and the blood of his
seed. Therefore was man created single, in order to shew that to him who
kills a single individual of Israel it shall be reckoned as if he had
slain the whole race, and that he, etc." precisely as in the text. Comp.
also the same form of expression in Bab. Tal, Kidush, § 1, "If one
fulfil but one commandment, he causes the scale of innocence to
preponderate for himself and the whole world; but if he commit one sin,
he causes the scale of guilt to preponderate for himself and the whole
world.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[19](005.htm#fr_1279) Muhammad is said by the
early traditionists to have punished a woman who had been guilty of
theft in this manner while on the route to Mecca previous to its
capture. We are, therefore, able to fix the date of verses 39-44.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[20](005.htm#fr_1280) Usury, bribes.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[21](005.htm#fr_1281) Ex. xxi. 23-27.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[22](005.htm#fr_1282) This may refer to
proposals made to the Muslims to enter into alliance with the Jews and
Christians against the heathen, after the reverse at Ohod. Lane observes
(Mod. Egyptians, i. 358) with regard to this precept, that "of the
leading features of the character of the Mooslims none is more
remarkable than their religious pride. They regard persons of every
other faith as the children of perdition; and such the Mooslim is early
taught to despise." They are, however, "as remarkable for their
toleration as for their contempt of unbelievers."

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[23](005.htm#fr_1283) Weil suggests that
verses 64-88 were revealed subsequently to contests with the Jews, but
before Muhammad had broken with the Christians, i.e. between Hej. 4 and
8.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[24](005.htm#fr_1284) That is, God has ceased
to be bounteous. The Muslims believe that at the day of judgment all the
Jews will appear with the right hand tied to the neck.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[25](005.htm#fr_1285) That is, the Koran. The
Jew was to retain a faith in the Towrât, or Law; the Christian in the
Injil, or Gospel; but both Jews and Christians were to receive the Koran
as the complement of both.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[26](005.htm#fr_1286) See Sura \[xci.\] ii.
59, p. 344.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[27](005.htm#fr_1287) I Thess. ii. 15.

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[28](005.htm#fr_1288) Did not give herself out
to be a goddess. Djelal.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[29](005.htm#fr_1289) That is, were human
beings, and subject to the usual wants and liabilities of ordinary
persons.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[30](005.htm#fr_1290) See Sura ii. 61, p. 344.
Mark viii. 30.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[31](005.htm#fr_1291) Geiger derives both the
Arabic words from Syriac terms, and renders elders and clerics, p. 51.
But the root of the Arabic word rendered monk is generally said to be
rahaba, to fear.

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[32](005.htm#fr_1292) Comp. Sura \[cix.\]
1xvi. 2. The date of verses 89-91 is therefore probably Hej. 7.

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[33](005.htm#fr_1293) If you violate it.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[34](005.htm#fr_1294) See verse 4. Tradition
has expanded the word ansab, so as to include all figures, and hence the
strict observers of the letter of the Koran forbid the game of chess.
The Persians, however, and Indians generally interpret this verse more
liberally.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[35](005.htm#fr_1295) This and the two
following verses are placed by the commentators in the year of
Hudaibiya, as also 98, 99, 100.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[36](005.htm#fr_1296) That is, Cube-House.
Maison Carrée. It is also commonly called the Bait Ullah, House of God.
The Caaba is an oblong massive structure 55 ft. in length, 45 in
breadth, and the height somewhat greater than the length. At the S.E.
corner is the famous Hajar El-Aswad, or Black Stone, according to Lieut.
Burton, an undoubted aerolite. It is figured in Mr. Muir's "Life of
Mahomet." The Caaba stands in an open parallelogram of about 500 ft. by
530 ft. and is surrounded by colonnades, the pillars of which, made of
various marbles, some Egyptian but mostly Meccan, stand in a quadruple
row on the east side, and three deep on the other sides, and amount to
554. It has been rebuilt several times, but has not been materially
altered since A.H. 1040.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[37](005.htm#fr_1297) Names given to the
sacred animals which were marked and allowed to range for pasture at
liberty. The dedicated mother-camel was the Saiba; the Wasila included
also goats or ewes; the eleventh female offspring of the camel was
Bahira; the dedicated stallion was Hami. These forms of superstition
grew up, obviously, from a remote period, out of the intense affection
of the Bedouin for his flocks, especially his horses and camels.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[38](005.htm#fr_1298) Lit. on you your souls.

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[39](005.htm#fr_1299) Lit. upon its face, i.e.
according to its plain scope.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[40](005.htm#fr_1300) See Evang. Infant. c. 1,
Invenimus in libro Josephi Pontificis qui vixit tempore Christi, Jesum
locutum esse, et quidem cum in cunis jaceret, etc. The date of verse 108
to the end is uncertain.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[41](005.htm#fr_1301) Precisely the same
expression is applied to our Lord in the Arabic Evang. Infantiæ, c. 36
at the end, which also relates the story of the Birds.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[42](005.htm#fr_1302) Ar. El-hawariyin, a
different word from that used for Jesus, Hud, Saleh, and the other
apostles par excellence. The root of the word is the Æthiopic hawyra, to
go, send; hence the Church is called in Æthiopic the Beth chrestyan ant
hawariyat, i.e. Apostolic. See, however, the note on Thilo's Cod. Apoc.
p. 152, who derives from the root hur, to be white, pure; hence,
friends, helpers.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[43](005.htm#fr_1303) Comp. 1 Cor. xi. 27,
sqq.--Muhammad obviously refers to the Eucharist.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[44](005.htm#fr_1304) Thou hast a right to do
so as their Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](qridx)

</div>
