<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/007) 
[Pickthall](../pick/007)  [Palmer Part I (SBE06)](../sbe06/007)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/00701)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq007)   
[Previous](035)  [Next](046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA VII.--AL ARAF \[LXXXVII.\]

MECCA.--205 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM. SAD. <span id="fr_741"></span>[1](#fn_741) A Book hath
been sent down to thee: therefore let there be no difficulty in thy
breast concerning it: to the intent that thou mayest warn thereby, and
that it may be a monition to the faithful.

Follow ye what hath been sent down to you from your Lord; and follow no
masters beside Him. How little will ye be monished!

How many cities have we destroyed! By night, or while they were in their
midday slumber, did our wrath reach them!

And what was their cry when our wrath reached them, but to say, "Verily,
we have been impious."

Surely, therefore, will we call those to account, to whom an Apostle
hath been sent, and of the sent ones themselves will we certainly demand
a reckoning.

And with knowledge will we tell them of their deeds, for we were not
absent from them.

The weighing <span id="fr_742"></span>[2](#fn_742) on that day, with
justice! and they whose balances shall be heavy, these are they who
shall be happy.

And they whose balances shall be light, these are they who have lost
their souls, for that to our signs they were unjust:

And now have we stabilished you on the earth, and given you therein the
supports of life. How little do ye give thanks!

We created you; then fashioned you; then said we to the angels,
"Prostrate yourselves unto Adam: and they prostrated them all in
worship, save Eblis: He was not among those who prostrated themselves.

To him said God: "What hath hindered thee from prostrating thyself in
worship at my bidding?" He said, "Nobler am I than he: me hast thou
created of fire; of clay hast thou created him."

He said, "Get thee down hence: Paradise is no place for thy pride: Get
thee gone then; one of the despised shalt thou be."

He said, "Respite me till the day when mankind shall be raised from the
dead."

He said, "One of the respited shalt thou be."

He said, "Now, for that thou hast caused me to err, surely in thy
straight path will I lay wait for them:

Then will I surely come upon them from before, and from behind, and from
their right hand, and from their left, and thou shalt not find the
greater part of them to be thankful."

He said, "Go forth from it, a scorned, a banished one! Whoever of them
shall follow thee, I will surely fill hell with you, one and all.

And, O Adam! dwell thou and thy wife in Paradise, and eat ye whence ye
will, but to this tree approach not, lest ye become of the unjust
doers."

Then Satan whispered them to shew them their nakedness, which had been
hidden from them both. And he said, "This tree <span
id="fr_743"></span>[3](#fn_743) hath your Lord forbidden you, only lest
ye should become angels, or lest ye should become immortals."

And he sware to them both, "Verily I am unto you one who counselleth
aright."

So he beguiled them by deceits: and when they had tasted of the tree,
their nakedness appeared to them, and they began to sew together upon
themselves the leaves of the garden. And their Lord called to them, "Did
I not forbid you this tree, and did I not say to you, 'Verily, Satan is
your declared enemy.' "

They said, "O our Lord! With ourselves have we dealt unjustly: if thou
forgive us not and have pity on us, we shall surely be of those who
perish."

He said, "Get ye down, the one of you an enemy <span
id="fr_744"></span>[4](#fn_744) to the other; and on earth shall be your
dwelling, and your provision for a season."

He said, "On it shall ye live, and on it shall ye die, and from it shall
ye be taken forth."

O children of Adam! now have we sent down to you raiment to hide your
nakedness, and splendid garments; but the raiment of piety--this is
best. This is one of the signs of God, that man haply may reflect.

O children of Adam! let not Satan bring you into trouble, as he drove
forth your parents from the Garden, by despoiling them of their raiment,
that he might cause them to see their nakedness: He truly seeth you, he
and his comrades, whence ye see not them. Verily, we have made the
Satans tutelars of those who believe not.

And when the wicked commit some filthy deed, they say, "We found our
fathers practising it, and to us hath God commanded it"--SAY: God
enjoineth not filthy deeds. Will ye speak of God ye know not what?

SAY: My Lord hath enjoined what is right. Turn your faces therefore
towards every place where he is worshipped <span
id="fr_745"></span>[5](#fn_745) and call upon him with sincere religion.
As he created you, to him shall ye return: some hath he guided, and some
hath he justly left in error, because they have taken the Satans as
their tutelars beside God, and have deemed that they were guided aright.

O children of Adam! wear your goodly apparel when ye repair to any
mosque, <span id="fr_746"></span>[6](#fn_746) and eat ye and drink; but
exceed not, for He loveth not those who exceed.

SAY: Who hath prohibited God's goodly raiment, and the healthful viands
which He hath provided for his servants? SAY: These are for the faithful
in this present life, but above all on the day of the resurrection. Thus
make we our signs plain for people of knowledge.

SAY: Truly my Lord hath forbidden filthy actions whether open or secret,
and iniquity, and unjust violence, and to associate with God that for
which He hath sent down no warranty, and to speak of God that ye know
not.

Every nation hath its set time. And when their time is come, they shall
not retard it an hour; and they shall not advance it.

O children of Adam! there shall come to you Apostles from among
yourselves, rehearsing my signs to you; and whoso shall fear God and do
good works, no fear shall be upon them, neither shall they be put to
grief.

But they who charge our signs with falsehood, and turn away from them in
their pride, shall be inmates of the fire: for ever shall they abide
therein.

And who is worse than he who deviseth a lie of God, or treateth our
signs as lies? To them shall a portion here below be assigned in
accordance with the Book of our decrees, until the time when our
messengers, <span id="fr_747"></span>[7](#fn_747) as they receive their
souls, shall say, "Where are they on whom ye called beside God?" They
shall say: "Gone from us." And they shall witness against themselves
that they were infidels.

He shall say, "Enter ye into the Fire with the generations of Djinn and
men who have preceded you. So oft as a fresh generation entereth, it
shall curse its sister, until when they have all reached it, the last
comers shall say to the former, 'O our Lord! these are they who led us
astray: assign them therefore a double torment of the fire:"' He will
say, "Ye shall all have double." But of this are ye ignorant.

And the former of them shall say to the latter, "What advantage have ye
over us? Taste ye therefore the torment for that which ye have done."

Verily, they who have charged our signs with falsehood and have turned
away from them in their pride, Heaven's gates shall not be opened to
them, nor shall they enter Paradise, until the camel <span
id="fr_748"></span>[8](#fn_748) passeth through the eye of the needle.
After this sort will we recompense the transgressors.

They shall make their bed in Hell, and above them shall be coverings of
fire! After this sort will we recompense the evil doers.

But as to those who have believed and done the things which are right
(we will lay on no one a burden beyond his power) These shall be inmates
of Paradise: for ever shall they abide therein;

And we will remove whatever rancour was in their bosoms: rivers shall
roll at their feet: and they shall say, "Praise be to God who hath
guided us hither! We had not been guided had not God guided us! Of a
surety the Apostles of our Lord came to us with truth." And a voice
shall cry to them, "This is Paradise, of which, as the meed of your
works, ye are made heirs."

And the inmates of Paradise shall cry to the inmates of the fire, "Now
have we found what our Lord promised us to be true. Have ye too found
what your Lord promised you to be true?" And they shall answer, "Yes."
And a Herald shall proclaim between them: "The curse of God be upon the
evil doers,

Who turn men aside from the way of God, and seek to make it crooked, and
who believe not in the life to come!"

And between them shall be a partition; and on the wall AL ARAF <span
id="fr_749"></span>[9](#fn_749) shall be men who will know all, <span
id="fr_750"></span>[10](#fn_750) by their tokens, and they shall cry to
the inmates of Paradise, "Peace be on you!" but they shall not yet enter
it, although they long to do so.

And when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the Fire, they
shall say, "O our Lord! place us not with the offending people."

And they who are upon Al Araf shall cry to those whom they shall know by
their tokens, "Your amassings and your pride have availed you nothing.

Are these they on whom ye sware God would not bestow mercy? Enter
ye <span id="fr_751"></span>[11](#fn_751) into Paradise! where no fear
shall be upon you, neither shall ye be put to grief."

And the inmates of the fire shall cry to the inmates of Paradise: "Pour
upon us some water, or of the refreshments <span
id="fr_752"></span>[12](#fn_752) God hath given you?" They shall say,
"Truly God hath forbidden both to unbelievers,

Who made their religion a sport and pastime, and whom the life of the
world hath deceived." This day therefore will we forget them, as they
forgot the meeting of this their day, and as they did deny our signs.

And now have we brought them the Book: with knowledge have we explained
it; a guidance and a mercy to them that believe.

What have they to wait for now but its interpretation? When its
interpretation <span id="fr_753"></span>[13](#fn_753) shall come, they
who aforetime were oblivious of it shall say, "The Prophets of our Lord
did indeed bring the truth; shall we have any intercessor to intercede
for us? or could we not be sent back? Then would we act otherwise than
we have acted." But they have ruined themselves; and the deities of
their own devising have fled from them!

Your Lord is God, who in six days created the Heavens and the Earth, and
then mounted the throne: He throweth the veil of night over the day: it
pursueth it swiftly: and he created the sun and the moon and the stars,
subjected to laws by His behest: Is not all creation and its empire His?
Blessed be God the Lord of the Worlds!

Call upon your Lord with lowliness and in secret, for He loveth not
transgressors.

And commit not disorders on the earth after it hath been well ordered;
and call on Him with fear and longing desire: Verily the mercy of God is
nigh unto the righteous.

And He it is who sendeth forth the winds as the heralds of his
compassion, <span id="fr_754"></span>[14](#fn_754) until they bring up
the laden clouds, which we drive along to some dead land and send down
water thereon, by which we cause an upgrowth of all kinds of
fruit.--Thus will we bring forth the dead. Haply ye will reflect.

In a rich soil, its plants spring forth abundantly by the will of its
Lord, and in that which is bad, they spring forth but scantily. Thus do
We diversify our signs for those who are thankful.

Of old sent We Noah to his people, <span
id="fr_755"></span>[15](#fn_755) and he said, "O my people! worship God.
Ye have no God but Him: indeed I fear for you the chastisement of the
great day."

The chiefs of his people said, "We clearly see that thou art in a
palpable error."

He said, "There is no error in me, O my people! but I am a messenger
from the Lord of the Worlds.

I bring to you the messages of my Lord, and I give you friendly counsel;
for I know from God what ye know not.

Marvel ye that a Warning should come to you from your Lord through one
of yourselves, that he may warn you, and that ye may fear for
yourselves, and that haply ye may find mercy?"

But they treated him as a liar: so we delivered him and those who were
with him in the ark, and we drowned those who charged our signs with
falsehood; for they were a blind people.

And to Ad <span id="fr_756"></span>[16](#fn_756) we sent their brother
Houd. <span id="fr_757"></span>[17](#fn_757) "O my people!" said he,
"worship God: ye have no other god than Him: Will ye not then fear Him?"

Said the unbelieving chiefs among his people, "We certainly perceive
that thou art unsound of mind; and we surely deem thee an impostor."

He said, "O my people! it is not unsoundness of mind in me, but I am an
Apostle from the Lord of the Worlds.

The messages of my Lord do I announce to you, and I am your
faithful <span id="fr_758"></span>[18](#fn_758) counsellor.

Marvel ye that a warning hath come to you from your Lord through one of
yourselves that He may warn you? Remember how he hath made you the
successors of the people of Noah, and increased you in tallness of
stature. Remember then the favours of God, that it may haply be well
with you."

They said, "Art thou come to us in order that we may worship one God
alone, and leave what our fathers worshipped? Then bring that upon us
with which thou threatenest us, if thou be a man of truth."

He said, "Vengeance and wrath shall suddenly light on you from your
Lord. Do ye dispute with me about names that you and your fathers have
given your idols, and for which God hath sent you down no warranty? Wait
ye then, and I too will wait with you."

And we delivered him, and those who were on his side, by our mercy, and
we cut off, to the last man, those who had treated our signs as lies,
and who were not believers.

And to Themoud we sent their brother Saleh. <span
id="fr_759"></span>[19](#fn_759) He said, O my people! worship God: ye
have no other god than Him: now hath a clear proof of my mission come to
you from your Lord, this she-camel of God being a sign to you: therefore
let her go at large to pasture on God's earth: and touch her not to harm
her, lest a grievous chastisement seize you.

And remember how he hath made you successors to the Adites, and given
you dwellings on the earth, so that on its plains ye build castles, and
hew out houses in the hills. And bear in mind the benefits of God, and
lay not the earth waste with deeds of licence.

Said the chiefs of his people puffed up with pride, to those who were
esteemed weak, even to those of them who believed, "What! know ye for
certain that Saleh is sent by his Lord?" They said, "Truly we believe in
that with which he hath been sent."

Then said those proud men, "Verily, we reject that in which ye believe."

And they ham-strung the she-camel, and rebelled against their Lord's
command, and said, "O Saleh, let thy menaces be accomplished upon us if
thou art one of the Sent Ones."

Then the earthquake surprised them; and in the morning they were found
dead on their faces in their dwellings.

So he turned away from them, and said, "O my people! I did indeed
announce to you the message of my Lord: and I gave you faithful counsel,
but ye love not faithful counsellors. <span
id="fr_760"></span>[20](#fn_760)

We also sent Lot, when he said to his people, commit ye this filthy deed
in which no creature hath gone before you?

Come ye to men, instead of women, lustfully? Ye are indeed a people
given up to excess.

But the only answer of his people was to say, "Turn them out of your
city, for they are men who vaunt them pure."

And we delivered him and his family, except his wife; she was of those
who lingered:

And we rained a rain upon them: and see what was the end of the wicked!

And we sent to Madian <span id="fr_761"></span>[21](#fn_761) their
brother Shoaib. He said, "O my people! worship God; ye have no other God
than Him: now hath a clear sign come to you from your Lord: give
therefore the full in measures and weights; take from no man his
chattels, and commit no disorder on the earth after it has been made so
good. This will be better for you, if you will believe it.

And lay not in ambush by every road in menacing sort; nor mislead him
who believeth in God, from His way, nor seek to make it crooked; and
remember when ye were few and that he multiplied you, and behold what
hath been the end of the authors of disorder!

And if a part of you believe in that with which I am sent, and a part of
you believe not, then wait steadfastly until God shall judge between us,
for He is the best of judges."

Said the chiefs of his people puffed up with pride, "We will surely
banish thee, O Shoaib, and thy fellow-believers from our cities, unless
indeed ye shall come back to our religion." "What!" said he, "though we
abhor it?

Now shall we have devised a lie concerning God, if after he hath
delivered us from your religion we shall return to it; nor can we return
to it, unless by the will of God our Lord: our Lord embraceth all things
in his ken. In God have we put our trust: O our Lord! decide between us
and between our people, with truth; for the best to decide art Thou."

And the chiefs of his people who believed not, said, "If ye follow
Shoaib, ye shall then surely perish."

An earthquake therefore surprised them, and they were found in the
morning dead on their faces, in their dwellings.

Those who had treated Shoaib as an impostor, became as though they had
never dwelt in them: they who treated Shoaib as an impostor, were they
that perished.

So he turned away from them and said, O my people! I proclaimed to you
the messages of my Lord, and I counselled you aright; but how should I
be grieved for a people who do not believe?

Nor did we ever send a prophet to any city without afflicting its people
with adversity and trouble, that haply they might humble them. <span
id="fr_762"></span>[22](#fn_762)

Then changed we their ill for good, until they waxed wealthy, and said,
"Of old did troubles and blessings befall our fathers:" therefore did we
seize upon them suddenly when they were unaware.

But if that the people of these cities had believed and feared us, we
would surely have laid open to them blessings out of the Heaven and the
Earth: but they treated our signs as lies, and we took vengeance on them
for their deeds.

Were the people, therefore, of those cities secure that our wrath would
not light on them by night, while they were slumbering?

Were the people of those cities secure that our wrath would not light on
them in broad day, while they were disporting themselves?

Did they, therefore, deem themselves secure from the deep counsel <span
id="fr_763"></span>[23](#fn_763) of God? But none deem themselves secure
from the deep counsel of God, save those who perish.

Is it not proved to those who inherit this land after its ancient
occupants, that if we please we can smite them for their sins, and put a
seal upon their hearts, that they hearken not?

We will tell thee the stories of these cities. Their apostles came to
them with clear proofs of their mission; but they would not believe in
what they had before treated as imposture.--Thus doth God seal up the
hearts of the unbelievers--

And we found not of their covenant in most of them; but we found most of
them to be perverse.

Then after them we sent Moses with our signs to Pharaoh and his nobles,
who acted unjustly in their regard. But see what was the end of the
corrupt doers!

And Moses said, "O Pharaoh! verily I am an apostle from the Lord of the
Worlds.

Nothing but truth is it right for me to speak of God. Now am I come to
you from your Lord with a proof of my mission; send away, therefore, the
children of Israel with me." He said, "If thou comest with a sign, shew
it if thou art a man of truth."

So he threw down his rod, and lo! it distinctly became a serpent.

Then drew he forth his hand, and lo! it was white <span
id="fr_764"></span>[24](#fn_764) to the beholders.

The nobles of Pharaoh's people said, "Verily, this is an expert
enchanter:

Fain would he expel you from your land: what then do ye order to be
done?"

They said, "Put <span id="fr_765"></span>[25](#fn_765) him and his
brother off awhile, and send round men to your cities who shall muster

And bring to thee every skilled enchanter."

And the enchanters came to Pharaoh. Said they, "Shall we surely be
rewarded if we prevail?"

He said, "Yes; and ye certainly shall be near my person."

They said, "O Moses! either cast thou down thy rod first, or we will
cast down ours."

He said, "Cast ye down." And when they had cast them down they enchanted
the people's eyes, and made them afraid; for they had displayed a great
enchantment.

Then spake we unto Moses, "Throw down thy rod;" and lo! it devoured
their lying wonders.

So the truth was made strong, and that which they had wrought proved
vain:

And they were vanquished on the spot, and drew back humiliated.

But the other enchanters prostrated themselves adoring:

Said they, "We believe on the Lord of the Worlds,

The Lord of Moses and Aaron."

Said Pharaoh, "Have ye believed on him, ere I have given you leave? This
truly is a plot which ye have plotted in this my city, in order to drive
out its people. But ye shall see in the end what shall happen.

I will surely cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides; then will I
have you all crucified."

They said, "Verily, to our Lord do we return;

And thou takest vengeance on us only because we have believed on the
signs of our Lord when they came to us. Lord! pour out constancy upon
us, and cause us to die Muslims."

Then said the chiefs of Pharaoh's people--"Wilt thou let Moses and his
people go to spread disorders in our land, and desert thee and thy
gods?" He said, "We will cause their male children to be slain and
preserve their females alive: and verily we shall be masters over them."

Said Moses to his people, "Cry unto God for help, and bear up patiently,
for the earth is God's: to such of His servants as He pleaseth doth He
give it as a heritage; and for those that fear Him is a happy issue."

"We have been oppressed," they said, "before thou camest to us, and
since thou hast been with us:" "Perhaps," said he, "your Lord will
destroy your enemy, and will make you his successors in the land, and He
will see how ye will act therein."

Already had we chastised the people of Pharaoh with dearth and scarcity
of fruits, that haply they might take warning:

And when good fell to their lot they said, "This is our due." But if ill
befel them, they regarded Moses and his partisans as (the birds) of evil
omen. <span id="fr_766"></span>[26](#fn_766) Yet, was not their evil
omen from God? But most of them knew it not.

And they said, "Whatever sign thou bring us for our enchantment, we will
not believe on thee."

And we sent upon them the flood and the locusts and the kummal (lice)
and the frogs and the blood,--clear signs <span
id="fr_767"></span>[27](#fn_767)--but they behaved proudly, and were a
sinful people.

And when any plague fell upon them, they said, "O Moses! pray for us to
thy Lord, according to that which he hath covenanted with thee: Truly if
thou take off the plague from us, we will surely believe thee, and will
surely send the children of Israel with thee." But when we had taken off
the plague from them, and the time which God had granted them had
expired, <span id="fr_768"></span>[28](#fn_768) behold! they broke their
promise.

Therefore we took vengeance on them and drowned them in the sea, because
they treated our signs as falsehoods and were heedless of them.

And we gave to the people who had been brought so low, the eastern and
the western lands, which we had blessed as an heritage: and the good
word of thy Lord was fulfilled on the children of Israel because they
had borne up with patience: and we destroyed the works and the
structures of Pharaoh and his people:

And we brought the children of Israel across the sea, and they came to a
people who gave themselves up to their idols. They said, "O Moses! make
us a god, as they have gods." He said, "Verily, ye are an ignorant
people:

For the worship they practise <span id="fr_769"></span>[29](#fn_769)
will be destroyed, and that which they do, is vain."

He said, "Shall I seek any other god for you than God, when it is He who
hath preferred you above all other peoples?"

And remember when we rescued you from the people of Pharaoh they had
laid on you a cruel affliction; they slew your sons, and let only your
daughters live, and in this was a great trial from your Lord.

And we appointed a meeting with Moses for thirty nights, which we
completed with ten other nights, so that his whole time with his
Lord <span id="fr_770"></span>[30](#fn_770) amounted to forty nights.
Then said Moses to his brother Aaron, "Take thou my place among my
people, and act rightly, and follow not the way of the corrupt doers."

And when Moses came at our set time and his Lord spake with him, he
said, "O Lord, shew thyself to me, that I may look upon thee." He said,
"Thou shalt not see Me; but look towards the mount, and if it abide firm
in its place, then shalt thou see Me." And when God manifested Himself
to the mountain he turned it to dust! and Moses fell in a swoon.

And when he came to himself, he said, "Glory be to thee! To thee do I
turn in penitence, and I am the first of them that believe."

He said, "O Moses! thee above all men have I chosen by my commissions,
and by my speaking to thee. Take therefore what I have brought thee, and
be one of those who render thanks.

And we wrote for him upon the tables a monition concerning every matter,
and said, "Receive them thyself with steadfastness, and command thy
people to receive them for the observance of its most goodly
precepts:--I will shew you the abode of the wicked."

The unjustly proud ones of the earth will I turn aside from my signs,
for even if they see every sign they will not believe them; and if they
see the path of uprightness, they will not take it for their path, but
if they see the path of error, for their path will they take it.

This,--for that they treated our signs as lies, and were heedless of
them.

Vain will be the works of those who treated our signs, and the meeting
of the life to come, as lies! Shall they be rewarded but as they have
wrought?

And the people of Moses took during his absence a calf made of their
ornaments, and ruddy like gold, and lowing. <span
id="fr_771"></span>[31](#fn_771) Saw they not that it could not speak to
them, nor guide them in the way?

Yet they took if for a God and became offenders!

But when they repented, and saw that they had erred, they said, Truly if
our Lord have not mercy on us, and forgive us, we shall surely be of
those who perish.

And when Moses returned to his people, wrathful, angered, he said, "Evil
is it that ye have done next upon my departure. Would ye hasten on the
judgments of your Lord?" And he threw down the tables, and seized his
brother by the head and dragged him unto him. Said he, "Son of my
mother! the people thought me weak, and had well nigh slain me. Make not
mine enemies to rejoice over me, and place me not among the wrong
doers."

He said, "O Lord, forgive me and my brother, and bring us into thy
mercy; for of those who shew mercy thou art the most merciful."

Verily as to those who took the calf as a god, wrath from their Lord
shall overtake them, and shame in this present life: for thus recompense
we the devisers of a lie.

But to those who have done evil, then afterwards repent and believe, thy
Lord will thereafter be Lenient, Merciful.

And when the anger of Moses was stilled, he took up the tables; and in
their writing was guidance and mercy for those who dread their Lord.

And Moses chose seventy men of his people for a meeting appointed by us.
And when the earthquake overtook them, he said, "O my Lord! if it had
been thy pleasure, thou hadst destroyed them and me ere this! wilt thou
destroy us for what our foolish ones have done? It is nought but thy
trial: thou wilt mislead by it whom thou wilt, and guide whom thou wilt.
Our guardian, thou! Forgive us then and have mercy on us; for of those
who forgive art thou the best:

And write down for us what is good in this world, as well as in the
world to come, for to thee are we guided." He said, "My chastisement
shall fall on whom I will, and my mercy embraceth all things, and I
write it down for those who shall fear me, and pay the alms, and believe
in our signs,

Who shall follow the Apostle, the unlettered <span
id="fr_772"></span>[32](#fn_772) Prophet--whom they shall find described
with them in the Law and Evangel. What is right will he enjoin them, and
forbid them what is wrong, and will allow them healthful viands and
prohibit the impure, and will ease them of their burden, and of the
yokes which were upon them; and those who shall believe in him, and
strengthen him, and help him, <span id="fr_773"></span>[33](#fn_773) and
follow the light <span id="fr_774"></span>[34](#fn_774) which hath been
sent down with him,-- these are they with whom it shall be well."

SAY to them: O men! Verily I am God's apostle to you all;

Whose is the kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth! Therefore believe
on God but He! He maketh alive and killeth! Therefore believe on God,
and his Apostle--the unlettered Prophet--who believeth in God and his
word. And follow him that ye may be guided aright.

And among the people of Moses there is a certain number <span
id="fr_775"></span>[35](#fn_775) who guide others with truth, and
practise what is right according to it.

And we divided the Israelites into twelve tribes, as nations; and we
revealed unto Moses when the people asked drink of him--"Strike the rock
with thy staff:" and there gushed forth from it twelve fountains--the
men all knew their drinking places. And we caused clouds to overshadow
them, and sent down upon them the manna and the quails. . . . "Eat of
the good things with which we have supplied you." But it was not us whom
they injured, but they injured their own selves:

And when it was said to them, "Dwell in this city, and eat therefrom
what ye will, and say 'Hittat' (forgiveness), and enter the gate with
prostrations; then will we pardon your offences,--we will give increase
to the doers of good:"

But the ungodly ones among them changed that word into another than that
which had been told them: <span id="fr_776"></span>[36](#fn_776)
therefore sent we forth wrath out of Heaven upon them for their wrong
doings.

And <span id="fr_777"></span>[37](#fn_777) ask them about the city that
stood by the sea, when its inhabitants broke the Sabbath; when their
fish came to them on their Sabbath day appearing openly, but came not to
them on the day when they kept no Sabbath. Thus did we make trial of
them, for that they were evildoers. <span
id="fr_778"></span>[38](#fn_778)

And when some of them said, why warn ye those whom God would destroy or
chastise with terrible chastisement? they said, For our own excuse with
your Lord; and that they may fear Him.

And when they forgot their warnings, we delivered those who had
forbidden evil; and we inflicted a severe chastisement on those who had
done wrong, for that they were evil doers.

But when they proudly persisted in that which was forbidden, we said to
them, "Become scouted apes;" and then thy Lord declared that until the
day of the resurrection, he would surely send against them <span
id="fr_779"></span>[39](#fn_779) (the Jews) those who should evil
entreat and chastise them: for prompt is thy Lord to punish; and He is
Forgiving, Merciful.

And we have divided them upon the Earth as peoples: some of them are
upright and some are otherwise; and by good things and by evil things
have we proved them, to the intent that they might return to us.

And they have had successors to succeed them: they have inherited the
Book: they have received the passing good things of this lower
world, <span id="fr_780"></span>[40](#fn_780) and say, "It will be
forgiven us." Yet if the like good things came to them again, they would
again receive them. But hath there not been received on their part a
covenant through the Scripture that they should speak nought of God but
the truth? And yet they study its contents. But the mansion of the next
world hath more value for those who fear God--Do ye not then
comprehend?--

And who hold fast the Book, and observe prayer: verily, we will not
suffer the reward of the righteous to perish.

And when we shook the mount <span id="fr_781"></span>[41](#fn_781) over
them as if it had been a shadow, and they thought it falling upon them,
. . . "Receive, said we, with steadfastness what we have brought you,
and remember what is therein to the end that ye may fear God."

And when thy Lord brought forth their descendants from the reins of the
sons of Adam and took them to witness against themselves, "Am I not,"
said He, "your Lord?" They said, "Yes, we witness it." This we did, lest
ye should say on the day of Resurrection, "Truly, of this were we
heedless, because uninformed;"

Or lest ye should say, "Our fathers, indeed, aforetime joined other gods
with our God, and we are their seed after them: wilt thou destroy us for
the doings of vain men?"

Thus make we our signs clear: that haply they may return to God.

Recite to them <span id="fr_782"></span>[42](#fn_782) the history of
him <span id="fr_783"></span>[43](#fn_783) to whom we vouchsafed our
signs, and who departed from them, so that Satan followed him, and he
became one of the seduced.

Had we pleased, we had certainly thereby exalted him; but he crouched to
the earth and followed his own lust: his likeness, therefore, is as that
of the dog which lolls out his tongue, whether thou chase him away, or
leave him alone! Such is the likeness of those who treat our signs as
lies. Tell them this tale then, that they may consider.

Evil the likeness of those who treat our signs as lies! and it is
themselves they injure.

He whom God guideth is the guided, and they whom he misleadeth shall be
the lost.

Many, moreover, of the Djinn and men have we created for Hell. Hearts
have they with which they understand not, and eyes have they with which
they see not, and ears have they with which they hearken not. They are
like the brutes: Yea, they go more astray: these are the heedless.

Most excellent titles hath God: <span id="fr_784"></span>[44](#fn_784)
by these call ye on Him, and stand aloof from those who pervert <span
id="fr_785"></span>[45](#fn_785) his titles. For what they have done
shall they be repaid!

And among those whom we have created are a people who guide others with
truth, and in accordance therewith act justly.

But as for those who treat our signs as lies, we will gradually bring
them down by means of which they know not:

And though I lengthen their days, verily, my stratagem shall prove
effectual.

Will they not bethink them that their companion Muhammad is not djinn-
possessed? Yes, his office is only that of plain warner.

Will they not look forth on the realms of the Heaven and of the Earth,
and on all things which God hath made, to see whether haply their end be
not drawing on? And in what other book will they believe <span
id="fr_786"></span>[46](#fn_786) who reject the Koran?

No other guide for him whom God shall mislead! He will leave them
distraught in their wanderings.

They will ask thee of the Hour--for what time is its coming fixed? SAY:
The knowledge of it is only with my Lord: none shall manifest it in its
time but He: it is the burden <span id="fr_787"></span>[47](#fn_787) of
the Heavens and of the Earth: not otherwise than on a sudden will it
come on you. <span id="fr_788"></span>[48](#fn_788)

They will ask thee as if thou wast privy to it: SAY: The knowledge of it
is with none but God. But most men know not this.

SAY: I have no control over what may be helpful or hurtful to me, but as
God willeth. Had I the knowledge of his secrets, I should revel in the
good, and evil should not touch me. But I am only a warner, and an
announcer of good tidings to those who believe.

He it is who hath created you from a single person, and from him brought
forth his wife that he might dwell with her: and when he had known her,
she bore a light burden, and went about with it; and when it became
heavy, they both cried to God their Lord, "If thou give us a perfect
child we will surely be of the thankful."

Yet when God had given them a perfect child, <span
id="fr_789"></span>[49](#fn_789) they <span
id="fr_790"></span>[50](#fn_790) joined partners with Him in return for
what he had given them. But high is God above the partners they joined
with Him!

What! Will they join those with Him who cannot create anything, and are
themselves created, and have no power to help them, or to help
themselves?

And if ye summon them to "the guidance," they will not follow you! It is
the same to them whether ye summon them or whether ye hold your peace!

Truly they whom ye call on beside God, are, like yourselves, His
servants! Call on them then, and let them answer you, if what ye say of
them be true!

Have they feet to walk with? Have they hands to hold with? Have they
eyes to see with? Have they ears to hear with? SAY: Call on these joint
gods of yours; then make your plot against me, and delay it not.

Verily, my Lord is God, who hath sent down "the Book;" and He is the
protector of the righteous.

But they whom ye call on beside Him, can lend you no help, nor can they
help themselves:

And if ye summon them to "the guidance," they hear you not: thou seest
them look towards thee, but they do not see!

Make the best of things; <span id="fr_791"></span>[51](#fn_791) and
enjoin what is just, and withdraw from the ignorant:

And if stirrings to evil from Satan stir thee, fly thou for refuge to
God: He verily heareth, knoweth!

Verily, they who fear God, when some phantom from Satan toucheth them,
remember Him, and lo! they see clearly.

Their Brethren <span id="fr_792"></span>[52](#fn_792) will only continue
them in error, and cannot preserve themselves from it.

And when thou bringest not a verse (sign) of the Koran to them, they
say, "Hast thou not yet patched it up? <span
id="fr_793"></span>[53](#fn_793) SAY: I only follow my Lord's utterances
to me. This is a clear proof on the part of your Lord, and a guidance
and a mercy for those who believe.

And when the Koran is read, then listen ye to it and keep silence, that
haply ye may obtain mercy.

And think within thine own self on God, with lowliness and with fear and
without loud spoken words, at even and at morn; and be not one of the
heedless.

Verily they who are round about thy Lord disdain not His service. They
praise Him and prostrate themselves before Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_741"></span>[1](007.htm#fr_741) The initial letters, it has
been conjectured, of (Amara li Muhammad sahdiq), thus spake to me
Muhammad the truthful. But see Sura 1xviii. p. 32. The first part of
this Sura was perhaps revealed when the Arabians were assembled at the
Pilgrimage. See verse 29.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[2](007.htm#fr_742) A figure of frequent
occurence in the Talmud. See Tr. Rosh. Haschana, 17a.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[3](007.htm#fr_743) Comp. Sura xx. 118, p. 101.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[4](007.htm#fr_744) Gen. iii. 15.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[5](007.htm#fr_745) Lit. towards each Mosque,
i.e. towards the kibla of each Mosque. The word mosque, mesjid, however,
is usually applied only to that of Mecca. The common term in use for
larger places of worship is djami, a word unknown, in that sense, to the
Koran.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[6](007.htm#fr_746) For full information as to
the clothing of the ancient Arabians see Freyt. Einl. pp. 295 327. The
Koreisch (we are told in Sirat Arrasul, fol. 26, and Beidh.), in order
to instil a deep respect for the Caaba and other holy places into the
minds of the Arabians, had forbidden all food during the processions,
and required that no clothes, except those borrowed from Meccans, should
be worn, or that those who wore their own should devote them to God as
holy vestments. The consequence was that most of the pilgrims visited
the holy places in perfect nudity. Hence the precept in the text.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[7](007.htm#fr_747) The Angels of Death.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[8](007.htm#fr_748) Comp. Matth. xix. 24; Mark
x. 25; Luke xviii. 25. By the change of a single vowel in the Arabic
word for camel, we obtain the rendering, cable. In the Rabbinic form of
the proverb, however, the elephant is substituted for the camel, which
confirms the usual rendering and reading.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[9](007.htm#fr_749) "On this wall (the name of
which is derived from Arafa, 'to know,' with allusion to the employment
of those upon it) will stand those whose good and evil works are equal,
and are not, therefore, deserving of either Paradise or Gehenna. The
idea, which is analogous to that of Purgatory, may be derived from the
Talmud. Thus in the Midrasch on Eccl. vii. 14, 'How much space is there
between the two' (Paradise and Hell)? R. Jochanan saith, a wall; R.
Acha, a span: others hold them to be so close that a person may see from
one into the other." See Plato's Phaed. 62.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[10](007.htm#fr_750) That is, they will know
the inmates of Paradise by their whiteness, and the people of Hell by
the blackness of their faces.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[11](007.htm#fr_751) That is, ye believers: to
whom the speakers on Al Araf are supposed to turn.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[12](007.htm#fr_752) The fruits of Paradise.
Comp. Luke xvi. 19.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[13](007.htm#fr_753) The fulfilment of its
promises and threats.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[14](007.htm#fr_754) The rain. Thus, the
Rabbins call the rain "the might and power of God," Comp. Tract Tanith,
fol. I, and connect it with the Resurrection, Tract Berachoth, fol. 33.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[15](007.htm#fr_755) The Rabbins in like manner
describe the mission of Noah. Comp. Sanhedr. 108. Midr. Rabbah on Gen.
par. 30, 33; and on Eccl. 9, 14. See Sura \[lxxv.\] xi. 40.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[16](007.htm#fr_756) The two tribes of Ad and
Themoud--the latter of whom is mentioned by Diod. Sic. and Ptolemy--lay
to the north of Mecca in the direct line of traffic between the
countries to the north and to the south, and both probably disappeared
with its cessation, when the Arabs were no longer held in check by the
Romans. The traditions adopted by Muhammad attribute this to the divine
vengeance, throughout the Koran, and were derived by him from the
popular legends of Arabia. See Freyt. Einl. p. 12.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[17](007.htm#fr_757) On Houd, see Geiger, pp.
113 119. He supposes him to be the Eber of the Bible. But Mr. Muir
suggests that both Houd and Saleh may have been persecuted Jewish or
Christian emissaries and teachers, whose rejection was thus recast by
Muhammad. See note on verse 71.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[18](007.htm#fr_758) Or, entrusted, i.e. with
the office of apostle.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[19](007.htm#fr_759) Saleh--according to
Bochart, the Peleg of Gen. xi. 16. D'Herbelot, B. O. 740, makes him the
Schelah of Gen. xi. 13. See v. 63, n. and p. 220, n.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[20](007.htm#fr_760) It is just possible that
the act of Koleib, chief of the Banu Taghlib tribe, in killing the milch
camel of Basûs, a female relative of his wife of Bani-Bakr
lineage--which led to a forty years' war between these two tribes, A.D.
490--may have been worked up by Muhammad into this account of the
persecutions of Saleh.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[21](007.htm#fr_761) See Sura xxiv. 176, p.
109.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[22](007.htm#fr_762) This verse may contain an
implied reference to the famine with which Mecca had been visited, and
fix the date of this part of the Sura. Comp. verse 127.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[23](007.htm#fr_763) Lit. plot, stratagem.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[24](007.htm#fr_764) Comp. the passage from
Pirke R. Eliezer, c. 48, who makes Moses perform this miracle in the
presence of Pharaoh, which the Scripture (Ex. vii.) account does not.
The Muhammadan tradition is that Moses was a black.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[25](007.htm#fr_765) Lit. cause him to hope,
temporise with him.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[26](007.htm#fr_766) Lit. male ominati sunt.
Mar. They traced their calamities to Moses. So Sale. Kas. But Ullmann.
renders, they attributed their misfortunes to the predictions of Moses.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[27](007.htm#fr_767) In Suras \[lxvii.\] xvii.
and \[lxviii.\] Muhammad speaks of nine plagues. The flood is not
mentioned in the Scripture.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[28](007.htm#fr_768) Lit. when we removed from
them the plague until a period at which they should arrive.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[29](007.htm#fr_769) Lit. that in which these
are.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[30](007.htm#fr_770) Lit. the set time of his
Lord was fulfilled in forty nights.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[31](007.htm#fr_771) Sale and others render
having a body, corporeal, of which the commentators give no satisfactory
explanation. I have adopted that given by Freytag in v. That the calf
lowed in consequence of Sama‰l having entered into it, is one of the
traditions of the Talmud. Pirke R. Eliezer, c. 45.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[32](007.htm#fr_772) Compare Sura \[lxxxi.\]
xxix. 47, \[xciv.\] lxxii. 2, \[xci.\] ii. 73. The word ummyy is derived
from ummah, a nation, and means Gentile; it here refers to Muhammad's
ignorance, previous to the revelation of Islam, of the ancient
Scriptures. It is equivalent to the Gr. laic, ethnic, and to the term
gojim, as applied by the Jews to those unacquainted with the Scriptures.
There can, however, be no doubt that Muhammad--in spite of his
assertions to the contrary, with the view of proving his
inspiration--was well acquainted with the Bible histories. He wished to
appear ignorant in order to raise the elegance of the Koran into a
miracle. For the passages of Scripture said to foretel Muhammad, see
Pocock's Sp. Hist. Ar. p. 188, ed. White.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[33](007.htm#fr_773) If these words, as Nöldeke
supposes, contain an allusion to the Ansars, it is likely that this
verse was added at Medina. The epithet Al-Ummy (the unlettered) does
not, thus, occur in Meccan Suras.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[34](007.htm#fr_774) The Koran.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[35](007.htm#fr_775) Pirke R. Eliezer, 45,
explains Ex. xxxii. 26, of the tribe of Levi, as not having been
implicated with the other tribes in the sin of the golden calf.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[36](007.htm#fr_776) The Jews changed hittat,
absolution, indulgence, into habbat, corn.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[37](007.htm#fr_777) This and the next six
verses are supposed to have been added at Medina.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[38](007.htm#fr_778) Comp. Sura \[xci.\] ii.
61. No trace of this legend is to be found in the Talmudists. The city
is said to have been Aila (Elath) on the Red Sea.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[39](007.htm#fr_779) Perhaps in allusion to
Deut. xxviii. 49, 50.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[40](007.htm#fr_780) As bribes to pervert
Scripture, etc.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[41](007.htm#fr_781) Sinai--which, however, is
not mentioned in the Koran as the place where the law was given. Comp.
"I will cover you with the mountain like a roof." Abodah Sar. 2, 2. Thus
also in Tract Sabbath, f. 88, 1, "R. Avdimi . . . saith, These words
teach us that the Holy One, blessed be He, turned the mountain over them
like a vessel, and said to them, If ye will receive the law, well; but
if not, there shall be your grave." This tradition is still held by the
Jews. See D. Lewis Pent. Prayers, fol. 150. Its origin is a
misunderstanding of Ex. xix. 17, rightly rendered in the E. version at
the nether part of the mountain.

<span id="fn_782"></span>[42](007.htm#fr_782) To the Jews.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[43](007.htm#fr_783) Balaam. But according to
others, a Jew who renounced his faith in Muhammad.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[44](007.htm#fr_784) The 99 titles of God,
taken from the Koran, are to be found in Maracci, vol. 11, p. 414, or in
Macbride's Religion of the Mohammedans, p. 121. To facilitate the
repetition of these names, the Muslims use a rosary.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[45](007.htm#fr_785) In altering the names of
God, changing allah into Allat, Elaziz into Alozza, Mennan into Menat,
etc.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[46](007.htm#fr_786) Lit. and in what
declaration after it will they believe?

<span id="fn_787"></span>[47](007.htm#fr_787) That is, it weighs heavily
on the hopes and fears of men, djinn, and angels.

<span id="fn_788"></span>[48](007.htm#fr_788) Probably the usual final
clause, whence ye looked not for it, should here be added to make good
the rhyme, which is otherwise interrupted in the original.

<span id="fn_789"></span>[49](007.htm#fr_789) Some render salihan, well
made, rightly shaped; others, virtuous, morally perfect.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[50](007.htm#fr_790) And their idolatrous
posterity. Beidh.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[51](007.htm#fr_791) Take or use indulgence;
i.e. take men and their actions as they are, and make all due
allowances. Some understand it, of Muhammad's accepting such voluntary
and superfluous alms as the people could spare.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[52](007.htm#fr_792) That is, those under
Satanic influence.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[53](007.htm#fr_793) Collected or sought it
out. Beidh.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura XLVI.--Al Ahkaf \[LXXXVIII.\]](046)

</div>
