<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/012) 
[Pickthall](../pick/012)  [Palmer Part I (SBE06)](../sbe06/012)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/01201)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq012)   
[Previous](014)  [Next](040) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA XII.--JOSEPH, PEACE BE ON HIM \[LXXVII.\]

MECCA.--III Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. RA. <span id="fr_602"></span>[1](#fn_602) These are signs of
the clear Book.

An Arabic Koran have we sent it down, that ye might understand it.

In revealing to thee this Koran, <span id="fr_603"></span>[2](#fn_603)
one of the most beautiful of narratives will we narrate to thee, of
which thou hast hitherto been regardless.

When Joseph said to his Father, "O my Father! verily I beheld eleven
stars and the sun and the moon--beheld them make obeisance to me!" <span
id="fr_604"></span>[3](#fn_604)

He said, "O my son! tell not thy vision to thy brethren, lest they plot
a plot against thee: for Satan is the manifest foe of man.

It is thus that thy Lord shall choose thee and will teach thee the
interpretation of dark saying, and will perfect his favours on thee and
on the family of Jacob, as of old he perfected it on thy fathers Abraham
and Isaac; verily thy Lord is Knowing, Wise!"

Now in JOSEPH and his brethren are signs for the enquirers; <span
id="fr_605"></span>[4](#fn_605)

When they said, "Surely better loved by our Father, than we, who are
more in number, is Joseph and his brother; verily, our father hath
clearly erred.

Slay ye Joseph! or drive him to some other land, and on you alone shall
your father's face be set! and after this, ye shall live as upright
persons."

One of them said, "Slay not Joseph, but cast him down to the bottom of
the well: if ye do so, some wayfarers will take him up."

They said, "O our Father! why dost thou not entrust us with Joseph?
indeed we mean him well.

Send him with us to-morrow that he may enjoy himself and sport: we will
surely keep him safely."

He said, "Verily, your taking him away will grieve me; and I fear lest
while ye are heedless of him the wolf devour him."

They said, "Surely if the wolf devour him, and we so many, we must in
that case be weak indeed." <span id="fr_606"></span>[5](#fn_606)

And when they went away with him they agreed to place him at the bottom
of the well. And We revealed to him, "Thou wilt yet tell them of this
their deed, when they shall not know thee."

And they came at nightfall to their father weeping.

They said, "O our Father! of a truth, we went to run races, and we left
Joseph with our clothes, and the wolf devoured him: but thou wilt not
believe us even though we speak the truth."

And they brought his shirt with false blood upon it. He said, "Nay, but
yourselves have managed this affair. <span
id="fr_607"></span>[6](#fn_607) But patience is seemly: and the help of
God is to be implored that I may bear what you tell me."

And wayfarers came and sent their drawer of water, <span
id="fr_608"></span>[7](#fn_608) and he let down his bucket. "Good
news!" <span id="fr_609"></span>[8](#fn_609) said he, "This is a youth!"
And they kept his case secret, to make merchandise of him. But God knew
what they did.

And they sold him for a paltry price--for some dirhems counted down, and
at no high rate did they value him.

And he who bought him--an Egyptian--said to his wife, "Treat him
hospitably; haply he may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son."
Thus did we settle Joseph in the land, and we instructed him in the
interpretation of dark sayings, for God is equal to his purpose; but
most men know it not.

And when he had reached his age of strength we bestowed on him judgment
and knowledge; for thus do we recompense the well doers.

And she in whose house he was conceived a passion for him, and she shut
the doors and said, "Come hither." He said, "God keep me! Verily, my
lord hath given me a good home: and the injurious shall not prosper."

But she longed for him; and he had longed for her had he not seen a
token from his lord. <span id="fr_610"></span>[9](#fn_610) Thus we
averted evil and defilement from him, for he was one of our sincere
servants.

And they both made for the door, and she rent his shirt behind; and at
the door they met her lord. "What," said she, "shall be the recompense
of him who would do evil to thy family, but a prison <span
id="fr_611"></span>[10](#fn_611) or a sore punishment?"

He said, "She solicited me to evil." And a witness out of her own
family <span id="fr_612"></span>[11](#fn_612) witnessed: "If his shirt
be rent in front she speaketh truth, and he is a liar:

But if his shirt be rent behind, she lieth and he is true."

And when his lord saw his shirt torn behind, he said, "This is one of
your devices! verily your devices are great!

Joseph! leave this affair. And thou, O wife, ask pardon for thy crime,
for thou hast sinned."

And in the city, the women said, "The wife of the Prince hath solicited
her servant: he hath fired her with his love: but we clearly see her
manifest error."

And when she heard of their cabal, she sent to them and got ready a
banquet for them, and gave each one of them a knife, and said, "Joseph
shew thyself to them." And when they saw him they were amazed at him,
and cut their hands, <span id="fr_613"></span>[12](#fn_613) and said,
"God keep us! This is no man! This is no other than a noble angel!"

She said, "This is he about whom ye blamed me. I wished him to yield to
my desires, but he stood firm. But if he obey not my command, he shall
surely be cast into prison, and become one of the despised."

He said, "O my Lord! I prefer the prison to compliance with their
bidding: but unless thou turn away their snares from me, I shall play
the youth with them, and become one of the unwise."

And his Lord heard him and turned aside their snares from him: for he is
the Hearer, the Knower.

Yet resolved they, even after they had seen the signs of his innocence,
to imprison him for a time.

And there came into the prison with him two youths. Said one of them,
"Methought in my dream that I was pressing grapes." And the other said,
"I dreamed that I was carrying bread on my head, of which the birds did
eat. Declare to us the interpretation of this, for we see thou art a
virtuous person."

He said, "There shall not come to you in a dream any food wherewith ye
shall be fed, but I will acquaint you with its interpretation ere it
come to pass to you. This is a part of that which my Lord hath taught
me: for I have abandoned the religion <span
id="fr_614"></span>[13](#fn_614) of those who believe not in God and who
deny the life to come;

And I follow the religion of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. We
may not associate aught with God. This is of God's bounty towards us and
towards mankind: but the greater part of mankind are not thankful.

O my two fellow prisoners! are sundry lords best, or God, the One, the
Mighty?

Ye worship beside him mere names which ye have named, ye and your
fathers, for which God hath not sent down any warranty. Judgment
belongeth to God alone. He hath bidden you worship none but Him. This is
the right faith: but most men know it not.

O my two fellow prisoners! as to one of you, he will serve wine unto his
Lord: but as to the other, he will be crucified and the birds shall eat
from off his head. The matter is decreed concerning which ye enquire."

And he said unto him who he judged would be set at large, "Remember me
with thy lord." But Satan caused him to forget the remembrance of his
Lord, <span id="fr_615"></span>[14](#fn_615) so he remained some years
in prison.

And the King said, "Verily, I saw in a dream seven fat kine which seven
lean devoured; and seven green ears and other withered. O nobles, teach
me my vision, if a vision ye are able to expound."

They said, "They are confused dreams, nor know we aught of the
unravelling of dreams."

And he of the twain who had been set at large, said, "I will tell you
the interpretation; let me go for it."

"Joseph, man of truth! teach us of the seven fat kine which seven lean
devoured, and of the seven green ears, and other withered, that I may
return to the men, and that they may be informed."

He said, "Ye shall sow seven years as is your wont, and the corn which
ye reap leave ye in its ear, except a little of which ye shall eat.

Then after that shall come seven grievous years which shall eat what ye
have stored for them, except a little which ye shall have kept.

Then shall come after this a year, in which men shall have rain, and in
which they shall press the grape."

And the King said, "Bring him to me." <span
id="fr_616"></span>[15](#fn_616) And when the messenger came to Joseph
he said, "Go back to thy lord, and ask him what meant the women who cut
their hands, for my lord well knoweth the snare they laid."

Then said the Prince to the women, "What was your purpose when ye
solicited Joseph?" They said, "God keep us! we know not any ill of him."
The wife of the Prince said, "Now doth the truth appear. It was I who
would have led him into unlawful love, and he is one of the truthful."

"By this" (said Joseph) "may my lord know that I did not in his absence
play him false, and that God guideth not the machinations of deceivers.

Yet I hold not myself clear, for the heart is prone to evil, save theirs
on whom my Lord hath mercy; for gracious is my Lord, Merciful."

And the King said, "Bring him to me: I will take him for my special
service." And when he had spoken with him he said, "From this day shalt
thou be with us, invested with place and trust."

He said, "Set me over the granaries of the land, <span
id="fr_617"></span>[16](#fn_617) I will be their prudent keeper!"

Thus did we stablish Joseph in the land that he might house himself
therein at pleasure. We bestow our favours on whom we will, and suffer
not the reward of the righteous to perish.

And truly the recompense of the life to come is better, for those who
have believed and feared God.

And Joseph's brethren came and went in to him and he knew them, but they
recognised him not.

And when he had provided them with their provision, he said, "Bring me
your brother from your father. See ye not that I fill the measure, and
am the best of hosts?

But if ye bring him not to me, then no measure of corn shall there be
for you from me, nor shall ye come near me."

They said, "We will ask him of his father, and we will surely do it."

Said he to his servants, "Put their money into their camel-packs, that
they may perceive it when they have returned to their family: haply they
will come back to us."

And when they returned to their father, they said, "O, our father! corn
is withholden from us: send, therefore, our brother with us and we shall
have our measure; and all care of him will we take."

He said, "Shall I entrust you with him otherwise than as I before
entrusted you with his brother? But God is the best guardian, and of
those who shew compassion He is the most compassionate."

And when they opened their goods they found their money had been
returned to them. They said, "O, our father, what more can we desire?
Here is our money returned to us; we will provide corn for our families,
and will take care of our brother, and shall receive a camel's burden
more of corn. This is an easy quantity." <span
id="fr_618"></span>[17](#fn_618)

He said, "I will not send him with you but on your oath before God that
ye will, indeed, bring him back to me, unless hindrances encompass you."
And when they had given him their pledge, he said, "God is witness of
what we say."

And he said, "O, my sons! Enter not by one gate, but enter by different
gates. <span id="fr_619"></span>[18](#fn_619) Yet can I not help you
against aught decreed by God: judgment belongeth to God alone. In Him
put I my trust, and in Him let the trusting trust."

And when they entered as their father had bidden them, it did not avert
from them anything decreed of God; but it only served to satisfy a
desire in the soul of Jacob which he had charged them to perform; for he
was possessed of knowledge which we had taught him; but most men have
not that knowledge.

And when they came in to Joseph, he took his brother to him. He said,
"Verily, I am thy brother. Be not thou grieved for what they did." <span
id="fr_620"></span>[19](#fn_620)

And when he had provided them with their provisions, he placed his
drinking cup in his brother's camel-pack. Then a crier cried after them,
"O travellers! ye are surely thieves."

They turned back to them and said, "What is that ye miss?"

"We miss," said they, "the prince's cup. For him who shall restore it, a
camel's load of corn! I pledge myself for it."

They said, "By God! ye know certainly that we came not to do wrong <span
id="fr_621"></span>[20](#fn_621) in the land and we have not been
thieves."

"What," said the Egyptians, "shall be the recompense of him who hath
stolen it, if ye be found liars?"

They said, "That he in whose camel-pack it shall be found be given up to
you in satisfaction for it. Thus recompense we the unjust."

And Joseph began with their sacks, before the sack of his brother, and
then from the sack of his brother he drew it out. This stratagem did we
suggest to Joseph. By the King's law he had no power to seize his
brother, had not God pleased. We uplift into grades of wisdom whom we
will. And there is one knowing above every one else endued with
knowledge.

They said, "If he steal, a brother of his hath stolen heretofore." <span
id="fr_622"></span>[21](#fn_622) But Joseph kept his secret, and did not
discover it to them. Said he, aside, "Ye are in the worse condition. And
God well knoweth what ye state."

They said, "O Prince! Verily he hath a very aged father; in his stead,
therefore, take one of us, for we see that thou art a generous person."

He said, "God forbid that we should take but him with whom our property
was found, for then should we act unjustly."

And when they despaired of Benjamin, they went apart for counsel. The
eldest of them said, "Know ye not how that your father hath taken a
pledge from you before God, and how formerly ye failed in duty with
regard to Joseph? I will not quit the land till my father give me leave,
or God decide for me; for of those who decide is He the best.

Return ye to your father and say, 'O our father! Verily, thy son hath
stolen: we bear witness only of what we know: we could not guard against
the unforeseen.

Enquire for thyself in the city where we have been, and of the caravan
with which we have arrived; and we are surely speakers of the truth.'

He said, "Nay, ye have arranged all this among yourselves: But patience
is seemly: God, may be, will bring them back to me together; for he is
the Knowing, the Wise."

And he turned away from them and said, "Oh! how I am grieved for
Joseph!" and his eyes became white with grief, for he bore a silent
sorrow.

They said, "By God thou wilt only cease to think of Joseph when thou art
at the point of death, or dead."

He said, "I only plead my grief and my sorrow to God: but I know from
God what ye know not: <span id="fr_623"></span>[22](#fn_623)

Go, my sons, and seek tidings of Joseph and his brother, and despair not
of God's mercy, for none but the unbelieving despair of the mercy of
God."

And when they came in to Joseph, they said, "O Prince, distress hath
reached us and our family, and little is the money that we have brought.
But give us full measure, and bestow it as alms, for God will recompense
the almsgivers."

He said, "Know ye what ye did to Joseph and his brother in your
ignorance?"

They said, "Canst thou indeed be Joseph?" He said, "I am Joseph, and
this is my brother. Now hath God been gracious to us. For whoso feareth
God and endureth. . . . God verily will not suffer the reward of the
righteous to perish!"

They said, "By God! now hath God chosen thee above us, and we have
indeed been sinners!"

He said, "No blame be on you this day. God will forgive you, for He is
the most merciful of those who shew mercy.

Go ye with this my shirt and throw it on my father's face, and he shall
recover his sight: and bring me all your family."

And when the caravan was departed, their father said, "I surely perceive
the smell of Joseph: <span id="fr_624"></span>[23](#fn_624) think ye
that I dote?"

They said, "By God, it is thy old mistake."

And when the bearer of good tidings came, he cast it on his face, and
Jacob's eyesight returned."

Then he said, "Did I not tell you that I knew from God what ye knew
not?"

They said, "Our father, ask pardon for our crimes for us, for we have
indeed been sinners."

He said, "I will ask your pardon of my Lord, for he is Gracious,
Merciful."

And when they came into Joseph he took his parents <span
id="fr_625"></span>[24](#fn_625) to him, and said, "Enter ye Egypt, if
God will, secure."

And he raised his parents to the seat of state, and they fell down
bowing themselves unto him. Then said he, "O my father, this is the
meaning of my dream of old. My Lord hath now made it true, and he hath
surely been gracious to me, since he took me forth from the prison, and
hath brought you up out of the desert, after that Satan had stirred up
strife between me and my brethren; for my Lord is gracious to whom He
will; for He is the Knowing, the Wise.

O my Lord, thou hast given me dominion, and hast taught me to expound
dark sayings. Maker of the Heavens and of the Earth! My guardian art
thou in this world and in the next! Cause thou me to die a Muslim, and
join me with the just."

This is one of the secret histories <span
id="fr_626"></span>[25](#fn_626) which we reveal unto thee. Thou wast
not present with Joseph's brethren when they conceived their design and
laid their plot: but the greater part of men, though thou long for it,
will not believe.

Thou shalt not ask of them any recompense for this message. It is simply
an instruction for all mankind.

And many as are the signs in the Heavens and on the Earth, yet they will
pass them by, and turn aside from them:

And most of them believe not in God, without also joining other deities
with Him.

What! Are they sure that the overwhelming chastisement of God shall not
come upon them, or that that Hour shall not come upon them suddenly,
while they are unaware?

SAY: This is my way: resting on a clear proof, I call you to God, I and
whoso followeth me: and glory be to God! I am not one of those who add
other deities to Him.

Never before thee have we sent any but men, chosen out of the people of
the cities, to whom we made revelations. Will they not journey through
the land, and see what hath been the end of those who were before them?
But the mansions of the next life shall be better for those who fear
God. Will they not then comprehend?

When at last the Apostles lost all hope, and deemed that they were
reckoned as liars, our aid reached them, and we delivered whom we would;
but our vengeance was not averted from the wicked.

Certainly in their histories is an example for men of understanding.
This is no new tale of fiction, but a confirmation of previous
scriptures, and an explanation of all things, and guidance and mercy to
those who believe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_602"></span>[1](012.htm#fr_602) See Sura lxviii. p. 32. In
no other Sura beside this is one subject treated of throughout. It was
recited to the first eight of the Ansars who were converted, and clearly
proves that Muhammad must have been in confidential intercourse with
learned Jews.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[2](012.htm#fr_603) The word Koran is here used
in the same sense as Sura.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[3](012.htm#fr_604) Muhammad was either unaware
of the previous dream mentioned, Gen. xxxvii. 7, or passes it by in
silence.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[4](012.htm#fr_605) The captious and
unbelieving Koreisch.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[5](012.htm#fr_606) Wir mussten denn zuerst das
Leben einbüssen. Wahl. Ullm. Maracci.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[6](012.htm#fr_607) Lit. your minds have made a
thing seem pleasant to you.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[7](012.htm#fr_608) According to Gen. xxxvii.
24, the well or pit had "no water in it.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[8](012.htm#fr_609) Some take the Arabic Boshra
as the proper name of the person who accompanied the drawer of water.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[9](012.htm#fr_610) The apparition of his
father, who said, "Hereafter shall the names of thy brethren, engraven
on precious stones, shine on the breast of the High Priest. Shall thine
be blotted out?" Tr. Sotah, fol. 36. Comp. Weil, Legenden, p. 109, n.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[10](012.htm#fr_611) Lit. that he be
imprisoned.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[11](012.htm#fr_612) An infant in the cradle.
Sepher Hadjascher, as below on v. 31.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[12](012.htm#fr_613) Instead of their food,
through surprise at his beauty. Seph. Hadj. in Midr. Jalkut. See also
Midr. Abkhir, ib. ch. 146.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[13](012.htm#fr_614) It is curious to observe
how Muhammad, in this and the following verse, puts his own doctrine and
convictions into the mouth of Joseph.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[14](012.htm#fr_615) Satan induced Joseph to
place his confidence in man, rather than in God alone, in punishment of
which sin the imprisonment was continued. Thus Midr. Rabba. Gen. Par.
89. Midr. Jalkut, ib. ch. 147.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[15](012.htm#fr_616) In Gen. xli. 14, Joseph is
released from prison before the interpretation of the dreams. But the
Koran makes him decline to quit it till his character is cleared.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[16](012.htm#fr_617) According to Gen. xli. 39,
Pharaoh of his own accord sets Joseph over his house and land.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[17](012.htm#fr_618) For the king to bestow.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[18](012.htm#fr_619) Thus we read in Mid. Rab.
on Gen. Par. 91, "Jacob said to them, Enter ye not all by one gate." See
also Midr. Jalkut, ch. 148.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[19](012.htm#fr_620) Thus also, in the Sepher
Hadjaschar, Joseph first discovers himself to Benjamin, in opposition to
Gen. xlv. 1.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[20](012.htm#fr_621) Comp. Gen. xlii. 9.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[21](012.htm#fr_622) Joseph is said by the
Muhammadan commentators to have stolen an idol of gold belonging to his
mother's father, which he broke, that he might not worship it. But this
comment, as well as the text of the Koran, is probably based upon some
such tradition as that of Midr. Rabba, Par. 92, "He is a thief and the
son of a thief" (Comp. Gen. xxxi. 19)--spoken of Benjamin.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[22](012.htm#fr_623) That is, that Joseph was
still alive. Thus Midr. Tanchumah on Gen. xlii. 1.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[23](012.htm#fr_624) Comp. Gen. xxvii. 27.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[24](012.htm#fr_625) Joseph's mother had long
been dead. See Gen. xxxv. 19. But the object of Muhammad was probably to
bring the event into strict accordance with the prediction of the dream.
Gen. xxxvii. 10. Some, however, suppose that Bilhah is here meant, and
her appearance before Joseph is also asserted to be the fulfilment of
the dream by some of the Rabbins. Comp. Raschi on Gen. xxxvii. 10.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[25](012.htm#fr_626) Lit. This is of the
announcements of the things unseen (by thee, Muhammad). Compare the
manner in which the story of the Creation and of Moses in the mount is
introduced. Sura xxxviii. 70; xxviii. 45. Mr. Muir thinks that Muhammad
must at this period, while recasting and working up these materials,
have entered upon a course of wilful dissimulation and deceit (although
the end would justify to him the means employed) in claiming inspiration
for them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura XL.--The Believer \[LXXVIII.\]](040)

</div>
