<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/024) 
[Pickthall](../pick/024)  [Palmer Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/024)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/02401)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq024)   
[Previous](063)  [Next](058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA XXIV.--LIGHT \[CV.\]

MEDINA.--64 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

A SURA which we have sent down and sanctioned! Clear signs have we sent
down therein, that ye may take warning.

The whore and the whoremonger--scourge each of them with an hundred
stripes; and let not compassion keep you from carrying out the sentence
of God, if ye believe in God and the last day: And let some of the
faithful witness their chastisement. <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1](#fn_1140)

The whoremonger shall not marry other than a whore or an idolatress; and
the whore shall not marry other than a whoremonger or an idolater. Such
alliances are forbidden to the faithful.

They who defame virtuous women, <span id="fr_1141"></span>[2](#fn_1141)
and bring not four witnesses, scourge them with fourscore stripes, and
receive ye not their testimony for ever, for these are perverse
persons--

Save those who afterwards repent and live virtuously; for truly God is
Lenient, Merciful!

And they who shall accuse their wives, and have no witnesses but
themselves, the testimony of each of them shall be a testimony by God
four times repeated, that he is indeed of them that speak the
truth. <span id="fr_1142"></span>[3](#fn_1142)

And the fifth time that the malison of God be upon him, if he be of them
that lie.

But it shall avert the chastisement from her if she testify a testimony
four times repeated, by God, that he is of them that lie;

And a fifth time to call down the wrath of God on her, if he have spoken
the truth.

And but for the goodness and mercy of God towards you, and that God is
He who loveth to turn, Wise . . . . !

Of a truth, they who advanced that lie <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[4](#fn_1143) were a large number of you; but regard
it not as an evil to you. No, it is an advantage to you. <span
id="fr_1144"></span>[5](#fn_1144) To every man among them shall it be
done according to the offence he hath committed; and as to that
person <span id="fr_1145"></span>[6](#fn_1145) among them who took on
himself to aggravate it, a sore punishment doth await him.

Did not the faithful of both sexes, when ye heard of this, form a
favourable judgment in their own minds, and say,

"This is a manifest lie?"

Have they brought four witnesses of the fact? If they cannot produce the
witnesses, they are the liars in the sight of God.

And but for the goodness of God towards you, and His mercy in this world
and in the next, a severe punishment had come upon you for that which ye
spread abroad, when ye uttered with your tongues, and spake with your
mouths that of which ye had no knowledge. Ye deemed it to be a light
matter, but with God it was a grave one.

And did ye say when ye heard it, "It is not for us to talk of this
affair! O God! By thy Glory, this is a gross calumny?"

God hath warned you that ye go not back to the like of this for ever, if
ye be believers:

And God maketh His signs clear to you: for God is Knowing, Wise.

But as for those who love that foul calumnies should go forth against
those who believe, a grievous chastisement awaits them

In this world and in the next. And God hath knowledge, but ye have not.

And but for the goodness of God towards you and His Mercy, and that God
is Kind, Merciful . . . !

O ye who believe! follow not the steps of Satan, for whosoever shall
follow the steps of Satan, he will enjoin on him what is base and
blameworthy; and but for the goodness of God towards you, <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[7](#fn_1146) and His mercy, no one of you had been
cleansed for ever: but God maketh whom He will to be clean, and God
Heareth, Knoweth.

And let not persons of wealth and means among you swear that they will
not give to their kindred, to the poor, and to those who have fled their
homes in the cause of God; let them rather pardon and pass over the
offence. <span id="fr_1147"></span>[8](#fn_1147) Desire ye not that God
should forgive you? And God is Gracious, Merciful!

Verily, they who throw out charges against virtuous but careless women,
who yet are believers, shall be cursed in this world and in the world to
come; and a terrible punishment doth await them.

Their own tongues, and hands, and feet, shall one day bear witness
against them of their own doings. <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[9](#fn_1148)

On that day will God pay them their just due, and they shall know that
God is the clear Truth itself.

Bad women for bad men, and bad men for bad women; but virtuous women for
virtuous men, and virtuous men for virtuous women! These shall be
cleared from calumnies; theirs shall be forgiveness and an honourable
provision.

O ye who believe! enter not into other houses <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[10](#fn_1149) than your own, until ye have asked
leave, and have saluted its inmates. This will be best for you: haply ye
will bear this in mind.

And if ye find no one therein, then enter it not till leave be given
you; and if it be said to you, "Go ye back," then go ye back. This will
be more blameless in you, and God knoweth what ye do.

There shall be no harm in your entering houses in which no one dwelleth,
for the supply of your needs: and God knoweth what ye do openly and what
ye hide.

Speak unto the believers that they restrain their eyes and observe
continence. Thus will they be more pure. God is well aware of what they
do.

And speak to the believing women that they refrain their eyes, and
observe continence; and that they display not their ornaments, except
those which are external; and that they throw their veils over their
bosoms, and display not their ornaments, except to their husbands or
their fathers, or their husbands' fathers, or their sons, or their
husbands' sons, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or their
sisters' sons, or their women, or their slaves, or male domestics who
have no natural force, or to children who note not women's nakedness.
And let them not strike their feet together, so as to discover their
hidden ornaments. <span id="fr_1150"></span>[11](#fn_1150) And be ye all
turned to God, O ye Believers! that it may be well with you.

And marry those among you who are single, and your good servants, and
the handmaidens. If they are poor, God of His bounty will enrich them.
God is all-bounteous, Knowing.

And let those who cannot find a match <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[12](#fn_1151) live in continence till God of His
bounty shall enrich them. And to those of your slaves who desire a deed
of manumission, execute it for them, if ye know good in them, and give
them a portion of the wealth of God which He hath given you. <span
id="fr_1152"></span>[13](#fn_1152) Force not your female slaves into
sin, in order that ye may gain the casual fruitions of this world, if
they wish to preserve their modesty. Yet if any one compel them, then
Verily to them, after their compulsion, will God be Forgiving, Merciful.

And now have we sent down to you clear signs, and an instance from among
those who flourished before you, and a caution for the
God-fearing. <span id="fr_1153"></span>[14](#fn_1153)

God is the LIGHT of the Heavens and of the Earth. His Light is like a
niche in which is a lamp--the lamp encased in glass--the glass, as it
were, a glistening star. From a blessed tree is it lighted, the olive
neither of the East nor of the West, whose oil would well nigh shine
out, even though fire touched it not! It is light upon light. God
guideth whom He will to His light, and God setteth forth parables to
men, for God knoweth all things.

In the temples which God hath allowed to be reared, that His name may
therein be remembered, do men praise Him morn and even.

Men whom neither merchandise nor traffic beguile from the remembrance of
God, and from the observance of prayer, and the payment of the stated
alms, through fear of the day when hearts shall throb and eyes shall
roll:

That for their most excellent works may God recompense them, and of His
bounty increase it to them more and more: for God maketh provision for
whom He pleaseth without measure.

But as to the infidels, their works are like the vapour in a plain which
the thirsty dreameth to be water, until when he cometh unto it, he
findeth it not aught, but findeth that God is with him; and He fully
payeth him his account: for swift to take account is God:

Or like the darkness on the deep sea when covered by billows riding upon
billows, above which are clouds: darkness upon darkness. When a man
reacheth forth his hand, he cannot nearly see it! He to whom God shall
not give light, no light at all hath he!

Hast thou not seen how all in the Heavens and in the Earth uttereth the
praise of God?--the very birds as they spread their wings? Every
creature knoweth its prayer and its praise! and God knoweth what they
do.

God's, the Kingdom of the Heavens and of the Earth: and unto God the
final return!

Hast thou not seen that God driveth clouds lightly forward, then
gathereth them together, then pileth them in masses? And then thou seest
the rain forthcoming from their midst; and He causeth clouds like
mountains charged with hail, to descend from the heaven, and He maketh
it to fall on whom He will, and from whom He will He turneth it
aside.--The brightness of His lightning all but taketh away the sight!

God causeth the day and the night to take their turn. Verily in this is
teaching for men of insight. And God hath created every animal of
water. <span id="fr_1154"></span>[15](#fn_1154) Some go upon the belly;
some go upon two feet; some go upon four feet. God hath created what He
pleased. Aye, God hath power over all things.

Now have we sent down distinct signs.--And God guideth whom He will into
the right path:

For there are who say "We believe on God and on the Apostle, and we
obey;" yet, after this, a part of them turn back. <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[16](#fn_1155) But these are not of the faithful.

And when they are summoned before God and His Apostle that He may judge
between them, lo! a part of them withdraw:

But had the truth been on their side, they would have come to Him,
obedient.

What! are they diseased of heart? Do they doubt? Are they afraid that
God and His Apostles will deal unfairly with them? Nay, themselves are
the unjust doers.

The words of the believers, when called to God and His Apostle that He
may judge between them, are only to say, "We have heard, and we obey:"
these are they with whom it shall be well.

And whoso shall obey God, and His Apostle, and shall dread God and fear
Him, these are they that shall be the blissful.

And they have sworn by God, with a most solemn oath, that if thou give
them the word, they will certainly march forth. Say: swear ye not: of
more worth is obedience. Verily, God is well aware of what ye do.

SAY: Obey God and obey the Apostle. Suppose that ye turn back, still the
burden of his duty is on him only, and the burden of your duty rests on
you. If ye obey Him, ye shall have guidance: but plain preaching is all
that devolves upon the Apostle.

God hath promised to those of you who believe and do the things that are
right, that He will cause them to succeed others in the land, as He gave
succession to those who were before them, and that He will establish for
them that religion which they delight in, and that after their fears He
will give them security in exchange. They shall worship Me: nought shall
they join with Me: And whoso, after this, believe not, they will be the
impious.

But observe prayer, and pay the stated alms, and obey the Apostle, that
haply ye may find mercy.

Let not the Infidels think that they can weaken God on His own Earth:
their dwelling place shall be the Fire! and right wretched the journey!

O ye who believe! let your slaves, and those of you who have not come of
age, ask leave of you, three times a day, ere they come into your
presence;--before the morning prayer, and when ye lay aside your
garments at mid-day, and after the evening prayer. These are your three
times of privacy. No blame shall attach to you or to them, if after
these times, when ye go your rounds of attendance on one another, they
come in without permission. Thus doth God make clear to you His signs:
and God is Knowing, Wise!

And when your children come of age, let them ask leave to come into your
presence, as they who were before them asked it. Thus doth God make
clear to you his signs: and God is Knowing, Wise.

As to women who are past childbearing, and have no hope of marriage, no
blame shall attach to them if they lay aside their outer garments, but
so as not to shew their ornaments. Yet if they abstain from this, it
will be better for them: and God Heareth, Knoweth.

No crime <span id="fr_1156"></span>[17](#fn_1156) shall it be in the
blind, or in the lame, or in the sick, to eat at your tables: or in
yourselves, if ye eat in your own houses, or in the houses of your
fathers, or of your mothers, or of your brothers, or of your sisters, or
of your uncles on the father's side, or of your aunts on the father's
side, or of your uncles on the mother's side, or of your aunts on the
mother's side, or in those of which ye possess the keys, or in the house
of your friend. No blame shall attach to you whether ye eat together or
apart.

And when ye enter houses, salute one another with a good and blessed
greeting as from God. Thus doth God make clear to you His signs, that
haply ye may comprehend them.

Verily, they only are believers who believe in God and His Apostle, and
who, when they are with him upon any affair of common interest, depart
not until they have sought his leave. Yes, they who ask leave of thee,
are those who believe in God and His Apostle. And when they ask leave of
Thee on account of any affairs of their own, then grant it to those of
them whom thou wilt, and ask indulgence for them of God: for God is
Indulgent, Merciful.

Address not the Apostle as ye address one another. <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[18](#fn_1157) God knoweth those of you who withdraw
quietly from the assemblies, screening themselves behind others. And let
those who transgress his command beware, lest some present trouble
befall them, or a grievous chastisement befall them, hereafter.

Is not whatever is in the Heavens and the Earth God's? He knoweth your
state; and one day shall men be assembled before Him, and He will tell
them of what they have done: for God knoweth all things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[1](024.htm#fr_1140) With this verse commences
the reference to the scandal against Ayesha, to which verses 6-9 read
like a later addition. See His. 731 ff. Albuhari, passim. Muslim ii. 628
ff. Tirm. 524. Tabari and Weil, p. 151.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[2](024.htm#fr_1141) Said to refer to Hilal
ben Umaiya (Muslim i. 886. Tirm. 523. Annasai, 409 f. Assamarq.) who had
accused his wife of adultery. Two of these commentators, however, give
the name of another Muslim as the person intended.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[3](024.htm#fr_1142) Comp. Numb. v. ii, 31,
with which Muhammad must have been acquainted.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[4](024.htm#fr_1143) The rumour of improper
intimacy between Ayesha and Safwan Ibn El Moattal, during Muhammad's
return from the expedition against the tribe of Mostaliq (an. Hej. 9),
in which he was separated from her for an entire day, which she passed
in the company of Safwan, who had found her when accidentally left
behind. Verses 4-26 were revealed shortly after the return.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[5](024.htm#fr_1144) Whose characters are
cleared.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[6](024.htm#fr_1145) Abdallah Ibn Obba.
(Abulf. p. 83.)

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[7](024.htm#fr_1146) Comp. verse 10, 11 (n.).

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[8](024.htm#fr_1147) Abubekr had been desirous
to punish one of his relatives, Mestah, who had propagated the scandal
against Ayesha, by refusing him gifts or alms.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[9](024.htm#fr_1148) "The very members of a
man shall testify against him, for thus we read (Jer. xliii. 12), Ye are
yourselves my witnesses saith the Lord." Chagiga, 16. Thaanith, 11a.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[10](024.htm#fr_1149) It was the custom in
Arabia, before Islam, to enter houses without permission. Freyt. Einl.
p. 216.

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[11](024.htm#fr_1150) That is, the anklets.
Comp. Isai. iii. 16, 18

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[12](024.htm#fr_1151) On account of poverty.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[13](024.htm#fr_1152) Comp. Deut. xv. 12 15.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[14](024.htm#fr_1153) The meaning probably is,
that the scandal raised against Ayesha resembled the scandal in the case
of Joseph in Egypt, and of the Virgin Mary, detailed in previous suras.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[15](024.htm#fr_1154) An idea perhaps derived
from Gen. i. 20, 21. Comp. Tr. Cholin, fol. 27a.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[16](024.htm#fr_1155) Verses 46-56 obviously
refer to a period, perhaps that between the battle of Ohod and the end
of the war of the Ditch, when Muhammad's prospects were overclouded and
the confidence of his followers shaken.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[17](024.htm#fr_1156) This verse was intended
to relieve the scruples of the Muslims, who. following the superstitious
customs of the Arabs, thought that they ought not to admit the blind,
etc. to their tables, to eat alone, or in a house of which they were
entrusted with the key, etc.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[18](024.htm#fr_1157) Lit. make not the
calling of the Apostle among you, like the calling of some of you to
others, i.e., address him by some respectful and honourable title. Thus
in the Talmud, "It is forbidden to a disciple to call his Rabbi by name
even when he is not in his presence;" and again: "Neither is he to
salute his Rabbi, nor to return his salutation, in the same way that
salutations are given and returned among friends." "Whoever despises the
wise men hath no portion in the world to come." See Hilchoth Torah, c.5.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura LVIII.--She Who Pleaded \[CVI.\]](058)

</div>
