<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/029) 
[Pickthall](../pick/029)  [Palmer Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/029)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/02901)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq029)   
[Previous](039)  [Next](031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA XXIX.--THE SPIDER \[LXXXI.\]

MECCA--69 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

ELIF. LAM. MIM. <span id="fr_676"></span>[1](#fn_676) Think men that
when they say, "We believe," they shall be let alone and not be put to
proof?

We put to proof those who lived before them; for God will surely take
knowledge of those who are sincere, and will surely take knowledge of
the liars.

Think they who work evil that they shall escape Us? Ill do they judge.

To him who hopeth to meet God, the set time of God will surely come. The
Hearer, the Knower, He!

Whoso maketh efforts for the faith, maketh them for his own good only.
Verily God is rich enough to dispense with all creatures.

And as to those who shall have believed and done the things that are
right, their evil deeds will we surely blot out from them, and according
to their best actions will we surely reward them.

Moreover we have enjoined on man to shew kindness to parents: but if
they strive with thee that thou join that with Me of which thou hast no
knowledge, <span id="fr_677"></span>[2](#fn_677) obey them not. To me do
ye return, and then will I tell you of your doings:

And those who shall have believed and done the things that are right, we
will surely give them an entering in among the just.

But some men say, "We believe in God," yet when they meet with
sufferings in the cause of God, they regard trouble from man as
chastisement from God. Yet if a success come from thy Lord they are sure
to say, "We were on your side!" Doth not God well know what is in the
breasts of his creatures?

Yes, and God well knoweth those who believe, and He well knoweth the
Hypocrites.

The unbelievers say to the faithful, "Follow ye our way, and we will
surely bear your sins." But not aught of their sins will they
bear--verily they are liars!

But their own burdens, and burdens beside their own burdens shall they
surely bear: and inquisition shall be made of them on the day of
Resurrection as to their false devices.

Of old sent we Noah to his people: a thousand years save fifty did he
tarry among them; and the flood overtook them in their wrongful doings:

But we rescued him and those who were in the vessel; and we made it a
sign to all men:

And Abraham; when he said to his people, "Worship God and fear Him. This
will be best for you, if ye have knowledge;"

Ye only worship idols beside God, and are the authors of a lie. Those
whom ye worship beside God can give you no supplies: seek, then, your
supplies from God; and serve Him and give Him thanks. To Him shall ye
return.

Suppose that ye treat me as a liar! nations before you have treated
God's messenger as a liar; but open preaching is his only duty.

See they not how God bringeth forth creation? and then causeth it to
return again? This truly is easy for God.

SAY, <span id="fr_678"></span>[3](#fn_678) Go through the earth, and see
how he hath brought forth created beings. Hereafter, with a second birth
will God cause them to be born again; for God is Almighty.

Whom He pleaseth will He chastise, and on whom He pleaseth will He have
mercy, and to Him shall ye be taken back.

And ye shall not invalidate his power either in the Earth or in the
Heaven: <span id="fr_679"></span>[4](#fn_679) and, save God, ye shall
have neither patron nor helper.

As for those who believe not in the signs of God, or that they shall
ever meet him, these of my mercy shall despair, and these doth a
grievous chastisement await."

And the only answer of his people was to say, "Slay him or burn him."
But from the fire did God save him! Verily, herein are signs to those
who believe.

And Abraham said, "Of a truth ye have taken idols along with God as your
bond of union <span id="fr_680"></span>[5](#fn_680) in this life
present;

But on the day of resurrection some of you shall deny the others, and
some of you shall curse the others; and your abode shall be the fire,
and ye shall have none to help."

But Lot believed on him, <span id="fr_681"></span>[6](#fn_681) and said,
"I betake me to my Lord, for He truly is the Mighty, the Wise."

And we bestowed on him Isaac and Jacob, <span
id="fr_682"></span>[7](#fn_682) and placed the gift of prophecy and the
Scripture among his posterity; And we gave him his reward in this world,
and in the next he shall be among the just.

We sent also Lot: when he said to his people, "Proceed ye to a
filthiness in which no people in the world hath ever gone before you?

Proceed ye even to men? attack ye them on the highway? and proceed ye to
the crime in your assemblies?" But the only answer of his people was to
say, "Bring God's chastisement upon us, if thou art a man of truth."

He cried: My Lord! help me against this polluted people.

And when our messengers came to Abraham with the tidings of a son, they
said, "Of a truth we will destroy the in-dwellers in this city, for its
in-dwellers are evil doers."

He said, "Lot is therein." They said, "We know full well who therein is.
Him and his family will we save, except his wife; she will be of those
who linger.

And when our messengers came to Lot, he was troubled for them, and his
arm was too weak <span id="fr_683"></span>[8](#fn_683) to protect them;
and they said, "Fear not, and distress not thyself, for thee and thy
family will we save, except thy wife; she will be of those who
linger. <span id="fr_684"></span>[9](#fn_684)

We will surely bring down upon the dwellers in this city vengeance from
Heaven for the excesses they have committed."

And in what we have left of it is a clear sign to men of understanding.

And to Madian we sent their brother Shoaib. And he said, "Oh! my people!
worship God, and expect the latter day, and enact not in the land deeds
of harmful excess."

But they treated him as an impostor: so an earthquake assailed them; and
at morn they were found prostrate and dead in their dwellings.

And we destroyed Ad and Themoud. Already is this made plain to you in
the ruins of their dwellings. For Satan had made their own works fair
seeming to them, and drew them from the right path, keen-sighted though
they were.

And Corah and Pharaoh and Haman. With proofs of his mission did Moses
come to them, and they behaved proudly on the earth; but us they could
not outstrip; <span id="fr_685"></span>[10](#fn_685)

For, every one of them did we seize in his sin. Against some of them did
wesend a stone-charged wind: Some of them did the terrible cry of
Gabriel surprise: for some of them we cleaved the earth; and some of
them we drowned. And it was not God who would deal wrongly by them, but
they wronged themselves.

The likeness for those who take to themselves guardians instead of God
is the likeness of the SPIDER who buildeth her a house: But verily,
frailest of all houses surely is the house of the spider. Did they but
know this!

God truly knoweth all that they call on beside Him; and He is the
Mighty, the Wise.

These similitudes do we set forth to men: and none understand them
except the wise.

God hath created the Heavens and the Earth for a serious end. <span
id="fr_686"></span>[11](#fn_686) Verily in this is a sign to those who
believe.

Recite the portions of the Book which have been revealed to thee and
discharge the duty of prayer: for prayer restraineth from the filthy and
the blame-worthy. And the gravest duty is the remembrance of God; and
God knoweth what ye do.

Dispute not, unless in kindly sort, with the people of the Book; <span
id="fr_687"></span>[12](#fn_687) save with such of them as have dealt
wrongfully with you: And say ye, "We believe in what hath been sent down
to us and hath been sent down to you. Our God and your God is one, and
to him are we self-surrendered" (Muslims).

Thus have we sent down the Book of the Koran to thee: and they to whom
we have given the Book of the law believe in it: and of these Arabians
there are those who believe in it: and none, save the Infidels, reject
our signs.

Thou didst not recite any book (of revelation) before it: with that
right hand of thine thou didst not transcribe one: else might they who
treat it as a vain thing have justly doubted:

But it is a clear sign in the hearts of those whom "the knowledge" hath
reached. None except the wicked reject our signs.

And they say, "Unless a sign be sent down to him from his Lord. . . ."
SAY: Signs are in the power of God alone. I am only a plain spoken
warner.

Is it not enough for them that we have sent down to thee the Book to be
recited to them? In this verily is a mercy and a warning to those who
believe.

SAY: God is witness enough between me and you.

He knoweth all that is in the Heavens and the Earth, and they who
believe in vain things <span id="fr_688"></span>[13](#fn_688) and
disbelieve in God--these shall be the lost ones.

They will challenge thee to hasten the punishment: but had there not
been a season fixed for it, that punishment had already come upon them.
But it shall overtake them suddenly when they look not for it.

They will challenge thee to hasten the punishment: but verily Hell shall
be round about the infidels.

One day the punishment shall wrap them round, both from above them and
from beneath their feet; and God will say, "Taste ye your own doings."

O my servants who have believed! Vast truly is my Earth: <span
id="fr_689"></span>[14](#fn_689) me, therefore! yea worship me.

Every soul shall taste of death. Then to us shall ye return.

But those who shall have believed and wrought righteousness will we
lodge in gardens with palaces, beneath which the rivers flow. For ever
shall they abide therein. How goodly the reward of those who labour,

Who patiently endure, and put their trust in their Lord!

How many animals are there which provide not <span
id="fr_690"></span>[15](#fn_690) their own food! God feedeth them and
you. He Heareth, Knoweth all things.

If thou ask them who hath created the Heavens and the Earth, and hath
imposed laws on the sun and on the moon, they will certainly say, "God."
How then can they devise lies?

God lavisheth supplies on such of his servants as He pleaseth or giveth
to them by measure. God knoweth all things.

If thou ask them who sendeth rain from heaven, and by it quickeneth the
earth, after it hath been dead, they will certainly answer, "God." SAY:
Praise be to God! Yet most of them do not understand.

This present life is no other than a pastime and a disport: but truly
the future mansion is life indeed! Would that they knew this!

Lo! when they embark on shipboard, they call upon God, vowing him
sincere worship, but when He bringeth them safe to land, behold they
join partners with Him.

In our revelation they believe not, yet take their fill of good things.
But in the end they shall know their folly.

Do they not see that we have established a safe precinct <span
id="fr_691"></span>[16](#fn_691) while all around them men are being
spoiled? Will they then believe in vain idols, and not own the goodness
of God?

But who acteth more wrongly than he who deviseth a lie against God, or
calls the truth when it hath come to him, a lie? Is there not an abode
for the infidels in Hell?

And whoso maketh efforts for us, in our ways will we guide them: for God
is assuredly with those who do righteous deeds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_676"></span>[1](029.htm#fr_676) See Sura lxviii. p. 32. The
first ten verses of this Sura were revealed at Medina, after the battles
of Bedr and Ohod. Nöld. p. 115.

<span id="fn_677"></span>[2](029.htm#fr_677) Deities for whose worship
thou canst shew no authority. Comp. Tr. Jebhamoth, fol. 6. If a father
saith to his son, "Defile thyself," or saith, "Make not restitution,"
shall he obey him? It is said (Lev. xix. 3), Let every man reverence his
father and mother, but keep my Sabbaths all of you: ye are all bound to
honour me. Thus also Midr. Jalkut, 604. Comp. next Sura, v. 13.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[3](029.htm#fr_678) The word SAY--the usual
address of God or Gabriel to Muhammad--must either be considered as
spoken by God to Abraham, in which case we have a curious instance of
the manner in which Muhammad identifies himself with Abraham, and makes
Abraham speak in words which he constantly elsewhere uses himself; or,
with Wahl, we must suppose that from v. 17 to v. 22 are misplaced.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[4](029.htm#fr_679) Comp. Ps. cxxxix. 7.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[5](029.htm#fr_680) Lit. for love among
yourselves, or as an object of love, i.e. devout worship.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[6](029.htm#fr_681) Thus Sura \[lxv.\] xxi. 71.
The Midr. Rabbah on Gen. Par. 18, says that Haran, the father of Lot,
was brought by Abraham's deliverance from the furnace to the adoption of
his doctrines. Muhammad may have transferred this idea to Lot.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[7](029.htm#fr_682) The following passages
deserve to be compared, as shewing the loose way in which Muhammad could
speak of the relationship subsisting between Abraham and the other
Patriarchs. See 38 below. Sura \[xci.\] ii. 127; \[lxxxix.\] vi. 84;
\[lviii.\] xix. 50; \[lxv.\] xxi. 72; \[lxxvii.\] xii. 6. It is a
curious coincidence that in the Sonna 398, 400, Joseph is said to be the
Grandson, and Jacob the Son, of Abraham.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[8](029.htm#fr_683) Lit. was straitened in
regard to them.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[9](029.htm#fr_684) See \[lxxv.\] xi. 83.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[10](029.htm#fr_685) So as to fly from our
vengeance.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[11](029.htm#fr_686) Lit. in truth.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[12](029.htm#fr_687) With the Jews. This
passage is quoted by modern Muslims in justification of their
indifference with respect to the propagation of their religion. "The
number of the faithful," said one of them to Mr. Lane, "is decreed by
God, and no act of man can increase or diminish it." Mod. Egypt. i. p.
364. Nöldeke supposes this verse to have been revealed at Medina, and
renders, Contend not except in the best way, i.e. not by words but by
force.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[13](029.htm#fr_688) Idols.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[14](029.htm#fr_689) That is, you may find
places of refuge where you may worship the true God in some other parts
of the earth, if driven forth from your native city. This verse is very
indicative of a late Meccan origin. Flight from Mecca must have been
imminent when Muhammad could thus write.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[15](029.htm#fr_690) Lit. carry not. Comp.
Matth. vi. 26; Luke xii. 24.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[16](029.htm#fr_691) At Mecca.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura XXXI.--Lokman \[LXXXII.\]](031)

</div>
