<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[Hypertext Quran](../htq/index)  [Unicode Quran](../uq/059) 
[Pickthall](../pick/059)  [Palmer Part II (SBE09)](../sbe09/059)  [Yusuf
Ali/Arabic](../quran/05901)  [Yusuf Ali English](../yaq/yaq059)   
[Previous](065)  [Next](033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Qur'ân, Rodwell edition \[1876\]; at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SURA LIX.--THE EMIGRATION \[CII.\]

MEDINA.--24 Verses

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful!

ALL that is in the Heavens and all that is on the Earth praiseth God!
He, the Mighty, the Wise!

He it is who caused the unbelievers among the people of the Book to quit
their homes and join those who had EMIGRATED previously. <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1](#fn_1105) Ye did not think that they would quit
them; and they on their part thought that their fortresses would protect
them against God: But God came upon them whence they looked not for Him,
and cast such fear into their hearts that by their own hands as well as
by the hands of the victorious believers they demolished their houses!
Profit by this example ye who are men of insight!

And were it not that God had decreed their exile, surely in this world
would he have chastised them: but in the world to come the chastisement
of the fire awaiteth them.

This because they set them against God and his apostle; and whoso
setteth him against God. . . . ! God truly is vehement in punishing.

Your cutting down some of their palm trees and sparing others was by
God's permission, and to put the wicked to shame.

After the spoils of these Jews which God hath assigned to his apostle,
ye pressed not with horse or camel. <span
id="fr_1106"></span>[2](#fn_1106) But God giveth his apostles power over
what he will. God is Almighty.

The spoil taken from the people of the towns and assigned by God to his
apostle, belongeth to God, and to the apostle, and to his kindred, and
to the orphan, and to the poor, and to the wayfarer, that none of it may
circulate among such of you only as are rich: What the apostle hath
given you, take: What he hath refused you, refuse: And fear ye God, for
God is severe in punishing.

To the poor refugees (Mohadjerin) also doth a part belong, who have been
driven from their homes and their substance, and who seek favour from
God and his goodwill, and aid God and his apostle. These are the men of
genuine virtue.

They of Medina who had been in possession of their abodes and embraced
the faith before them, cherish those who take refuge with them; and they
find not in their breasts any desire for what hath fallen to their
share: they prefer them before themselves, though poverty be their own
lot. And with such as are preserved from their own covetousness shall it
be well.

And they who have come after them into the faith say, "O our Lord!
forgive us and our brethren who have preceded us in the faith, and put
not into our hearts ill-will against those who believe. O our Lord! thou
verily art Kind, Merciful."

Hast thou not observed the disaffected saying to their unbelieving
brethren <span id="fr_1107"></span>[3](#fn_1107) among the people of the
Book, "If ye be driven forth, we will go forth with you; and in what
concerneth you, never will we obey any one; and if ye be attacked we
will certainly come to your help." But God is witness that they are
liars.

No! if they were driven forth, they would not share their banishment; if
they were attacked they would not help them, or if they help them they
will surely turn their backs: then would they remain unhelped.

Assuredly the fear of you is more intense in their hearts than the fear
of God! This because they are a people devoid of discernment.

They (the Jews) will not fight against you in a body except in fenced
towns or from behind walls. Mighty is their valour among themselves!
thou thinkest them united--but their hearts are divided. This for that
they are a people who understand not.

They act like those who lately preceded them, <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[4](#fn_1108) who also tasted the result of their
doings; and a grievous chastisement awaiteth them--

Like Satan when he saith to a man, "Be an infidel:" and when he hath
become an infidel, he saith, "I share not thy guilt: <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[5](#fn_1109) verily, I fear God the Lord of the
Worlds."

Of both, therefore, shall the end be that they dwell for ever in the
fire: This is the recompense of the evil doers.

O ye who believe! fear God. And let every soul look well to what it
sendeth on before for the morrow. And fear ye God: Verily, God is
cognisant of what ye do.

And be ye not like those who forget God, and whom He hath therefore
caused to forget their proper selves. Such men are the evil doers.

The inmates of the Fire and the inmates of Paradise are not to be held
equal. The inmates of Paradise only shall be the blissful.

Had we sent down this Koran on some mountain, thou wouldst certainly
have seen it humbling itself <span id="fr_1110"></span>[6](#fn_1110) and
cleaving asunder for the fear of God. Such are the parables we propose
to men in order that they may reflect.

He is God beside whom there is no god. He knoweth things visible and
invisible: He is the Compassionate, the Merciful.

He is God beside whom there is no god: He is the King, the Holy, the
Peaceful, the Faithful, the Guardian, the Mighty, the Strong, the Most
High! Far be the Glory of God from that which they unite with Him!

He is God, the Producer, the Maker, the Fashioner! To Him are ascribed
excellent titles. Whatever is in the Heavens and in the Earth praiseth
Him. He is the Mighty, the Wise!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[1](059.htm#fr_1105) The Jews of Nadhir, three
miles from Medina, had broken a treaty made with Muhammad, and in the
month Rab\* of the fourth year of the Hejira were besieged by him and
driven first to the Jews of Kainoka, who had emigrated previously, under
compulsion, after the battle of Bedr, and subsequently out of Arabia.
Weil, Life of M. p.137.n.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[2](059.htm#fr_1106) On which account these
spoils were entirely assigned to Muhammad, and not divided in the usual
manner. See Sura \[xcv.\] viii. 42. Weil, p. 138, 184.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[3](059.htm#fr_1107) To the Jews of the tribe
of Nadhir.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[4](059.htm#fr_1108) The idolaters slain at
Bedr (Djal.) or the Jews of Kainoka, who had been plundered previously
to those of Nadhir.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[5](059.htm#fr_1109) Lit. I am clear of thee.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[6](059.htm#fr_1110) This may be derived from
the Rabbinical idea that Mount Sinai was chosen, on account of its
lowness, to be the scene of the revelation to Moses, in order to shew
that God loves the humble.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sura XXXIII.--The Confederates \[CIII.\]](033)

</div>
