[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](htaq03)  [Next](htaq05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662316/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Hidden Treasures of the Ancient Qabalah*, by Elias Gewurz, \[1918\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### The Feminine Elements in Man and their Redeeming Power

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Much shall be forgiven unto her who loveth much</em>.</p>
<p>...........................<br />
...........................</p>
<p><em>Love on, through doubt and darkness, and believe<br />
There is no thing which love may not achieve.<br />
—E.W.W</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### II.

### THE FEMININE ELEMENTS IN MAN AND THEIR REDEEMING POWER

Strength and beauty are the two attractive elements of our nature, but
the masculine strength and the feminine beauty are in reality one and
the same thing. That which we admire as strength in the man is the same
element that fascinates us as beauty in the woman.

The difference consists in the way of their manifestation only. When the
spirit has gained sufficient power on the outgoing path and is strong
enough to hold the power that is his in eternal potentiality, then
beauty appears on the scene and transforms the
[aggressive](errata.htm#2.md) forcefulness of the man into the gentle
attractiveness of the woman.

To be quite exact, beauty is strength on a higher spiral; when strength
ripens, it becomes beauty. This is the spiritual aspect

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

of it, that seems to have been voiced by all the sages of antiquity.

Even savage man of prehistoric times was subject to the attractions of
the physically much weaker female, thereby acknowledging her superiority
over his brute force.

The law which governs the generation of energy on the inner planes of
being also presides over the evolution of beautiful forms; the source
whence strength springs is identical with the origin of all that is
pleasing to our sight.

Man is by nature the aggressor, the moving factor, whose energy makes
the plasticity of the world-soul yield her latent treasures.

Woman, on the other hand, contains these treasures. She is identical
with the World-Soul, and in her the strength of man becomes transformed
into beauty, which is the higher aspect of strength. Right here I must
remind you that in every man is concealed the womanly element just as
every woman has masculine qualities. In fact there are such things as
womanly men and

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

manly women. Here we are concerned with the spiritual nature, and as
regards this, it is well for us to bear in mind that the feminine nature
is far superior to the masculine both in its sensitivity to the unseen,
and in its capacity of sacrifice and devotion to the ideal.

I do not wish to be understood as depreciating "the mere man." I could
not very well do that, but what I want to emphasize is this, that true
greatness and nobility of soul are due to those qualities within us
which are feminine by nature.

It matters not whether the physical body one wears is that of a male or
a female; It is the perfection of the spiritual nature that counts.

Before man can be redeemed his nature must become feminine. Man stands
for positive action, while woman is the symbol of passivity. The idea of
power is generally associated with active energy, but it requires a
stronger will to refrain from action that to act. Therefore is woman's
sphere above that of man, and her kingdom

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

must come before man realizes his true nature.

The dissecting and analytical function of the mind is of a masculine
character, while the synthesis, the gathering up and consummating, is
altogether womanly. This applies to all the realms of nature; to
everything under the sun. In the battle of life, while making his
pilgrimage through this wilderness of earthly existence, man is like a
strong oak, or a trusty, sturdy oaken stem, but woman like a vine
clinging in grace and beauty to him.

This expression of female tenderness on the physical plane is only an
emblem of the true relation on the plane of spirit. There the
companionship is free from the vicissitudes of earth, and partakes of
the Divine nature only. The relations between the sexes on the higher
planes are in accordance with the heavenly law governing those planes.
Those whose good fortune it was to know the pure friendship of a woman
on the earth plane have had, even in this life, a foretaste of the
Heavenly condition. Its effect upon

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

the physical nature is the same as when the sun draws up the muddy water
of a stagnant pool by the roadside, and, changing its vibrations,
returns it as the gentle life-giving rain, softening the dry earth.

Thus is the effect of the sweetness and light emanating from a pure soul
in whom passion has been stilled and desire transmuted.

It is through this recognition of the spiritual elements within us which
are of a feminine nature that the atoms, molecules and particles of the
physical body become glorified and healed and the mind becomes
illuminated.

The human soul is in possession of the greatest of all Divine gifts—the
power to heal other souls; mark you—not only bodies, but Souls.

The gift of healing is in itself a great boon to mankind, but, when to
it is added the power to heal the heavy-laden soul of man then the
possessor thereof is indeed a favored mortal whom the Gods delight to
honor. This spiritual gift of healing can

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

only be exercised by that man or by that woman in whom the mind has been
dualized, that is to say, it has become male-female in one. In those in
whom this process of mind-dualization has been effected, a new life
springs up which, compared to the old one, is like light unto darkness.
It is here, right here that the redeeming power of the feminine elements
in man is seen. At the first birth man is endowed with the earthly mind,
but at the second birth he receives the heavenly one. To the twice-born
sons and daughters of God all things are possible.

To some of us this exalted state may seem a dream, but dreams and
longings are founded upon true being for no one can long for that which
has no existence or the possibility of existence. Perception of coming
things is only possible through conception. The physical life we live
and all the desires of the flesh that appertain to it are like the
sacred lotus of Oriental lands. The root of this lotus is buried in mud
and slime, but from this lowly condition it rises

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

through the currents of the river until at last it reaches the air. Here
the plant blossoms forth in luxuriant purity, a type and symbol of the
highest spiritual development.

Thus it is with sex life. Sex life has its roots in the mud of material
life; it rises through the flowing waters of mentality and finally
blossoms in the clear air of our spiritual nature, pure, sacred, divine.

Those whose feet have climbed the rugged steeps of the spiritual heights
and who have at last reached the summit will understand the need of
their trials, and the wisdom which ordained them. It is at the very top
of the mountain that the spiritual consciousness opens and man becomes
aware of his dual nature. Then, when this highest part of his
constitution is mature, he can draw unto himself from surrounding nature
that which corresponds to this highest and most potent part in himself.

If he has the Gold (Love) within him, he can draw the very highest from
the vast expanse of space by virtue of the law of affinity which makes
like attract like.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

There is a fundamental difference between the atomic elements of the
masculine and [feminine](errata.htm#3.md) principles in nature and this
causes the difference in the external form of male and female.

It is a peculiarity of atoms well known to chemists that their behavior
depends upon their arrangement, though their nature is not changed. Thus
the difference in the constitution between a molecule of ozone and a
molecule of oxygen is quite imperceptible, but their properties differ
widely. Why this should be so is a mystery which is perfectly
unfathomable to physical science. The key to this mystery is to be found
elsewhere; it lies in the spiritual forces governing nature from within.
The power that determines the mode of life and activity of an atom, or a
molecule, is beyond the reach of the microscope and the scalpel; it is a
spiritual power which acts in accordance with laws not yet known to the
scientific world. These laws are as beneficent as they are wise, and
they invariably make for human well-being. Now if we ascend the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

scale of creation and examine the workings of these atomic arrangements
on the higher planes we find the same law holds good and that duality of
sex and its effects upon the life of the human species is just as much a
mystery as it is on the lower planes. You often hear of the new mental
type which is emerging from the present one; this new type is to be a
dualized mind. The holy Qabalah teaches that every thought and emotion
is represented structurally in invisible substance, the highest and
purest aspirations and emotions consist atomically of bisexual human
beings dualized in their mental nature and patterned after the shape of
primal man. These forces, however, can only operate through those
mortals who are struggling to regain their lost condition of pristine
purity by long preparations, severe moral discipline and self-denial.
Those who have given themselves to the service of humanity, consecrating
their life, thought and substance to the furtherance of God's Kingdom
and the doing of God's will on earth, will find that all their old
passions

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

and desires, having once been transmuted, will now spring up as powers
for good within them. Eliphas Levi, the great Qabalist, left his
testimony to this effect. The strength of his devotion to the light he
had keen, he assured his pupils, was in exact ratio to the strength of
his former passions, a force of which he had by severe discipline
subdued and turned into a servant of the God within.

All desire is centrifugal, outgoing, while will, pure spiritual will, is
centripetal and attractive. Thus do the feminine qualities in our
constitution exercise a redeeming power over our old Adamic nature, and,
until man understands this bi-une arrangement of his internal make-up,
and, understanding it, strives to awaken and deepen the Divine
Consciousness within himself so as to become continually and
increasingly aware of his duality, there is little chance of his
transcending the level of ordinary humanity. But, when this miracle has
happened and the eyes of the soul have been opened and the torch of
faith has been lit, then man

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

becomes more than man; he has established his right to be a ruler of
man.

Christ, the everlasting symbol of all that is true and good and really
great, was of a feminine nature. He only wore the body of a man, but His
soul was womanly. His life, His labors, His final sacrifice were just
the means to fill the measure before His departure from the valley of
tears, in which He was to learn all lessons and to suffer all manner of
pain, in order that He might be able to help those whose lot in life it
was to suffer and to endure. If we wish to benefit by the redeeming
power of the feminine elements within us, let us recall the memory of
the Lord of Compassion and the agonies of His spiritual crucifixion. It
is an ordeal we all must pass through, sooner or later. Let it be
sooner.

The supreme message of this ordeal to us is that we may not try to
escape from our Karma, but whatever betide us, we should say: "Let this
cup pass from me, yet not my will, but *thine* be done." Thus shall we
learn

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

to be patient under tribulation and strong in the day of trial.

Millions of human beings, our brothers and sisters, are waiting for our
help. We cannot help them until we have ourselves overcome. The
physician must first heal himself if he is to be of any use to the
patient. It is a hard path to tread, the path of overcoming; it has been
called the path of woe, but it is also the path of glory. When we some
day arrive at the end of it, we shall understand the words of the
Conquering Christ ringing down through the ages—"*It is
finished*"—"Consumatum est," as the Latin Bible has it. Yes, then, we
too shall say "It is finished"; we have fulfilled the cycle of our
destiny. Whenever this comes to pass, our sole concern in this life and
the things of this life will only be so far as they relate to the
spirit's welfare. Henceforth all our striving, if we strive at all, will
be, that, as the days pass by, we may grow juster and fairer and purer,
more kind and more true, more silent and more humble, and having
attained ourselves, to

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

point out the way to the younger souls corning after us. It is the only
means we have to repay the blessed Masters for Their sacrifices, which
alone have made our lives worth living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Spiritual Companionship Between Man and Woman](htaq05.md)
