[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar05)  [Next](gar07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ORIGIN OF MASONRY, AND ITS ADVANTAGES.

FROM the commencement of the world, we may trace the foundation of
Masonry. Ever since symmetry began, and harmony displayed her charms,
our Order has had a being. During many ages, and in many different
countries, it has flourished. No art, no science, preceded it. In the
dark periods of antiquity, when literature was in a low state, and the
rude manners of our forefathers withheld from them that

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

knowledge we now so amply share, Masonry diffused its influence. This
science unvailed, arts arose, civilization took place, and the progress
of knowledge and philosophy gradually dispelled the gloom of ignorance
and barbarism. Government being settled, authority was given to laws,
and the assemblies of the Fraternity acquired the patronage of the great
and the good, while the tenets of the profession diffused unbounded
philanthropy.

Abstracted from the pure pleasures which arise from friendship so wisely
constituted as that which subsists among Masons, and which it is
scarcely possible that any circumstance or occurrence can erase, Masonry
is a science confined to no particular country, but extends over the
whole terrestrial globe. Wherever the arts flourish, there it flourishes
too. Add to this, that by secret and inviolable signs, carefully
preserved among the fraternity, it becomes an universal language. Hence,
many advantages are gained: the distant Chinese, the wild Arab, and the
American savage, will embrace a brother Briton, and know that, besides
the common ties of humanity, there is still a stronger obligation to
induce him to kind and friendly offices. The spirit of the fulminating
priest will be tamed, and a moral brother, though of a different
persuasion, engage his esteem: for mutual toleration in religious
opinions is one of the most distinguishing and valuable characteristics
of the Craft. As all religions teach morality, if a brother be found to
act the part of a truly honest man, his private speculative opinions are
left to God and himself. Thus, through the influence of Masonry, which
is reconcilable to the best policy, all those disputes which embitter
life and sour the tempers of men, are avoided; while the common good,
the general object, is zealously pursued.

From this view of our system, its utility must be sufficiently obvious.
The universal principles of the Art unite,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

in one indissoluble bond of affection, men of the most opposite tenets,
of the most distant countries, and of the most contradictory opinions;
so that in every nation a Mason may find a friend, and in every climate
a home. <span id="fr_3"></span>[\*](gar07.htm#fn_3.md)

Such is the nature of our institution, that, in the Lodge, which is
confined to no particular spot, union is cemented by sincere attachment,
and pleasure reciprocally communicated in the cheerful observance of
every obliging office. Virtue, the grand object in view, luminous as the
meridian sun, shines refulgent on the mind, enlivens the heart, and
heightens cool approbation into warm sympathy and cordial
attention.—PRESTON.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Government of the Fraternity](gar07.md)
