[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar07)  [Next](gar09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LODGE AND ITS GOVERNMENT.

1\. THE room in which a certain number of Freemasons assemble, for
business connected with the institution, is called a LODGE. The
assembly, or organized body of Freemasons, is also called a Lodge, just
as the word CHURCH is expressive both of the congregation and the place
in which they meet to worship. A Lodge of Freemasons, to be legally
constituted, must be in possession of an unreclaimed charter, granted by
the Grand Lodge in whose jurisdiction it is situated; the Book of the
Law; Square and Compasses; the Book of Constitutions; a code of By-Laws;
its Officers, and a sufficient number of members (not less than seven)
to perform the ceremonies pertaining to the Order.

2\. The constitutional officers of a Lodge are the Worshipful Master,
Senior Warden, Junior Warden, Treasurer, Secretary, senior Deacon,
Junior Deacon, and Tiler. To which may be

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

added, two Stewards, (sometimes called Masters of Ceremonies) a Marshal,
a Chaplain, and an Organist.

3\. A Lodge ought to assemble at least once a month for work and
instruction.

4\. A Lodge has the right to do all the work of Ancient Craft Masonry;
to be represented at all the communications of the Grand Lodge; to elect
and install its officers; to increase its numbers by the admission of
new members, and no member can be forced upon a Lodge without its
consent; to make by-laws for its government; to exclude a member, on
cause shown, temporarily or permanently; to levy tax on its members; to
appeal to the Grand Lodge or Grand Master from the decision of its
Master; to exercise penal authority over its own members, and over all
unaffiliated Masons living within the limits of its jurisdiction, and to
change its time and place of meeting within the town or city designated
in its warrant.

5\. A Lodge under dispensation is a temporary and inchoate organization
of Freemasons, acting under authority from the Grand or Deputy Grand
Master; is not entitled to representation in the Grand Lodge; cannot
elect or install officers; is without power to frame by-laws, or adopt a
seal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Qualifications of Candidates](gar09.md)
