[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar13)  [Next](gar15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE RITE OF INDUCTION.

WE are convinced by long and extensive observation that Masons need a
truer and deeper insight into the nature of our esoteric work. We do not
think our beautiful and truth-glowing ritual and our sublime symbolism
are quite understood by the mass of the Brotherhood. It is true all are
affected, in a certain degree, by them; it

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

could not be otherwise: but many fail to discover the grand truths which
are inculcated therein. Symbols are of no practical importance, if we
have lost the sense they were intended to convey; and rites are puerile,
if they do not immediately lead the mind to the consideration of
tangible ideas and immortal verities. Our ceremonies are moral and
philosophical lessons; and, earnestly studied and rightly understood,
will be seen to be pregnant with mighty meanings.

Thus expressive and full of significance is the RITE or INDUCTION.

The induction of the Neophyte into the Order of Freemasonry, his first
entrance into the sanctuary of the illuminated, is for him a step of
momentous importance and solemnity. There are few candidates, we
believe, who can approach the portals of the mystery-shrouded Lodge
without much trepidation of heart, and a feeling of mingled awe and
fear. Consequently, the induction is effected by the performance of
certain appropriate symbolical ceremonies, all of which are remarkably
and eloquently suggestive of the new life, duties, and obligations he is
about to assume, and to which he is on the point of binding himself
voluntarily, absolutely, and without reservation, for ever.

In ancient Egypt, the Neophyte was presented with a cup of water, and
addressed in these words:—"Aspirant to the honor of a divine
companionship! seeker after celestial truth! this is the water of
forgetfulness. Drink!—drink to the oblivion of all your vices—the
forgetfulness of all your imperfections; and thus be prepared for the
reception of the new revelations of Truth, with which you are soon to be
honored." Although modern Freemasonry does not retain this particular
ceremony, it preserves the spirit of it, by other forms, not less
expressive and instructive. The candidate is directed to close his eyes
on the Past—to lay aside the trappings and vestures of the outward
world—the symbols of traffic and war—all that reminds one of the
selfishness and discords of life—and turn his face towards the dread
unknown—the mysterious Future.

The RITE OF INDUCTION, therefore, signifies the end of a profane and
vicious life—the *palingenesia* (new birth) of corrupted human
nature—the death of vice and all bad passions, and the introduction to a
new life of purity and virtue. It also prepares the candidate, by prayer
and meditation, for that mystic pilgrimage, where he must wander through
night and darkness, before he can behold the golden splendors of the
ORIENT, and stand in unfettered freedom among the Sons of Light.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

The Rite is intended, still further, to represent man in his primitive
condition of helplessness, ignorance, and moral blindness, seeking after
that mental and moral enlightenment which alone can deliver his mind
from all thralldoms, and make him master of the material world. The
Neophyte, in darkness and with tremblings, knocks at the portals of the
Lodge, and demands admission, instruction, and light. So man, born
ignorant, and helpless, and blind, yet feeling stirring within him
unappeasable longings for knowledge, knocks at the doors of the temple
of science. He interrogates Nature, demands her secrets, and at length
becomes the proud possessor of her mysteries.

Finally, the RITE of INDUCTION refers to the supreme hour of man's
worldly life, when, laying aside all earthly wealth, and pomp, and rank,
and glory, and divested of his mortal vesture, he passes alone through
the grim darkness of the tomb, to stand before the GRAND ORIENT of the
immortal Land.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Through death to life I and through this vale of
tears,  
   And thistle-world of mortal life, ascend  
 To the great Banquet, in that world whose years  
   Of bliss unclouded, fadeless, know no end."</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prayer at Initiation](gar15)
