[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar20)  [Next](gar22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Working-Tools of an Entered Apprentice.

#### THE TWENTY-FOUR-INCH GUAGE

Is an instrument used by operative masons to measure and lay out their
work; but we, as

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Free and Accepted
Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more noble and glorious
purpose of dividing our time. It being divided into twenty-four equal
parts, is emblematical of the twenty-four hours of the day, which we are
taught to divide into three equal parts; whereby are found eight hours
for the service of God and a distressed worthy brother; eight for our
usual vocations; and eight for refreshment and sleep.

The Twenty-four-inch Guage is to measure and ascertain the extent of an
edifice. Hence we derive a lesson of instruction. It recalls to our mind
the division of the day into twenty-four hours, and directs us to
apportion them to prayer, labor, refreshment, and repose. It may be
further considered as the scale which comprehends the numerical
apportionment of the different degrees, according to the several Lodges.

### THE COMMON GAVEL

Is an instrument made use of by operative masons to break off the
corners of rough stones, the better to fit them for the builder's use;
but we, as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for
the more noble and glorious purpose of divesting our hearts and
consciences of all the vices and superfluities of life; thereby fitting
our minds, as living stones, for that spiritual building—that house not
made with hands—eternal in the heavens.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

The Common Gavel is an important instrument of labor, without which no
work of manual skill can be completed; from which we learn that skill
without industry will be of no avail, and labor is the lot of man; for
the heart may conceive, and the head devise in vain, if the hand be not
prompt to execute the design.

Masons are called moral builders. In their rituals they declare,
emphatically, that a more noble and glorious purpose than squaring
stones and hewing timbers is theirs—fitting immortal nature for that
spiritual building not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. It is
said that the construction of the pyramids of Egypt employed the labor
of one hundred thousand men for many years, but it was only to build
monumental piles, beneath whose shadows kings might rest. These pyramids
are only temples for the dead; Masons are building one for the living.
The pyramids were only mausoleums in which the bones of the mighty dead
might repose in imperial magnificence; Masons are erecting a structure
in which the God of Israel shall dwell for ever. The pyramid shall
crumble away, till not one stone shall be left upon another; but who
shall count the years of immortality, the life-time of the soul, which
is fitted for its place in the heavens? Who can define its outlines, or
fathom its depths, or measure its journey! It is a stream which grows
broader and deeper as it flows onward. An angel's eye cannot measure its
length, nor an angel's wing travel to its farthest boundary. When
earth's proudest monumental piles have crumbled away, and that sand been
scattered by the desert winds, and the glory and greatness of earth
shall be forgotten, then will the immortal be pluming its wings for
loftier flights. It is a fountain whose sources are in the Infinite, and
whose placid waters flow on for ever—a spring-time that shall bloom,
educating immortal mind for the present, the future, for all ages—is
acknowledged to be one of the essential objects of Masonic labors. The
builder builds for a century; Masons, for eternity. The painter paints
for a generation; they, for everlasting years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section II. The Preparation. Right Hand. Badge of a Mason](gar22)
