[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar21)  [Next](gar23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

### SECTION II.

IN this section is fully explained the symbolic meaning of the
ceremonies that take place in the first. Without this explanation, the
mind of the novitiate would still be. in darkness; all would be
mysterious and incomprehensible. When these ceremonies are explained by
an intelligent and competent teacher, the mind is favorably impressed
with the beautiful system; the mystery is unvailed, and the candidate
discovers that his progress is replete with instruction, and that the
assertion is confirmed, that every character, figure, and emblem,
depicted in a Lodge, has a moral tendency, inculcates the practice of
the noblest virtues, and furnishes sufficient proof of the definition,
that "Freemasonry is a system of morality, vailed in allegory and
illustrated by symbols."

### THE PREPARATION.

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

Various passages of Scripture are referred to in this section -as
explaining the traditions of Masonry.

"Cut wood out of Lebanon, and bring it on floats by sea to Joppa; and
carry it up to Jerusalem."

"And the house was built of stone, made ready before it was brought
thither; so that there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron
heard in the house, while it was building."

"For to confirm all things, a man plucked off his shoe, and gave it unto
his neighbor: and this was testimony in Israel."

"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you."

### PRAYER.

Bending the knees, in adoration of JEHOVAH, is one of the most ancient
customs among men. We are taught, as Masons, never to commence any great
or important undertaking without first invoking the blessing and
protection of Deity.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

The right hand has in all ages been deemed an emblem of fidelity, and
the ancients worshiped Deity under the name of *Fides*, or Fidelity,
which was sometimes represented by two right hands joined, and sometimes
by two human figures, holding each other by the right hands.

The joining of right hands was esteemed, among the Persians and
Parthians, as conveying a most inviolable obligation of fidelity. Hence,
when King ARTABANUS desired to hold a conference with his revolted
subject ASINEUS, who was in arms against him, he dispatched a messenger
to him with the request, who said to ASINEUS, "The king hath sent me to
give you his right hand and security,"—that is, a promise of safety in
coming and going. And when ASINEUS sent his brother ASILEUS to the
proposed conference, the king met him, and gave him his right hand; upon
which JOSEPHUS remarks: "This is of the greatest force there with all
these barbarians, and affords a firm security to those who hold
intercourse with them, for none of them will deceive, when once they
have given you their right hands; nor will any one doubt of their
fidelity, when that once is given, even though they were before
suspected of injustice."

VALERIUS MAXIMUS tells us that the ancients had a moral deity, whom they
called FIDES. Her temple was first consecrated by NUMA. . . . FIDES was
a goddess of honesty or fidelity; and the writer adds, when they
promised any thing of old, they gave the right hand to pledge it, as we
do, and, therefore, she is represented as giving her hand and sometimes
her two hands conjoined. CHARTARIUS more fully describes this, by
observing that the proper residence of faith or fidelity was thought by
the ancients to be in the right hand; and, therefore, this deity was
sometimes represented by two right hands joined together; sometimes by
two little images, shaking each other's right hand: so that the right
hand was by them held sacred, and was symbolically made use of in a
solemn manner to denote fidelity.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### Badge of a Mason.

The LAMB has, in all ages, been deemed an emblem of innocence; the
lambskin is, therefore, to remind him of that purity of life and conduct
which is so essentially necessary to his gaining admission into the
Celestial Lodge above, where the Supreme Architect of the Universe
presides.

The Apron, in ancient times, was a universally-received emblem of Truth.
Among the Grecian mysteries, the candidate was invested with a white
robe and apron. In Persia, the investiture was exceedingly splendid, and
succeeded to the commission of Light. It consisted of the girdle, on
which the twelve signs of the Zodiac were depicted; the tiara, the white
apron, and the purple tunic.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section III: The Lodge](gar23)
