[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar38)  [Next](gar40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### OPERATIVE MASONRY.

We work in Speculative Masonry, but our ancient brethren wrought in both
Operative and Speculative. <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22.md) They
worked at the building of King SOLOMON'S temple, and many other sacred
and Masonic edifices.

By Operative Masonry, we allude to a proper application of the useful
rules of architecture, whence a structure will derive figure, strength,
and beauty, and whence will result a due proportion and a just
correspondence in all its parts. It furnishes us with dwellings and
convenient shelters from the vicissitudes and inclemencies of seasons;
and while it displays the effects of

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

human wisdom, as well in the choke as in the arrangement of the sundry
materials of which an edifice is composed, it demonstrates that a fund
of science and industry is implanted in man, for the best, most
salutary, and beneficent purposes.

#### SPECULATIVE MASONRY.

By Speculative Masonry, we learn to subdue the passions, act upon the
square, keep a tongue of good report, maintain secrecy, and practice
charity. It is so far interwoven with religion, as to lay us under
obligations to pay that rational homage to the Deity, which at once
constitutes our duty and our happiness. It leads the contemplative to
view, with reverence and admiration, the glorious works of creation, and
inspires him with the most exalted ideas of the perfection of his Divine
Creator.

#### MASONRY, OPERATIVE AND SPECULATIVE.

FOR a considerable time previous to the building of SOLOMON'S Temple,
the Societies of Sidonian Architects and Builders had become celebrated
throughout the ancient world. A company of these masons and architects,
under the superintendence of HIRAM, the Widow's Son, was sent by the
King of Tyre to SOLOMON, to assist in the erection of that stately
edifice. At this period commences the history of Masonry among the Jews.
Thus introduced into Judea, it flourished greatly under the protection
of SOLOMON and some of his successors; but it was also, in the course of
years,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

subject to bitter persecutions, gross misrepresentations, and fierce
denunciations. The exclusive and stern Hebrews were slow to appreciate
fully its catholic and benign spirit, and its great value as an
industrial agent.

Even at this period, we have reason to believe, the Sidonian Order was
not entirely an operative society, but rather was a mixed body,
consisting of both operative and speculative Masons. In the formation of
its rituals, it had drawn largely on the Rites of the Orphic, Cabirian,
and Isianic Mysteries. The speculative character finally triumphed over
the operative, and the ancient Order of Hiram was transformed into the
Order of the Essen, or Breast-plate, or the Essenian Brotherhood.

At an early period the Sidonian Masons had planted their societies in
Rome, and in the reign of NUMA POMPUAUS were highly favored by that
monarch. These societies were there known under the name of Colleges of
Builders and Artificers. After Christianity had subdued the pagan world,
these "Colleges of Builders," or societies of Operative Masons, were
engaged in erecting cathedrals, churches, and other public edifices, and
continued, in unbroken succession, down to A. D. 1717. In 1459 they held
a general convention of the Crafts at Ratisbon, and decided to institute
a Grand Lodge at Strasburg, and that the architect of that cathedral,
for the time being, should be, *ex officio*, Grand Master.

These Lodges also preserved the ancient rituals, which gave them a
speculative or philosophical character; and thus we find that the
history of the Order of Operative Masons in Europe reproduces that of
Sidonian Masonry in ancient Judea. As that Order culminated in the
Essenian Brotherhood, so the Order of Operative was in 1717 transformed
into that of Speculative Masonry.

That Speculative Masonry is the offspring of the ancient corporations of
Builders and Masons, there cannot be a doubt. It possesses all the
venerable forms of those old societies, their rituals, and their
language of signs and symbols. The instruments of the builder's art—the
Gavel, Twenty-four-inch [Gauge](errata.htm#2.md), Trowel, Level, Plumb,
Square, Compasses, Spade, Setting-Maul, etc.—it retains, and applies
them to moral uses. They have become the most significant and
instructive of emblems. All Freemasons are familiar with their
symbolical interpretations, and appreciate their beauty and the force of
their teaching. The Free or Speculative Mason is also a builder, but not
of material edifices. He is, or should be, the constructer of a Temple,
more glorious than that of SOLOMON—

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

a Temple of Virtue, of Honor, of Charity, Purity, and Knowledge; and
these implements of the Operative Mason's art, in their emblematic use,
indicate the labors he is to execute, the dangers he is to encounter,
and the preparations he is to make in the great work of uprearing that
spiritual fabric wherein his soul may find peace for evermore.

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

This section also refers to the origin of the Jewish Sabbath, as well as
to the manner in which it was kept by our ancient brethren.

In six days GOD created the heaven and the earth, and rested upon the
seventh day; the seventh, therefore, our ancient brethren consecrated as
a day of rest from their labors, thereby enjoying frequent opportunities
to contemplate the glorious works of creation, and to adore their great
Creator.

 

THE six days of creation are technically known among Freemasons as the
"Grand Architect's Six Periods." These important periods in the world's
history may be more particularly illustrated as follows:

Before the Almighty was pleased to command this vast world into
existence, the elements and materials of creation lay blended together
without distinction or form. Darkness was on the face of the great deep,
and the spirit of GOD moved on the surface of the waters. The Almighty,
as an example to man, that all things of moment should be done with due
deliberation, was pleased to be *six days* in commanding it from chaos
to perfection. The *first* instance of his supreme power was made
manifest by commanding light; and being pleased with this new operation,
he distinguished it by name, calling the light DAY, and the darkness he
called NIGHT. And, in order to keep this same framed matter within just
limits.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

the *second day* was employed in laying the foundations for the heavens,
which be called firmament, designed to keep the waters that were within
the clouds, and those beneath them, asunder. Ou the *third day*, he
commanded those waters within due limits, and dry land appeared, which
he called EARTH; and the mighty congregated waters he called SEA. The
earth being yet irregular and barren, GOD spoke the word, and it was
immediately covered with a beautiful carpet of grass, designed as
pasture for the brute creation. Trees, shrubs, and flowers of all sorts,
succeeded in full growth, maturity, and perfection. On the *fourth day*,
the two grand luminaries, the SUN and moots, were created; the sum to
rule the day, and the MOON to govern the night. And the sacred historian
informs us that they were ordained for signs, seasons, days, and years,
The Almighty was also pleased to bespangle the ethereal concave of
heaven with a multitude of stars, that man, whom he intended to make,
might contemplate thereon, and justly admire his majesty and glory. On
the *fifth day*, he caused the waters to bring forth a variety of fish
for our use; and, in order to imprint on the mind of man a reverential
awe of his divine omnipotence, he created the other inhabitants of the
mighty deep, which multiplied exceedingly after their kind. On the same
day, the Almighty caused the birds to fly in the air, that man might
delight his eyes and ears—with some for their beautiful plumage, and
others for their melodious notes.

On the *sixth day*, he created the beasts of the field and the reptiles
which crawl on the earth. And here we may plainly perceive the wisdom,
power, and goodness of the Grand Geometrician of the Universe, made
manifest throughout the whole of his proceedings. He produced what
effects he pleased without the aid of their natural causes—such as
giving light to the world before he created the sun and moon, and making
the earth fruitful without the influence of the heavenly bodies. He did
not create the beasts of the field until he had provided sufficient
herbage for their support; neither did he create man until be had
furnished him with a dwelling, and every thing requisite for life and
pleasure. Then, to dignify the work of his hands still more, ho made
man, who came into the world with greater pomp than any creature which
preceded him. They came but with a single command. GOD spake the word,
and it was done. But at the formation of man, we are told, there was a
consultation, in which GOD said, Let us make man. He was immediately
formed out of the dust of the earth. The breath of life

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

was blown into his nostrils, and man became a living soul. In this one
creature, there is a combination of every thing throughout the whole
creation—such as the quality and substance of an animate being, the life
of plants, the senses of beasts; but, above all, the understanding of
angels; formed after the immediate image of GOD, thereby intimating to
him that integrity and uprightness should ever influence him to adore
his Creator, who has so liberally bestowed on him the faculty of speech,
and further endued him with that noble instinct called REASON. The
Almighty, as his last and best gift to man, created WOMAN. Under his
forming hand, the creature grew—man-like, but of different sex—so lovely
fair, that what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now mean: all in
her summed up—in her contained. On she came, led by her Heavenly Maker,
though unseen, yet guided by his voice, adorned with all that heaven
could bestow to make her amiable.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Grace was in all her steps, heaven in her eye,  
In every gesture dignity and love."</span>

</div>

The Almighty, having finished the sixth day's work, rested on the
*seventh*. He blessed, hallowed, and sanctified it. He thereby taught
man to work industriously six days, but strictly commanded him to rest
on the seventh, the better to contemplate on the beautiful works of
creation—to adore him as their Creator—to go into his sanctuaries, and
offer up praises for life and every blessing he so amply enjoys at his
bountiful hands.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[122:\*](gar39.htm#fr_22.md) Freemasonry is to be
considered as divided into two parts—the *Operative* and *Speculative;*
and these are again subdivided—that is, Craft Masonry—into three
distinct branches: the Manual, the Instrumental, and the Scientific. The
Manual consists of such parts of business as are performed by hand-labor
alone, or by the help of some simple instruments, the uses whereof are
not to be learned by any problems or rules of art, but by labor and
practice only; and this is more particularly applicable to the brethren
of the first degree, called *Entered Apprentices*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pillars of the Porch](gar40.md)
