[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar29)  [Next](gar31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Situation of the Lodge

The Lodge is situated due East and West. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19)

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

Dr. OLIVER assigns the following reasons why the Tabernacle is
considered as the type of a Freemason's Lodge: "It was an oblong square,
and, with its courts and appendages, it represented the whole habitable
globe. Such is also the extent of our Lodges. The former was supported
by pillars, and the latter is also sustained by those of Wisdom,
Strength, and Beauty. They were equally situated due east and west. The
sacred roll of GOD'S revealed will and law was deposited in the Ark of
the Covenant; the same Holy Record is placed in a conspicuous part of
our Lodges. The altar of incense was a double cube, and so is our
pedestal and stone of foundation. The covering of the Tabernacle was
composed of three colors, as a representation of the celestial
hemisphere; such, also, is the covering of a Freemason's Lodge. The
floor of the Tabernacle was so holy, that the priest's were forbidden to
tread upon it without taking off their shoes; the floor of the Lodge is
holy ground."

CALCOTT says that MOSES, "foreseeing the difficulties which he would
have to encounter before he should arrive in the promised land, and
having already experienced the instability of the Israelites, caused the
Tabernacle to be erected *east* and *west*, to excite in them a firm
reliance on the omnipotence of that GOD who had then lately wrought so
great a miracle in their favor, by causing a wind

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

to blow first *east*, and then *west*, whereby they safely escaped from
the Egyptians upon dry land, even through the midst of a sea, which,
nevertheless, overwhelmed and totally destroyed their pursuers. And as
they were liable to meet with many distresses in their sojournment in
the wilderness, so, as oft as they should behold the situation of the
Tabernacle, their faith might be strengthened, and, by a firm reliance
on ALMIGHTY GOD, they might be enabled to proceed with resolution and
cheerfulness. And as the Tabernacle was at that time to be a constant
exhortation to them, from that great instance of omnipotence, to confide
in GOD under all their embarrassments, so the Temple, afterwards built
by SOLOMON, in the same form and situation, was to be a lasting monument
to their posterity of the mighty works the LORD had performed in
conducting their forefathers out of their captivity into the promised
land. And this, also, may be deemed a very sufficient reason why places
for Christian worship, after the pattern of the said Tabernacle and
Temple, have ever been, and still are, generally erected in the same
manner; for, as human creatures, we, as well as our forefathers, stand
in need to be continually reminded of our weakness, and a necessary
constant dependence on an Omnipotent and All-gracious Being."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[85:\*](gar30.htm#fr_19) Our Lodges are situated
due East and West, because all places of Divine worship, as well as all
well-formed and regularly-constituted Lodges, are, or ought to be, so
situated; for which we assign three Masonic reasons:—1. The sun, the
glory of the LORD, rises in the East and sets in the West; 2. Learning
originated in the East, and from thence extended its benign influence to
the West; 3. The last and grand reason, refers to the situation of the
Tabernacle in the wilderness. The nature of the Lodge—its form,
dimensions, and supports—its ground, situation, and covering—its
ornaments, furniture, and jewels—all unite their aid to form a perfect
code of moral and theological philosophy; which, while it fascinates the
understanding, improves the mind, until it becomes polished like the
Perfect Ashlar, and can only be tried by the Square of GOD'S word and
the unerring Compass of conscience.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dedication of Lodges](gar31)
