[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar31)  [Next](gar33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The three great tenets of a Freemason's profession inculcate the
practice of those truly commendable virtues, BROTHERLY LOVE, RELIEF, and
TRUTH.

### BROTHERLY LOVE.

By the exercise of Brotherly Love, we are taught to regard the whole
human species as one family—the high, the low, the rich, the poor—who,
as created by one Almighty Parent, and inhabitants of the same planet,
are to aid, support, and protect each other. On this principle, Masonry
unites men of every country, sect, and opinion, and conciliates true
friendship

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

among those who might otherwise have remained at a perpetual distance.

Brotherly Love or Friendship is regarded by Freemasons as the strong
cement of the Order; without this high moral virtue, the Fraternity
would soon cease to exist. By Brotherly Love, we are to understand that
generous principle of the soul which regards the human species as one
family, created by an All-wise Being, and placed on this globe for the
mutual assistance of each other. The man who is actuated by the pure
principle of Brotherly Love, will not desert his friend when dangers
threaten or misfortunes assail him. When he is calumniated, he will
openly and boldly espouse his cause, and endeavor to remove the
aspersion. When sickness or infirmity occasion him to be deserted by
others, he will seize the opportunity, and redouble all the affectionate
attentions which love suggests. No society can exist for any length of
time, unless Brotherly Love prevail among its members. To "dwell
together in unity," is the life and support of the great Masonic
institution.

### RELIEF.

To relieve the distressed, is a duty incumbent on all men, but
particularly on Masons, who are linked together by an indissoluble chain
of sincere affection. To soothe the unhappy; to sympathize with their
misfortunes; to compassionate their miseries, and to restore peace to
their troubled minds, is the great aim we have in view. On this basis,
we form our friendships and establish our connections.

Relief flows from brotherly love, as free, pure, and refreshing as the
mountain air. It dries up the gushing fountains of grief, banishes want
from the abode of a distressed brother, and pours the oil of joy into
the wounded hearts of the widow and the orphan.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### TRUTH

Is a divine attribute, and the foundation of every virtue. To be good
and true, is the first lesson we are taught in Masonry. On this theme we
contemplate, and by its dictates endeavor to regulate our conduct.
Hence, while influenced by this principle, hypocrisy and deceit are
unknown among us; sincerity and plain dealing distinguish us; and the
heart and the tongue join in promoting each other's welfare, and
rejoicing in each other's prosperity. <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_21.md)

Truth is the foundation of all Masonic virtues; it is one of our grand
principles; for to be good men and true, is a part of the first lesson
we are taught; and at the commencement of our freedom we are exhorted to
be fervent and zealous in the pursuit of truth and goodness. It is not
sufficient that we walk in the light, unless we do so in the truth also.
All hypocrisy and deceit must be banished from among us. Sincerity and
plain dealing complete the harmony of a Lodge, and render us acceptable
in the sight of Him unto whom all hearts are open, all desires known,
and from whom no secrets are hid. There is a charm in truth, which draws
and attracts the mind continually towards it. The more we discover, the
more we desire; and the great reward is wisdom, virtue, and happiness.
This is an edifice founded on a rock, which malice cannot shake or time
destroy.

The \* \* \* \* are explained, in connection with the four cardinal
virtues, FORTITUDE, PRUDENCE, TEMPERANCE, and JUSTICE.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

### FORTITUDE

Is that noble and steady purpose of the mind, whereby we are enabled to
undergo any pain, peril, or danger, when prudentially deemed expedient.
This virtue is equally distant from rashness or cowardice; and should be
deeply impressed upon the mind of every Mason, as a safeguard or
security against any illegal attack that may be made, by force or
otherwise, to extort from him any of those valuable secrets with which
he has been so solemnly intrusted, and which were emblematically
represented upon his first admission into the Lodge, and \* \* \* \*

In the absence of this virtue, no person can perform his duty, either to
GOD, his neighbor, or himself, in an acceptable manner. He will be too
much overwhelmed with the cares and troubles of the world to find
leisure or resolution to protect himself from the enticing machinations
with which he will be continually beset during his progress through
life; and may be led unintentionally to rend asunder the sacred ties of
brotherhood which unite men of all parties, religions, or politics, by
forfeiting the confidence trustingly reposed in him, and thereby
becoming the victim of his own weakness.

### PRUDENCE

Teaches us to regulate our lives and actions agreeably to the dictates
of reason, and is that habit by which we wisely judge and prudentially
determine on all things relative to cur present

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

as well as to our future happiness. This virtue should be the peculiar
characteristic of every Mason, not only for the government of his
conduct while in the Lodge, but also when abroad in the world. It should
be particularly attended to, in all strange and mixed companies, never
to let fall the least sign, token, or word, whereby the secrets of
Masonry might be unlawfully obtained, and \* \* \* \* \*

Prudence is among the most exalted objects that demand every Mason's
special attention, for it is the rule which governs all other virtues.
She directs us to the path which leads to every degree of propriety,
inciting us to the performance of worthy actions, and, as a
guiding-star, lighting our steps through the dreary and dark-some ways
of this life.

### TEMPERANCE

Is that due restraint upon our affections and passions, which renders
the body tame and governable, and frees the mind from the allurements of
vice. This virtue should be the constant practice of every Mason; as he
is thereby taught to avoid excess, or contracting any licentious or
vicious habits, the indulgence of which might lead him to disclose some
of those valuable secrets which he has promised to conceal, and never
reveal, and which would consequently

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

subject him to the contempt and detestation of all good Masons.

This virtue should be the constant practice of every Freemason, while
its opposite should be carefully guarded against. At the shrine of
Intemperance, how many victims are daily offered!—Blooming youth and
hoary age have alike bowed before it. They continue offering libations
on the unhallowed altar, until their fortunes are wasted, their credit
lost, their constitutions impaired, their children beggared, and that
life which might have been usefully and honorably employed, becomes a
burden to the possessor.

### JUSTICE

Is that standard, or boundary of right, which enables us to render to
every man his just due, without distinction. This virtue is not only
consistent with divine and human laws, but is the very cement and
support of civil society; and as justice, in a great measure,
constitutes the really good man, so should it be the invariable practice
of every Mason never to deviate from the minutest principle thereof. \*
\* \*

The exercise of this principle incites us to act toward others, in all
the transactions of life, as we wish they would act toward us; and as,
in a great measure, it constitutes real goodness, it is therefore
represented as the perpetual study of an accomplished Freemason. Without
the influence of justice, universal confusion would ensue; lawless force
would overcome the principles of equity, and social intercourse would no
longer exist.

Here may be given some general instructions peculiar to Freemasons,
relative to the manner in which Entered Apprentices

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

serve their \* \* \*, and how represented \* \* \*; together with a few
observations regarding the comparison between it and clay, etc., and
concluding thus:

Our Mother EARTH alone, of all the elements, has never proved unfriendly
to man; the bodies of water deluge him with rain, oppress him with hail,
and drown him with inundations. The air rushes in storms, prepares the
tempest, and lights up the volcano; but the earth, ever kind and
indulgent, is found subservient to his wishes. Though constantly
harassed, more to furnish the luxuries than the necessaries of life, she
never refuses her accustomed yield; spreading his path with flowers and
his table with plenty; though she produces poison, still she supplies
the antidote, and returns with interest every good committed to her
care; and when at last he is called upon to pass through the "dark
valley of the shadow of Death," she once more receives him, and piously
covers his remains within her bosom: this admonishes us that from it we
came, and to it we must shortly return.

Such is the arrangement of the different sections in the first lecture,
which, with the forms adopted at the Opening and Closing of a Lodge,
comprehends the whole of the first degree of Masonry. This plan has the
advantage of regularity

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

to recommend it, the support of precedent and authority, and the
sanction and respect which flow from antiquity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[94:\*](gar32.htm#fr_21.md) In the ancient
mythology of Rome, TRUTH was called the mother of VIRTUE, and was
depicted with white and flowing garments. Her looks were cheerful and
pleasant, though modest and serene. She was the protectress of honor and
honesty, and the light and joy of human society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Charge to the Candidate](gar33.md)
