[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar46)  [Next](gar48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### CHARGE TO THE CANDIDATE.

BROTHER: Being advanced to the second degree of Freemasonry, we
congratulate you on your preferment. The internal, and not the external
qualifications of a man are what Masonry regards. As you increase in
knowledge, you will improve in social intercourse.

It is unnecessary to recapitulate the duties which, as a Fellow-Craft,
you are bound to discharge, or to enlarge on the necessity of a strict
adherence to them, as your own experience must have established their
value. Our laws and regulations you are strenuously to support; and be
always ready to assist in seeing them duly executed. You are not to
palliate or aggravate the offences of your brethren; but in the decision

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of every trespass against our rules, you are to judge with candor,
admonish with friendship, and reprehend with justice.

The study of the Liberal Arts, that valuable branch of education, which
tends so effectually to polish and adorn the mind, is earnestly
recommended to your consideration; especially the science of Geometry,
which is established as the basis of our art. Geometry, or Masonry,
originally synonymous terms, being of a divine and moral nature, is
enriched with the most useful knowledge; while it proves the wonderful
properties of Nature, it demonstrates the more important truths of
morality.

Your past behavior and regular deportment have merited the honor which
we have now conferred; and in your new character, it is expected that
you will conform to the principles of the Order, by steadily persevering
in the practice of every commendable virtue. Such is the nature of your
engagements as a Fellow-Craft, and to these duties you are bound by the
most sacred ties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lecture on the Legend of the Winding Stairs](gar48.md)
