[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar42)  [Next](gar44.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

The ORDERS OF ARCHITECTURE are next considered and explained.

#### OF ORDER IN ARCHITECTURE.

By order in architecture is meant a system of all the members,
proportions, and ornaments of columns and pilasters; or, it is a regular
arrangement of the projecting parts of a building, which, united with
those of a column, form a beautiful, perfect, and complete whole.

#### OF ITS ANTIQUITY.

From the first formation of society, order in architecture may be
traced. When the rigor of seasons obliged men to contrive shelter from
the inclemency of the weather, we learn that they first planted trees on
end, and then laid others across, to support a covering. The bands which
connected those trees at top and bottom are said to have given rise to
the idea of the base and capital of pillars; and from this simple hint
originally proceeded the more improved art of architecture.

The first habitations of men were such as Nature afforded, with but
little labor on the part of the occupant, and sufficient only to satisfy
his simple wants. Each tribe or people constructed, from the materials
that presented themselves, such habitations as were best suited to this
purpose, and at the same time most convenient.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We thus find, in
countries remote from other nations, und where foreign influences did
not exist, an architecture at once singular, and as indigenous as the
vegetation itself. The *hypogea* of the borders of the Indus, the Nile,
and the Ganges—the temporary tents of the nomadic tribes of eastern
Asia—the oaks of the Grecian forests, fashioned by the ingenuity of man
into the humble cabin (the prototype of the principal Grecian order)—are
indubitably the primitive styles of the Egyptian, the Grecian, and the
Oriental structures. Anterior to the discovery of printing, the monument
was the tablet upon which the various races chronicled for posterity the
annals of their history. In the simple, unhewn altar, we recognize the
genius of religion: we trace in it the germ of the development of human
intelligence; it bespeaks faith, ingenuity, ambition. The ancient Babel,
and the altars of Scripture—the monuments of Gilgal and Gilead of the
Hebrews—the Celtic Dolmens, the Cromlechs, the Peulvens or Menheirs, the
Lichavens, (the Trelithous of the Greeks,) the Nurhags, the Talayots,
and the Tumuli, (the Latin Mercuriales,)—are all symbols of pristine
faith. With the pagan devotee, the art was made to conform to the moral
attributes of the character of the deity in whose honor the monument was
erected. With the Greeks, various styles of structure were thus
instigated, from the early polygonal formations of the Phoenicians, at
Astrea and Tyranthus, to the perfections of design, the imposing Doric,
the graceful Ionic, and the magnificent Corinthian orders. Each nation,
at every age, possessed its symbolic monuments, revealing its conception
of the attributes of the Infinite, with the exception of the Persians,
who, as we learn from the Zend Avesta, worshiped in the open air, and
who, according to HEEODOTUS, possessed no temples, but revered the whole
circuit of the heavens; and the Assyrians, whose Magi interpreted the
silent stars, and worshiped the sun. Among such monuments, we must
reckon, as the chief, the Temple of SOLOMON, that sublime conception of
the spirit of immateriality, true type, in its massive splendor, of a
higher and purer belief; at Elora, the temple of Indra, sacred to
Swargas, the god of ether, which, according to the Puranas, was designed
by Wisvakama, the *stapathi*, or architect of the heavens. In China, the
ancient Tings, Taas, and Mikosi, were temples of the gods, and the
*mias*, in Japan and Siam, were sacred structures. The Pyramids were
symbolic emblems of the metempsychosian creed of Egypt. The Djebel
Pharouni, the pyramids of Rhamses, the temples of Isis end Osiris, and
the Memnon, bespeak

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

(in their colossal size) a vast and boundless faith. Athens possessed
her Parthenon, over whose magnificence presided Minerva Archegetea, and
Rome her Pantheon, "shrine of all saints and altar of all gods." Ancient
Cordova had her mosque, on which the Moors spent the riches of their
oriental taste. Modern Rome possesses her basilica of St. Peters, on
whose sublime structure, amid the visible decadence of classic art,
MICHAEL ANGELO lavished his genius.—Of the early achievements and of the
progressive steps of the science of architecture, there remain but
fragments, though sufficient, with the assistance of history, to teach
us their antiquity. The epochs of advancement can be traced
progressively from the early elements of structure to the more perfected
styles; and throughout the whole globe remains of edifices will be found
which proclaim an early possession of certain degrees of architectural
knowledge.—The most ancient nation known to us who made any considerable
progress in the arts of design is the Babylonian. Their most celebrated
monuments were the Temple of Belus, the Kasr, and the hanging gardens
which Nebuchadnezzar built for his Lydian bride, the wonderful canal of
the Naher Malca, and the Lake of Palacópos. An idea of the colossal size
of the structures they once composed can be formed from the dimensions
of their ruins. The material employed in cementing the burned or
sun-dried bricks—upon which hieroglyphics are to be traced—was the
mortar produced by Nature from the fountains of naphtha and bitumen at
the river Is, near Babylon. No entire architectural monument has come
down to us from the Assyrians, whose capital was embellished with the
superb Kalla, Ninoah, and the Khorzabad; nor from the Phoenicians, whose
cities—Tyre, Sidon, Arados, and Sarepta—were adorned with equal
magnificence; nor from the Israelites, whose temples were wonderful
structures; nor from the Syrians, the Philistines, and many other
nations. Our want of thorough knowledge concerning the architecture of
these Oriental nations is attributable partly to the innumerable
devastations which have taken place on this great battle-field of the
world; but to the perishability of the materials that were employed—such
as gypsum, alabaster, wood, terra cotta, and brick, with which their
ruins abound—we must likewise attribute, in part, this ignorance.

The massive temples of the Hindoos at Elora, Salsitte, and the Island of
Elephanta, seem in their awful grandeur like the habitations of giants,
on whose land some divine malediction has fallen. The Hindoos, in these
colossal structures with their endless sculptured

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

panels, their huge figures, and their astounding and intricate
excavations, evince a perseverance and industry equaled only by the
Egyptians. Their pagodas, towering in the air, are likewise wonderful
architectural achievements, quite as admirable as their hypogea. The
Indian structures are remarkable for their severe and grotesque
appearance. Their temples—whether of BRAHMA, the creator of all; VISHNU,
the preserver of all; or of SERB or SHEVA, the destroyer of all—exhibit
a striking embodiment of the attributes of the deities in whose honor
they were erected.

A remarkable resemblance to the Hindoo constructions has been found in
the religious monuments or *teocallis* of Mexico and Yucatan. But the
architectural types of these antique structures sink into insignificance
when compared with those of Egypt. The obelisks, pyramids, temples,
palaces, tombs, and other structures with which that country abounds,
are on a colossal scale, and such as can have been executed only by a
people far advanced in architectural art, and profoundly versed in the
science of mechanics. These works, like the Hindoo structures, were
remarkable for their gigantic proportions and massiveness. Intricate and
highly painted relievo sculptures or hieroglyphics covered the entire
extent of their walls. The prevailing monotony of the hieroglyphic
designs which form the chief feature of Egyptian architectural
decoration, was superinduced by the circumscribed and limiting laws of
their religion. In Egyptian architecture we trace the elements of the
early Indian school, blended with more harmonious combinations, as
likewise the introduction of architectural orders. Beside skilled
organization of parts, and a just appreciation of pleasing effect, their
works in their colossal features evince a thorough knowledge of the
geometrical branch of the science of construction. The architectural
genius of Egypt lavished its power on mausoleums, and on gorgeous
temples to the deities, which, in their sublimity, inspire awe. They
were constructed of granite, breccia, sandstone, and brick, which
different materials are adjusted with much precision. The huge blocks
employed in their various monuments exhibit a perfect acquaintance with
the laws of mechanics. We cannot but wonder at their monolithic
obelisks, especially when we reflect upon the immense distances they had
to be transported. The pyramidal shape pervades most of their works, the
walls of their temples inclining inward. The jambs to their
entrance-gates also were generally inclined. The Egyptians never used
columns peripterally, even under the dominion of the Greeks and Romans.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

when the column was used externally, the space intervening was walled up
to a certain height. To these circumstances, together with the fact that
their monuments were terraced, eau be ascribed their massive and solid
appearance. With them, columns were employed to form porticos in their
interior courts, and also to support the ceilings. The shafts, of
different forms, being conical, or cylindrical, or bulging out at the
base, sometimes presented a smooth surface; they were rarely fluted,
being generally covered with hieroglyphics. Occasionally, they were
monoliths, but were generally constructed in layers, and covered with
hieroglyphics; a circular plinth formed the base. The capitals resemble
the lotus, at times, spreading out at the top; again, the flower appears
bound together, assuming the bulbous shape; above is a square tablet
forming the abacus. Others, of a later date, present projecting convex
lobes; while other capitals are composed of a rectangular block, with a
head carved on either side, surmounted by a die, also carved. Caryatic
figures were also employed by the Egyptians, and were generally placed
against walls or pillars, thus appearing to support the entablature,
composed of a simple architrave and a coved cornice, with a large torus
intervening, which descends the angles of the walls. The Pelasgians
appear to have been the first people settled in Greece, numerous remains
of whose structures are still extant. Subsequently, from the knowledge
possessed by the indigenous tribes, together with that acquired from the
Egyptians and the Asiatic nations, the Greeks extracted and developed a
style peculiarly their own; and architectural art passed from the
gigantic to the elegant and classic forms. During the reign of PERICLES
it flourished with meridian splendor, and some of the most superb
edifices the world has ever seen were erected during this period. The
Grecian monument belonged to the nation, and upon the public works of
the country the government lavished fabulous sums. HEEREN informs us
that the Greeks placed the necessary appropriation of funds for the
public works at the head of the government expenditures. The thoughts of
the whole Grecian nation, it would seem, were turned toward the
adornment of the country. They forbade by law any architectural display
on private residences, and in fact, until after Greece became subject to
Macedonia, architects were permitted to work only for the governments.

The beauty and grace which pervade all their works, whether monumental,
mechanical, or industrial, lead us to suppose that, although imperfect
as regards comfort, they must yet have exhibited

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

a certain degree of elegance. A just idea of the moldings and ornaments,
unequaled for their purity and grace, can be obtained only from personal
observation. It is also impossible, from any verbal description, to be
able fully to appreciate the beauty and harmony of their different
styles. It may not be amiss, however, here to lay down some general
principles:—These styles may be classed in systems or orders—the Doric,
Ionic, and Corinthian. They also employed, though rarely, caryatides.
Innumerable conjectures exist concerning the origin of these different
orders. In all probability we are indebted to the Dorians for the
invention of the Doric; although CHAMPOLLION sees in an Egyptian order,
which he styles the proto-Doric, the type of the Grecian order of that
name. The oldest example extant is at Corinth.—To the Ionians, likewise,
is attributed the honor of having first employed the Ionic order, no
example of which is to be found in Greece, prior to the Macedonian
conquest. As for the origin of the Corinthian, without wishing to
discredit the interesting narrative of VITRUVIUS, wherein he accords to
CALLIMACHUS the invention of the Corinthian capital, it might be well to
state, that foliated capitals, of much greater antiquity than any
discovered in Greece, are to be found in Egypt and in Asia Minor. The
most perfect Grecian example of this order is employed in the choragic
monument of LYSICRATES; and there can be little doubt that the Greeks
also derived the idea of their caryatic order from the Egyptians, who
frequently employed human figures instead of columns in their
structures.—The Doric holds the foremost rank among the Grecian orders,
not only on account of its being the most ancient, the most generally
employed, and, consequently, the most perfected, but more especially on
account of its containing, as it were, the principle of all their
architecture, as well as an exact imitation of all the parts employed in
their primitive constructions, which were undoubtedly of wood. This
style, typical of majesty and imposing grandeur, was almost universally
employed by the Greeks in the construction of their temples; and
certainly monumental art does not furnish us with the equal of a Greek
peripteral temple.

To the Etruscans the invention of the arch, constructed on its true
principles, has been generally attributed, as likewise the composition
of an order styled Tuscan, a species of simple Doric, no entire example
of which, however, has been handed down to us by the ancients.

The history of Roman architecture, under its kings and at the

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

beginning of the republic, is somewhat obscure, as but few of the
monuments of that period remain. The Roman kings fortified the city, and
erected various palaces, temples, and tombs. It became adorned with
colossal works of art, whose stupendous features—forming such a contrast
with the comparative insignificance of its power and condition—would
seem to indicate that the future of imperial Rome had been foreshadowed
to its people. The early Romans employed Etruscans in their works. When
Greece at length fell under the yoke of the Roman empire, Rome became
enriched with the spoils of Athens. The Greek artists sought protection
and patronage among their conquerors, and adorned the imperial capital
with structures which called forth unbounded praise. The Grecian style
was blended with the Etruscan during the more early period of the Roman
school. But as the arch, which was the characteristic feature of Roman
architecture, revealed its treasures, the Grecian elements were employed
but as a system of ornamentation. During the middle ages, the spirit of
classic art seems to have waned with the glory of the Roman empire. The
science of building became perverted, and the fame which the Romans had
attained in architecture became a memory only. At this period it is
supposed that the construction of houses in stories became general. The
habitations of the mass of the people were poor, and irregularly planted
about the town-hall in cities, or clustered about those massive
structures (feudal castles) erected as fortresses, into which the
arrogant possessor might retire, and whence he might sally at pleasure
to harass the country. Many of the castle fortresses were on a plan of
great magnitude, consisting of two or more large towers and divers inner
buildings, including chapels During the gloom and the disastrous
influences of the bloody wars of the middle ages, we find the venerable
institution of Freemasonry nourishing, under the ashes of its ancient
mysteries, the social fire of architectural art. While the whole of
Europe was convulsed with the international and social strife and
invasions of barbarians, which resulted in its complete reorganization,
the study of the arts, sciences, and literature, took refuge in the
monasteries. In Italy, during the tenth century, we find the corporation
of Magistri Comacini exercising great influence, and giving to Grecian
artists shelter from the political troubles of the East, and from the
persecutions of the Iconoclasts. These artists promulgated among the
Lombards the Byzantine elements of structure. whose influence, es we
have seen, was more or less diffused

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

throughout the architectural schools of Europe. Under ERWIN VON
STEINBACH, of Germany, during the thirteenth century, the Mitten, or
Lodges, were organized, one object of which was the study of
architecture, over which they exercised a powerful influence. In
Strasbourg existed the Lodge of the Haupt-Hütte. Under GODOYNE, or JOSSE
DOTTZINGER, of Worms, (who in 1444 succeeded the architect J. HULT,) the
various sects of the German Freemasons were incorporated into one body,
and, in virtue of an act passed at Ratisbon, the same year, the
architect of the cathedral of Strasbourg was elected the sole Grand
Master of the Fraternity. These *magistri lapidum* were likewise sole
directors or supervisors of all the religious structures. Protected by
the Church, sole depository of the arcana of the early Masters,
architecture passed from the old Gothic through various phases of the
pointed or ogean styles. The influence, the enterprise, and daring
achievements of its promoters seemed to strike the contemporary ages as
well as posterity with a religious awe; and the intellectual power and
energy of the people appear to have been concentrated and expended upon
architecture. The revival of the spirit of emulation, engendered by the
impetus thus given to art, would seem to have possessed a regenerating
power, and to have resuscitated Europe from the condition of moral
syncope into which it had fallen. The spirit of an age is embodied in
its architecture.

The five orders are thus classed:—the TUSCAN, DORIC, IONIC, CORINTHIAN,
and COMPOSITE.

#### THE TUSCAN

Is the most simple and solid of the five orders. It was invented in
Tuscany, whence it derives its name. Its column is seven diameters high;
and its capital, base, and entablature have but few moldings. The
simplicity of the construction of this column renders it eligible where
ornament would be superfluous.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

#### THE DORIC,

Which is plain and natural, is the most ancient, and was invented by the
Greeks. Its column is eight diameters high, and has seldom any ornaments
on base or capital, except moldings—though the frieze is distinguished
by triglyphs and metopes, and triglyphs compose the ornaments of the
frieze. The solid composition of this order gives it a preference, in
structures where strength and a noble simplicity are chiefly required.
The Doric is the best proportioned of all the orders. The several parts
of which it is composed are founded on the natural position of solid
bodies. In its first invention, it was more simple than in its present
state. In after-times, when it began to be adorned, it gained the name
of Doric: for when it was constructed in its primitive and simple form,
the name of Tuscan was conferred on it. Hence the Tuscan precedes the
Doric in rank, on account of its resemblance to that pillar in its
original state.

#### THE IONIC

Bears a kind of mean proportion between the more solid and delicate
orders. Its column is

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

nine diameters high; its capital is adorned with volutes, and its
cornice has dentils. There is both delicacy and ingenuity displayed in
this pillar, the invention of which is attributed to the Ionians, as the
famous "*Temple of Diana*," at Ephesus, was of this order. It is said to
have been formed after the model of an agreeable young woman, of an
elegant shape, dressed in her hair; as a contrast to the Doric order,
which was formed after that of a strong, robust man.

#### THE CORINTHIAN,

The richest of the five orders, is deemed *a masterpiece of art*. Its
column is ten diameters high, and its capital is adorned with two rows
of leaves, and eight volutes, which sustain the abacus. The frieze is
ornamented with curious devices; the cornice with dentils and
modillions. This order is used in stately and superb structures. It was
invented at Corinth by CALLIMACHUS, who is said to have taken the hint
of the capital of this pillar from the following remarkable
circumstance:—Accidentally passing by the tomb of a young lady, be
perceived a basket of toys, covered with a tile, placed over an
acanthus-root, having been left there by her nurse.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

As the branches grew up, they encompassed the basket until, arriving at
the tile, they met with an obstruction, and bent downwards. CALLIMACHUS,
struck with the object, set [about](errata.htm#4.md) imitating the figure;
the vase of the capital he made to represent the basket; the abacus, the
tile; and the volutes, the bending leaves.

#### THE COMPOSITE

Is compounded of the other orders, and was contrived by the Romans. Its
capital has the two rows of leaves of the Corinthian, and the volutes of
the Ionic. Its column has quarter-rounds, as the Tuscan and Doric
orders; is ten diameters high, and its cornice has dentils, or simple
modillions. This pillar is generally found in buildings where strength,
elegance and beauty are displayed.

#### THE INVENTION OF ORDER IN ARCHITECTURE.

The ancient and original orders of architecture, revered by Masons, are
no more than three: the *Doric*, *Ionic*, and *Corinthian*, which were
invented by the Greeks. To these, the Romans have added two—the Tuscan,
which they made plainer than the Doric, and the Composite, which was

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

more ornamental, if not more beautiful, than the Corinthian. The first
three orders alone, however, show invention and particular character,
and essentially differ from each other; the two others have nothing but
what is borrowed, and differ only accidentally: the Tuscan is the Doric
in its earliest state; and the Composite is the Corinthian enriched with
the Ionic. To the Greeks, therefore, and not to the Romans, we arc
indebted for what is great, judicious, and distinct in architecture.

Of these five orders, the IONIC, DORIC, and CORINTHIAN, as the most
ancient, are most esteemed by Masons.

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Five Senses of Human Nature](gar44.md)
