[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar43)  [Next](gar45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### The five Senses of Human Nature.

An analysis of the human faculties is next given in this section, in
which the FIVE EXTERNAL SENSES particularly claim attention.

 

The senses we are to consider as the gifts of Nature, and though not the
acquisition of our reasoning faculty, yet, in the use of them, are still
subject to reason. REASON, properly employed, confirms the regulations
of Nature, which are always true and wholesome: she distinguishes

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

the good from the bad; rejects the last with modesty—adheres to the
first with reverence. The objects of human knowledge are innumerable;
the channels by which this knowledge is conveyed are few. Among these,
the perception of external things by the senses, and the information we
receive from human testimony, are not the least considerable: the
analogy between them is obvious. In the testimony of Nature, given by
the senses, as well as in human testimony, given by information, things
are signified by signs. In one as well as the other, the mind, either by
original principles or by custom, passes from the sign to the conception
and belief of the thing signified. The signs in the natural language, as
well as the signs in our original perceptions, have the same
signification in all climates and nations, and the skill of interpreting
them is not acquired, but innate.

Having made these observations, we shall proceed to give a brief
description of the five senses:

#### HEARING

Is that sense by which we distinguish sounds, and are capable of
enjoying all the agreeable charms of music. By it we are enabled to
enjoy

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

the pleasures of society, and reciprocally to communicate to each other
our thoughts and intentions—our purposes and desires; and thus our
reason is rendered capable of exerting its utmost power and energy. The
wise and beneficent Author of Nature intended, by the formation of this
sense, that we should be social creatures, and receive the greatest and
most important part of our knowledge from social intercourse with each
other. For these purposes we are endowed with hearing, that, by a proper
exertion of our rational powers, our happiness may be complete.

#### SEEING

Is that sense by which we distinguish objects, and in an instant of
time, without change of place or situation, view armies in battle array,
figures of the most stately structures, and all the agreeable variety
displayed in the landscape of Nature. By this sense, we find our way on
the pathless ocean, traverse the globe of earth, determine its figure
and dimensions, and delineate any region or quarter of it. By it we
measure the planetary orbs, and make new discoveries in the sphere of
the fixed stars. Nay, more, by it we perceive the tempers and
dispositions, the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

passions and affections of our fellow-creatures, when they wish most to
conceal them; so that, though the tongue may be taught to lie and
dissemble, the countenance will display the hypocrisy to the discerning
eye. In fine, the rays of LIGHT which administer to this sense, are the
most astonishing parts of the animated creation, and render the eye a
peculiar object of admiration.

Of all the faculties, SIGHT is the noblest. The structure of the eye,
and its appurtenances, evince the admirable contrivance of Nature for
performing all its various external and internal motions; while the
variety displayed in the eyes of different animals, suited to their
several ways of life, clearly demonstrate this organ to be .the
master-piece of Nature's works.

#### FEELING

Is that sense by which we distinguish the different qualities of
bodies:—such as *heat* and *cold*, *hardness* and *softness*,
*roughness* and *smoothness*, *figure*, *solidity*, *motion*, and
*extension*.

These three senses, *Hearing*, *Seeing* and *Feeling*, are deemed
peculiarly essential among Masons.

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

#### SMELLING

Is that sense by which we distinguish odors, the various kinds of which
convey different impressions to the mind. Animal and vegetable bodies,
and indeed most other bodies, while exposed to the air, continually send
forth effluvia of vast subtility, as well in a state of life and growth,
as in the state of fermentation and putrefaction. These effluvia, being
drawn into the nostrils along with the air, are the means by which all
bodies are distinguished. Hence it is evident, that there is a manifest
appearance of design in the great Creator's having planted the organ of
smell in the inside of that canal through which the air continually
passes in respiration.

#### TASTING

Enables us to make a proper distinction in the choice of our food. The
organ of this sense guards the entrance of the alimentary canal, as that
of smelling guards the entrance of the canal for respiration. From the
situation of both these organs, it is plain that they were intended by
Nature to distinguish wholesome food from that which is nauseous. Every
thing that enters into

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

the stomach must undergo the scrutiny of tasting; and by it we are
capable of discerning the changes which the same body undergoes in the
different compositions of art, cookery, chemistry, pharmacy, etc.

Smelling and tasting are inseparably connected; and it is by the
unnatural kind of life men commonly lead in society, that these senses
are rendered less fit to perform their natural offices.

The proper use of these five senses enables us to form just and accurate
notions of the operations of Nature; and when we reflect on the objects
with which our senses are gratified, we become conscious of them, and
are enabled to attend to them till they become familiar objects of
thought.

On the mind all our knowledge must depend. What, therefore, can be a
more proper subject for the investigation of Masons?

To sum up the whole of this transcendent measure of GOD'S bounty to man,
we shall add, that Memory, Imagination, Taste, Reasoning, Moral
Perception, and all the active powers of the soul, present a vast and
boundless field for philosophical disquisition, which far exceeds

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

human inquiry, and are peculiar mysteries, known only to Nature and to
Nature's GOD, to whom all are indebted for creation, preservation, and
every blessing we enjoy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seven Liberal Arts and Sciences](gar45)
