[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar44)  [Next](gar46.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### The Seven Liberal Arts And Sciences,

Which are Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, and
Astronomy, are here illustrated. Grammar is the science which teaches us
to express our ideas in appropriate words, which we may afterward
beautify and adorn by means of Rhetoric; while Logic instructs us how to
think and reason with propriety, and to make language subordinate to
thought. Arithmetic, which is the science of computing by numbers, is
absolutely essential, not only to a thorough knowledge of all
mathematical science, but also to a proper pursuit of our daily
avocations. Geometry, or the application of Arithmetic to sensible
quantities, is of all sciences the most important, since by it we are
enabled to measure and survey the globe that we inhabit. Its principles
extend to other spheres; and, occupied in the contemplation and
measurement of the sun, moon, and heavenly bodies, constitute the
science of Astronomy; and, lastly, when our minds are filled, and our
thoughts enlarged, by the contemplation of all the wonders which these
sciences open to our view, Music comes forward, to soften our hearts and
cultivate our affections by its soothing influences.

#### GRAMMAR

Is the key by which alone the door can be opened to the understanding of
speech. It is Grammar which reveals the admirable art of language, and
unfolds its various constituent parts—its names, definitions, and
respective offices; it unravels, as it were, the thread of which the web
of speech is composed. These reflections seldom occur to

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

any one before their acquaintance with the art; yet it is most certain
that, without a knowledge of Grammar, it is very difficult to speak with
propriety, precision, and purity.

#### RHETORIC.

It is by Rhetoric that the art of speaking eloquently is acquired. To be
an eloquent speaker, in the proper sense of the word, is far from being
either a common or an easy attainment: it is the art of being persuasive
and commanding; the art, not only of pleasing the fancy, but of speaking
both to the understanding and to the heart.

#### LOGIC

Is that science which directs us how to form clear and distinct ideas of
things, and thereby prevents us from being misled by their similitude or
resemblance. Of all the human sciences, that concerning man is certainly
most worthy of the human mind, and the proper manner of conducting its
several powers in the attainment of truth and knowledge. This science
ought to be cultivated as the foundation or ground-work of our
inquiries; particularly in the pursuit of those sublime principles which
claim our attention as Masons.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

#### ARITHMETIC

Is the art of numbering, or that part of the mathematics which considers
the properties of numbers in general. We have but a very imperfect idea
of things without quantity, and as imperfect of quantity itself, without
the help of Arithmetic. All the works of the Almighty are made in
number, weight, and measure; therefore, to understand them rightly, we
ought to understand arithmetical calculations; and the greater
advancement we make in the mathematical sciences, the more capable we
shall be of considering such things as are the ordinary objects of our
conceptions, and be thereby led to a more comprehensive knowledge of our
great Creator and the works of the creation.

#### GEOMETRY

Treats of the powers and properties of magnitudes in general, where
length, breadth, and thickness are considered—from a *point* to a
*line*, from a line to a *superfices*, and from a superfices to a
*solid*.

A *point* is the beginning of all geometrical matter.

A *line* is a continuation of the same.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

A *superfices* is length and breadth, without a given thickness.

A *solid* is length and breadth, with a given thickness, which forms a
cube, and comprehends the whole.

#### THE ADVANTAGES OF GEOMETRY.

By this science, the architect is enabled to construct his plans and
execute his designs; the general, to arrange his soldiers; the engineer,
to mark out grounds for encampments; the geographer, to give us the
dimensions of the world, and all things therein contained; to delineate
the extent of seas, and specify the divisions of empires, kingdoms, and
provinces. By it, also, the astronomer is enabled to make his
observations, and to fix the duration of times and seasons, years and
cycles. In fine, Geometry is the foundation of architecture, and the
root of the mathematics.

The contemplation of this science, in a moral and comprehensive view,
fills the mind with rapture. To the true geometrician, the regions of
matter with which he is surrounded afford ample scope for his
admiration, while they open a sublime field for his inquiry and
disquisition.

Every particle of matter on which he treads, every blade of grass which
covers the field, every flower which blows, and every infect which wings
its way in this expanded space, proves the existence of a First Cause,
and yields pleasure to the intelligent mind.

The symmetry, beauty, and order displayed in the various parts

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

of the animate and inanimate creation, is a pleasing and delightful
theme, and naturally leads to the source whence the whole is derived.
When we bring within the focus of the eye the variegated carpet of the
terrestrial theater, and survey the progress of the vegetative system,
our admiration is justly excited. Every plant which grows, every
flowering shrub which breathes its sweets, affords instruction and
delight. When we extend our views to the animal creation, and
contemplate the varied clothing of every species, we are equally struck
with astonishment. And when we trace the lines of geometry drawn by the
Divine pencil in the beautiful plumage of the feathered tribe, how
exalted is our conception of the heavenly work! The admirable structure
of plants and animals, and the infinite number of fibers and vessels
which run through the whole, with the apt disposition of one part to
another, is a perpetual subject of study to the geometrician, who, while
he adverts to the changes which all undergo in their progress to
maturity, is lost in rapture and veneration of the Great Cause which
governs the system.

When he descends into the bowels of the earth, and explores the kingdom
of ores, minerals, and fossils, he finds the same instances of Divine
Wisdom and Goodness displayed in their formation and structure: every
gem and pebble proclaims the handiwork of an Almighty Creator.

When he surveys the watery elements, and directs his attention to the
wonders of the deep, with all the inhabitants of the mighty ocean, he
perceives emblems of the same supreme intelligence. The scales of the
largest fish, as well as the penciled shell of the minutest bivalve,
equally yield a theme for his contemplation, on which he fondly dwells,
while the symmetry of their formation, and the delicacy of their tints,
evince the wisdom of the Divine Artist.

When he exalts his view to the more noble and elevated parts of Nature,
and surveys the celestial orbs, how much greater is his astonishment!
If, on the principles of geometry and true philosophy, he contemplate
the sun, the moon, the stars, and the whole concave of heaven, his pride
will be humbled, while he is lost in awful admiration of the Maker. The
immense magnitude of those bodies, the regularity and velocity of their
motions, and the inconceivable extent of space through which they move,
are equally wonderful and incomprehensible, so as to baffle his most
daring conceptions, while he labors in considering the immensity of the
theme!

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

#### MUSIC

Is that elevated science which affects the passions by sound. There are
few who have not felt its charms, and acknowledged its expression to be
intelligible to the heart. It is a language of delightful sensations,
far more eloquent than words; it breathes to the ear the clearest
intimations; it touches and gently agitates the agreeable and sublime
passions; it wraps us in melancholy, and elevates us in joy; it
dissolves and inflames; it melts us in tenderness, and excites us to
war. This science is truly congenial to the nature of man; for by its
powerful charms the most discordant passions may be harmonized, and
brought into perfect unison; but it never sounds with such seraphic
harmony as when employed in singing hymns of gratitude to the Creator of
the universe.

#### ASTRONOMY

Is that sublime science which inspires the contemplative mind to soar
aloft, and read the wisdom, strength, and beauty of the great Creator in
the heavens. How nobly eloquent of the Deity is the celestial
hemisphere!—spangled with the most magnificent heralds of his infinite

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

glory! They spear-to the whole universe; for there is no speech so
barbarous, but their language is understood; nor nation so distant, but
their voices are heard among them.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The heavens proclaim the glory of GOD;  
The firmament declareth the works of his hands.</span>

</div>

Assisted by Astronomy, we ascertain the laws which govern the heavenly
bodies, and by which their motions are directed; investigate the power
by which they circulate in their orbs, discover their size, determine
their distance, explain their various phenomena, and correct the fallacy
of the senses by the light of truth. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[\*](gar46.htm#fn_25.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Emblem of Plenty Explained](gar46.md)
