[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar50)  [Next](gar52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

All the implements in Masonry, indiscriminately, properly belong to this
degree, and may be illustrated in this section. The TROWEL, however, is
more particularly referred to.

#### THE TROWEL

Is an instrument made use of by operative Masons to spread the cement
which unites the building into one common mass; but we, as Free and
Accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more noble and
glorious purpose of spreading the cement of brotherly love and
affection; that cement which unites us into one sacred band, or society
of friends and brothers, among whom no contention should ever exist, but
that noble contention, or rather emulation, of who best can work and
best agree.

The three precious jewels of a Master Mason—FRIENDSHIP, MORALITY, and
BROTHERLY LOVE.

#### SECTION II.

Trim section recites the historical traditions of the Order, and
presents to view a picture of great moral sublimity. It recites the
legend of which the symbolic interpretation testifies our faith in the
resurrection of the body and the immortality of the soul; while it also
exemplifies an instance of integrity and firmness seldom equaled and
never excelled, and is in strong contrast with the development of those
passions which debase and ruin all who indulge in them.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

THE ceremonial of the Degree of Master Mason is unquestionably the most
important, impressive, and instructive portion of the Ritual of Ancient
Freemasonry. It transcends all others in the profoundness of its
philosophy, in the wide range of ideas it aims to elucidate, and the
dramatic interest with which it is invested. Wrong interpretations,
however, assuming what is evidently a philosophical and ethical Mythus,
to be the description of a literal fact, have, in a certain degree,
weakened the effects which it is capable, otherwise, of producing.

That portion of the Rite which is connected with the legend of the
Tyrian Artist, is well worthy the deep and earnest study of thoughtful
men. But it should be studied as a myth, and not as a fact; and, if thus
accepted, it will be found exceedingly rich in instructive lessons, and
lessons, too, which admit of an immense variety of applications;
whereas, if it be regarded simply as a ceremony commemorative of
historical occurrences, it has no philosophical importance nor
significance whatever.

Against the notion that it is the representation of a scene that
actually occurred in the Temple, it may well be urged that, outside of
Masonic tradition, there is no proof that an event, such as is related
in connection with the Temple-Builder, ever transpired; and, besides,
the ceremony is *older*, by more than a thousand years, than the age of
SOLOMON. There are characters impressed upon it which cannot be
mistaken. It is thoroughly Egyptian, and is closely allied to the
supreme rite of the Isianic mysteries.

OSIRIS, ISIS, and TYPHON are the three principal figures in the ancient
Egyptian mythology. TYPHON—i.e., *Evil*—made war upon OSIRIS—i.e.,
*Beauty*, *Goodness*, and *Truth*. A fierce conflict long raged between
these spiritual forces, of which all the combats, antagonisms, and
disorders of the outward, visible world, were only far-distant. echoes,
or feeble reverberations. TYPHON (*Evil*), for a period, appeared to
triumph. With his wiles and arts, he overcame OSIRIS (*Truth*),
dismembered his body, and concealed the fragments in the several
quarters of the earth. Then the whole universe was shrouded in gloom,
and resounded with lamentations and mourning over the fall of the
Beautiful and Good! ISIS set forth, on her woful pilgrimage, to find the
remains of the beloved OSIRIS. After many disappointments and trials,
her efforts were crowned with success. The great day of triumph came.
TYPHON (*Evil*) was

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

destroyed by HORUS; the tomb of OSIRIS opened, and HE—*Order*, *Truth*,
*Justice*—came forth, victorious, in the possession of immortal life,
and harmony, peace, and joy prevailed through the universe.

The Egyptian rite was a dramatic representation of these events, and its
purpose is sufficiently obvious. It pictured, in an impressive and
solemn manner, the mighty and unceasing conflict of *Truth* with
*Error*, *Light* with *Darkness*, *Beauty* with *Deformity*, *Virtue*
with *Vice*, and *Life* with *Death;* and the final certain triumph of
the former, and the sure defeat and destruction of the latter.

This myth is the antetype of the Temple-legend. OSIRIS and the Tyrian
Architect are one and the same—not a mortal individual, but an idea—an
IMMORTAL PRINCIPLE! In Egyptian Freemasonry, OSIRIS was the type of
Beauty, Goodness, Order, and Truth. So, in the Temple-myth, the Tyrian
is the symbol of Beauty and Order, and of that Creative Art which is
ever ready to seize the Ideal, and incarnate it in material forms—that
divine art which robes the physical world in immortal
splendors—embellishes and beautifies life—idealizes all Nature,
transforming dull and prosy reality to a sunny, flowery dream;

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Clothing the palpable and the familiar  
 With golden exhalations of the dawn."</span>

</div>

TYPHON was slain, and the iniquitous triad of the Temple met a deserved
doom. The Master's rite, from this point of view, has a wider scope and
deeper significance, than if recognized as merely the record of an
historical fact. In the one case, it simply tells us that a good man
fell in the discharge of his duty, and that his foes were punished. In
the other, it embraces all the possible conditions of Humanity, ranges
through all worlds, reveals the Law of Eternal Justice, announces the
omnipotence of Truth, and proclaims the immortality of man.

In this sense, the myth of the Tyrian is perpetually repeated in the
history of human affairs. ORPHEUS was murdered, and his body thrown into
the Hebrus; SOCRATES was made to drink the hemlock; and, in all ages, we
have seen Evil temporarily triumphant, and Virtue and Truth calumniated,
persecuted, crucified, and slain. But Eternal Justice marches surely and
swiftly through the world: the TYPHONS, the children of darkness, the
plotters of crime, all the infinitely varied forms of evil, are swept
into oblivion; and Truth and Virtue—for a time laid low—come forth,
clothed with diviner majesty, and crowned with everlasting glory!

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"TRUTH, crushed to earth, will rise again;  
  The eternal years of GOD are hers:  
While ERROR, wounded, writhes in pain,  
  And dies amid her worshipers."</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Twelve Messengers—Acacia Tree—Letter G.](gar52)
