[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar54)  [Next](gar56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

#### SECTION III.

THIS section illustrates certain hieroglyphical emblems, and inculcates
many useful and impressive moral lessons. It also details many
particulars relative to the building of the Temple at Jerusalem.

This magnificent structure was founded in the fourth year of the reign
of SOLOMON, on the second day of the month Zif, being the second month
of the sacred year. It was located on Mount Moriah, near the place where
ABRAHAM was about to offer up his son ISAAC, and where DAVID met and
appeased the destroying angel. JOSEPHUS informs us that, although more
than seven years were occupied in building it, yet, during the whole
term, it did not rain in the day-time, that the workmen might not be
obstructed in their labor. From sacred history we also learn, that there
was not the sound of ax, hammer, or any tool of iron, heard in the house
while it was

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

building. It is said to have been supported by fourteen hundred and
fifty-three columns, and two thousand nine hundred and six pilasters,
all hewn from the finest Parian marble.

It was symbolically supported, also, by three columns—WISDOM, STRENGTH,
and BEAUTY.

\*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*       \*

In the British and other mysteries, these three pillars represented the
great emblematical *Triad of Deity*, as with us they refer to the three
principal officers of the Lodge. It is a fact that, in Britain, the
*Adytum* or Lodge was actually supported by three stones or pillars,
which were supposed to convey a regenerating purity to the aspirant,
after having endured the ceremony of initiation in all its accustomed
formalities. The delivery from between them was termed a *new birth*.
The corresponding pillars of the Hindoo mythology were also known by the
names of Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty, and placed in the East, West, and
South, crowned with three human heads. They jointly referred to the
Creator, who was said to have planned the Great Work by his infinite
*Wisdom*, executed it by his *Strength*, and to have adorned it with all
its *Beauty* and usefulness for the benefit of man. These united powers
were not overlooked in the mysteries; for we find them represented in
the solemn ceremony of initiation by the three presiding Brahmins or
Hierophants. The chief Brahmin sat in the East, high exalted on a
brilliant throne, clad in a flowing robe of azure, thickly sparkled with
golden stars, and bearing in his hand a magical rod; thus symbolizing
BRAHMA, the creator of the world. His two compeers, clad in robes of
equal magnificence, occupied corresponding situations of distinction.
The representative of VISHNU (the setting sun) was placed on an exalted
throne in the West; and he who personated SIVA, the meridian sun,
occupied a splendid throne in the South.

There were employed in its building three Grand Masters; three thousand
and three hundred

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masters or
Overseers of the work; eighty thousand Fellow-Crafts; and seventy
thousand Entered Apprentices, or bearers of burdens. All these were
classed and arranged in such manner, by the wisdom of SOLOMON, that
neither envy, discord, nor confusion, were suffered to interrupt or
disturb the peace and good-fellowship which prevailed among the workmen.

In front of the magnificent porch were placed the two celebrated
pillars—one on the left hand and one on the right hand. They are
supposed to have been placed there as a memorial to the children of
Israel of the happy deliverance of their forefathers from Egyptian
bondage, and in commemoration of the miraculous pillars of fire and
cloud. The pillar of fire gave light to the Israelites, and facilitated
their march; and the cloud proved darkness to PHARAOH and his host, and
retarded their pursuit. King SOLOMON, therefore, ordered these pillars
to be placed at the entrance of the Temple, as the most conspicuous
part, that the children of Israel might have that happy event
continually before their eyes, in going to and returning from divine
worship.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

#### KING SOLOMON'S TEMPLE.

THE place chosen for the erection of this magnificent structure was
Mount Moriah, a lofty hill, situated in the north-easterly part of the
city of Jerusalem, having Mount Zion on the south-west, Mount Acra on
the west, and Mount Olives on the east. The summit of this mountain was
unequal, and its aides irregular; but it was a favorite object of the
Jews to level and extend it. The plan and model of the Temple was in the
same form as the Tabernacle of Moses, but was of much larger dimensions.

King SOLOMON commenced the erection of the Temple in the year B.C. 1011,
about 480 years after the Exodus and the building of the Tabernacle in
the wilderness; and it was finished B.C. 1004, having occupied seven
years and six months in the building.

The foundations were laid at a profound depth, and consisted of stones
of immense size and great durability. They were closely mortised into
the rock, so as to form a secure basis for the substantial erection of
the sacred edifice.

The building does not appear to have been so remarkable for its
magnitude, as for the magnificence of its ornaments and the value of its
materials. The porch was 120 cubits, or 210 feet high, and the rest of
the building was in height but 30 cubits, or 52½ feet; so that the form
of the whole house was thus:—It was situated due east and west, the holy
of holies being to the westward, and the porch or entrance toward the
east. The whole length, from east to west, was 70 cubits, or 122½ feet.
The breadth, exclusive of the side chambers, was 20 cubits, or 35 feet;
the height of the holy place and the holy of holies was 30 cubits, or
52½ feet, and the porch stood at the eastern end, like a lofty steeple,
120 cubits, or 210 feet high. In fact, as LIGHTFOOT remarks, the Temple
much resembled a modern church, with this difference, that the steeple,
which was placed over the porch, was situated at the east end.

Around the north and south sides and the west end were built chambers of
three stories, each story being 5 cubits in height, or 15 cubits, 26
feet 9 inches in all—and these were united to the outside wall of the
house.

The windows, which were used for ventillation rather than for light,
which was derived from the sacred candlesticks, were placed in the wall
of the Temple that was above the roof of the side chambers. But that
part which included the holy of holies was without

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

any aperture whatever, to which SOLOMON alludes in the passage, "The
LORD said that HE would dwell in the thick darkness."

The Temple was divided, internally, into three parts—the porch, the
sanctuary, and the holy of holies; the breadth of all these wag of
course the same, namely, 20 cubits, or 35 feet, but they differed in
length. The porch was 17 feet 6 inches in length, the sanctuary 70 feet,
and the holy of holies 35, or, in the Hebrew measure, 10, 40, and 20
cubits. The entrance from the porch into the sanctuary was through a
wide door of olive posts and leaves of fir; but the door between the
sanctuary and the holy of holies was composed entirely of olive-wood.
These doors were always open, and the aperture closed by a suspended
curtain. The partition between the sanctuary and the holy of holies
partly consisted of an open network, so that the incense daily offered
in the former place might be diffused through the interstices into the
latter.

In the sanctuary were placed the golden candlestick, the table of
shew-bread, and the altar of incense. The holy of holies contained
nothing but the ark of the covenant, which included the tables of the
law.

The frame-work of the Temple consisted of massive stone, but it was
wainscoted with cedar, which was covered with gold. The boards within
the Temple were ornamented with carved work, skillfully representing
cherubim, palm-leaves, and flowers. The ceiling was supported by beams
of cedar-wood, which, with that used in the wainscoting, was supplied by
the workmen of HIRAM, King of Tyre, from the forest of Lebanon. The
floor was throughout made of cedar, but boarded over with planks of fir.

The Temple, thus constructed, was surrounded by various courts and high
walls, and thus occupied the entire summit of Mount Moriah. The first of
the courts was the Court of the Gentiles, beyond which Gentiles were
prohibited from passing. Within this, and separated from it by a low
wall, was the Court of the Children of Israel, and inside of that,
separated from it by another wall, was the Court of the Priests, in
which was placed the altar of burnt offerings. From this court there was
an ascent of twelve steps to the porch of the Temple, before which stood
the two pillars of JACHIN and BOAZ.

For the erection of this magnificent structure, besides the sums
annually appropriated by SOLOMON, his father, DAVID, had left one
hundred thousand talents of gold and a million talents of silver, equal
to nearly four thousand millions of dollars.

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

The year after the Temple was finished, it was dedicated with those
solemn ceremonies which are alluded to in this degree. The dedicatory
ceremonies commenced on Friday, the 30th of October, and lasted for
fourteen days, terminating on Thursday, the 12th of November, although
the people were not dismissed until the following Saturday. Seven days
of this festival were devoted to the dedication exclusively, and the
remaining seven to the Feast of Tabernacles, which followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Emblems of Master Mason's Degree](gar56)
