[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar60)  [Next](gar62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDMG/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*General Ahiman Rezon*, by Daniel Sickels, \[1868\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### DEDICATION.

A piece of solemn music is performed.

The Grand Master, then standing with his hands stretched forth over the
Lodge, exclaims,

To the memory of the Holy SAINTS JOHN, we dedicate this Lodge. May every
brother revere their character and imitate their virtues!

*Response*.—As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be; world
without end.—AMEN.

A piece of music is performed while the brethren of the new Lodge
advance in procession to salute the Grand Lodge, with their hands
crossed upon their breasts, and bowing as they pass. They then take
their places as they were.

#### CONSTITUTION.

The Grand Master then rises, and Constitutes the new Lodge in the
following form, all the brethren standing at the same time:

In the name of the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge, I now constitute and
form you, my beloved brethren, into a regular Lodge of Free

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

and Accepted Masons. From henceforth I empower you to meet as a regular
Lodge, constituted in conformity to the rites of our Order, and the
Charges of our Ancient and Honorable Fraternity; and may the Supreme
Architect of the Universe prosper, direct, and counsel you in all your
doings!

*Response*.—So mote it be.—AMEN.

The public grand honors are then given.

The powers and privileges of a Subordinate or Warranted Lodge are such
as are defined in its Warrant, by the Constitutions of the Grand Lodge
granting the same, and the Ancient Landmarks and General Regulations.
They are divided into—

1\. EXECUTIVE: in the direction and performance of its work, under the
control of its Master, and in all other matters in aid of the Master,
who has the primary executive power of a Lodge.

2\. LEGISLATIVE: embracing all matters relating to its internal
concerns, not in derogation of the Ancient Landmarks, the Constitutions
and General Regulations of the Grand Lodge, and its own particular
By-Laws; and

3\. JUDICIAL: embracing the exercise of discipline, and settlement of
controversies between and over all its members (except the Master), and
over all Masons and non-affiliated brethren within its jurisdiction,
subject to an appeal to the Grand Lodge.

The powers of a Warranted Lodge are, therefore, divided into two
classes, INHERENT and CONSTITUTIONAL:

The inherent powers of a Lodge, controlled only by the Ancient
Landmarks, are—

1\. To decide who shall be admitted members of or initiated therein;
that is, of persons properly qualified.

2\. To make Masons (not more than five at one meeting), of those it has
decided to admit.

3\. To place on trial a member against whom charges may have been
preferred, to pronounce sentence, and enforce discipline.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

4\. To elect and install its officers.

5\. To fix its time of meeting.

6\. To require its members to contribute to its funds.

7\. To be represented at all communications of the Grand Lodge.

8\. To instruct its representatives, for their government, at all such
communications of the Grand Lodge.

The constitutional powers of a Lodge, subject to control by the Grand
Lodge, are—

1\. To make a code of By-Laws for its internal government, not in
derogation of its inalienable rights, or of those of its members.

2\. To perform all the work pertaining to the three degrees of Ancient
Craft Masonry.

3\. To transact all business that can be legally transacted by a
duly-constituted Lodge of Freemasons.

4\. To appeal to the Grand Master or Grand Lodge from the decision of
the presiding-officer.

5\. To change its place of meeting.

6\. To control its funds.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Installation of the Officers of a Lodge](gar62)
