[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32049)  [Next](cc32051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlix"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p1"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)<span id="ii.xlix-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xlix-p1.2"></span>[Mark
8:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xlix-p1.2"></span>; <span id="ii.xlix-p1.3"></span>[Luke
12:54-57](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#054)<span
id="ii.xlix-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
16:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)<span id="ii.xlix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
8:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#011)<span id="ii.xlix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p4"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
12:54-57](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#054)<span
id="ii.xlix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p5"></span>**1**. And the Pharisees, together with the
Sadducees, came, and tempting desired that he would show them a sign
from heaven. **2**. But he answering said to them, About the
commencement of the evening you say, It will be fine weather; for the
sky is red. **3**. And in the morning, There will be a storm today; for
the sky is red and lowering. Hypocrites, you can judge aright of the
face of the sky; but can you not judge of the signs of the times?
**4**. A wicked and adulterous nation demandeth a sign, and no sign
shall be given to it but the sign of the prophet Jonah. And he left
them, and departed.

<span id="ii.xlix-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlix-p7"></span> **11**. And the Pharisees came, and began
to dispute with him, requesting from him a sign from heaven tempting
him. **12**. And he groaned in his spirit, and said, Why doth this
generation ask a sign? Verily, I say to you, That no sign shall be given
to this generation. **13**. And he left them, and returned to the ship,
and departed across the lake.

<span id="ii.xlix-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlix-p9"></span> **54**. And he said also to the
multitudes, When you see a cloud rising out of the west, you immediately
say, A shower is coming; and so it is. **55**. And when you perceive the
south wind blowing, you say that there will be hot weather; and so it
is. **56**. Hypocrites, you know how to judge of the appearance of the
sky and of the earth, and how comes it that you do not understand this
time? **57**. And why even of yourselves do you not judge what is right?

<span id="ii.xlix-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlix-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlix-p12"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.xlix-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xlix-p13.2"></span>.** *And the Pharisees came.* Mark says that
they *began to dispute*, from which we may conjecture that, when they
had been vanquished in argument, this was their last resource; as
obstinate men, whenever they are reduced to extremities, to avoid being
compelled to yield to the truth, are accustomed to introduce something
which is foreign to the subject. Though the nature of the dispute is not
expressed, yet I think it probable that they debated about the calling
of Christ, why he ventured to make any innovation, and why he made such
lofty pretensions, as if by his coming he had fully restored the kingdom
of God. Having nothing farther to object against his doctrine, they
demand that he *shall give them a sign from heaven.* But it is certain
that a hundred *signs* would have no greater effect than the testimonies
of Scripture. Besides, many miracles already performed had placed before
their eyes the power of Christ, and had almost enabled them to touch it
with their hands. *Signs*, by which Christ made himself familiarly
known, are despised by them; and how much less will they derive
advantage from a distant and obscure *sign?* Thus the Papists of our own
day, as if the doctrine of the Gospel had not yet been proved, demand
that it be ascertained by means of new miracles.

<span id="ii.xlix-p14"></span>*The Pharisees, together with the
Sadducees.* It deserves our attention that, though *the Sadducees* and
*the Pharisees* looked upon each other as enemies, and not only
cherished bitter hatred, but were continually engaged in hostilities,
yet they enter into a mutual league against Christ. In like manner,
though ungodly men quarrel among themselves, their internal broils never
prevent them from conspiring against God, and entering into a compact
for joining their hands in persecuting the truth.

<span id="ii.xlix-p15"></span>*Tempting.* By this word the Evangelists
mean that it was not with honest intentions, nor from a desire of
instruction, but by cunning and deceit, that they demanded what they
thought that Christ would refuse, or at least what they imagined was not
in his power. Regarding him as utterly mean and despicable, they had no
other design than to expose his weakness, and to destroy all the
applause which he had hitherto obtained among the people. In this manner
unbelievers are said to *tempt* God, when they murmur at being denied
what their fancy prompted them to ask, and charge God with want of
power.

<span id="ii.xlix-p16"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p17"></span>**2.** *About the commencement of the
evening.* By these words Christ reminds them that his power had been
sufficiently manifested, so that they must have recognised *the time of
their visitation*, (<span id="ii.xlix-p17.2"></span>[Lu
19:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044)<span
id="ii.xlix-p17.2"></span>,) had they not of their own accord shut their
eyes, and refused to admit the clearest light. The comparison which he
employs is beautiful and highly appropriate; for, though the aspect of
the sky is changeable, so that sometimes a storm unexpectedly arises,
and sometimes fair weather springs up when it was not expected, yet the
instructions of nature are sufficient to enable men to predict from
*signs* whether the day will be fair or cloudy. Christ therefore asks
why they do not recognize the kingdom of God, when it is made known by
*signs* not less manifest; for this proved clearly that they were
excessively occupied with earthly and transitory advantages, and cared
little about any thing that related to the heavenly and spiritual life,
and were blinded not so much by mistake as by voluntary malice.

<span id="ii.xlix-p18"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p19"></span>**3.** *Hypocrites, you can judge.* He
calls them *hypocrites*, because they pretend to ask that which, if it
were exhibited to them, they are resolved not to observe. The same
reproof applies nearly to the whole world; for men direct their
ingenuity, and apply their senses, to immediate advantage; and therefore
there is scarcely any man who is not sufficiently well qualified in this
respect, or at least who is not tolerably acquainted with the means of
gaining his object. How comes it then that we feel no concern about the
*signs* by which God invites us to himself? Is it not because every man
gives himself up to willing indifference, and extinguishes the light
which is offered to him? The calling of Christ, and the immediate
exhibition of eternal salvation, were exhibited to the scribes both by
the Law and the Prophets, and by his own doctrine, to which miracles
were added.

<span id="ii.xlix-p20"></span>There are many persons of the same
description in the present day, who plead that on intricate subjects
they have a good right to suspend their judgment, because they must wait
till the matter is fully ascertained. They go farther, and believe that
it is a mark of prudence purposely to avoid all inquiry into the truth;
as if it were not an instance of shameful sloth that, while they are so
eagerly solicitous about the objects of the flesh and of the earth, they
neglect the eternal salvation of their souls, and at the same time
contrive vain excuses for gross and stupid ignorance.

<span id="ii.xlix-p21"></span>A very absurd inference is drawn by some
ignorant persons from this passage, that we are not at liberty to
predict from the aspect of the sky whether we shall have fair or stormy
weather. It is rather an argument which Christ founds on the regular
course of nature, that those men deserve to perish for their
ingratitude, who, while they are sufficiently acute in matters of the
present life, yet knowingly and willfully quench the heavenly light by
their stupidity.

<span id="ii.xlix-p22"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p23"></span>**<span id="ii.xlix-p23.2"></span>[Mark
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xlix-p23.2"></span>.** *And groaning in his spirit.* By these
words Mark informs us that it occasioned grief and bitter vexation to
our Lord, when he saw those ungrateful men obstinately resist God. And
certainly all who are desirous to promote the glory of God, and who feel
concern about the salvation of men, ought to have such feelings that
nothing would inflict on their hearts a deeper wound than to see
unbelievers purposely blocking up against themselves the way of
believing, and employing all their ingenuity in obscuring by their
clouds the brightness of the word and works of God. The words, *in his
spirit*, appear to me to be added emphatically, to inform us that this
groan proceeded from the deepest affection of his heart, and that no
sophist might allege that Christ resorted to outward attitudes to
express a grief which he did not inwardly feel; for that holy soul,
which was guided by the zeal of the Spirit, must have been moved by deep
sadness at the sight of such wicked obstinacy.

<span id="ii.xlix-p24"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p25"></span>**<span id="ii.xlix-p25.2"></span>[Luke
12:57](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#057)<span
id="ii.xlix-p25.2"></span>.** *And why even of yourselves, etc.?* Here
Christ opens up the source of the evil, and, as it were, applies the
lancet to the ulcer. He tells them that they do not descend into their
consciences, and there examine with themselves, as in the presence of
God, what is right. The reason why hypocrites are so much disposed to
make objections is, that they throw their swelling words into the air
without any concern, and never exercise calm thought, or place
themselves at the tribunal of God, that the truth, when once
ascertained, may be fully embraced. When Luke says that this was *spoken
to the multitudes*, he does not contradict the narrative of Matthew and
Mark; for it is probable that Christ adapted his style generally to the
followers and disciples of the scribes, and to other despisers of God
who resembled them, of whom he perceived that there were too many; as
the present complaint or expostulation was applicable to the whole of
that rabble.

<span id="ii.xlix-p26"></span><span id="ii.xlix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p27"></span>**<span id="ii.xlix-p27.2"></span>[Matthew
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xlix-p27.2"></span>.** *A wicked and adulterous nation.* This
passage was explained  <span id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) under
<span id="ii.xlix-p28.2"></span>[Mt
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038)<span id="ii.xlix-p28.2"></span>.
The general meaning is, that the Jews are never satisfied with any
*signs*, but are continually tickled by a wicked desire to tempt God. He
does not call them *an adulterous nation* merely because they demand
some kind of sign, (for the Lord sometimes permitted his people to do
this,) but because they deliberately provoke God; and therefore he
threatens that, after he has risen from the dead, he will be a prophet
like Jonah. So Matthew at least says — for Mark does not mention Jonah —
but the meaning is the same; for, strictly speaking, this was intended
to serve as a *sign* to them, that Christ, when he had risen from the
dead, would in every place cause the voice of his Gospel to be
distinctly heard.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](cc32050.htm#fr_425) <span
id="ii.xlix-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlix-p28"></span> See page 93 of this volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 16:5-12; Mark 8:14-21; Luke 12:1](cc32051)
