[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32058)  [Next](cc32060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lviii"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
17:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022)<span
id="ii.lviii-p1.1"></span>, 18:1-5; <span
id="ii.lviii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
9:30-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030)<span
id="ii.lviii-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lviii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
9:43-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#043)<span
id="ii.lviii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
17:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022)<span
id="ii.lviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p3"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
9:30-36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030)<span
id="ii.lviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p4"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:43-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#043)<span
id="ii.lviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p5"></span> **22**. And while they remained in
Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man will be delivered into the
hands of men: **23**. And they will kill him, and on the third day he
will rise again. And they were deeply grieved.

<span id="ii.lviii-p6"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p6.1"></span>[Matthew
18:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001)<span id="ii.lviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p7"></span>**1**. At that time the disciples came to
Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? **2**. And
Jesus, having called a little child to him, placed him in the midst of
them, **3**. And said, Verily I say to you, Unless you be converted, and
become as little children, you shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. **4**. Whosoever then shall humble himself like this little
child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. **5**. And whosoever
shall receive such a little child in my name receiveth me.

<span id="ii.lviii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.lviii-p9"></span> **30**. And departing thence, they passed
through Galilee, and he was desirous that nobody should know it.
**31**. For he taught his disciples, and said to them, The Son of man is
delivered into the hands of men, and they will kill him; and, after
being killed, he will arise on the third day. **32**. but they knew not
what he said, and were afraid to ask him. **33**. And he came to
Capernaum;  <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) and when he was come
into the house, he asked them, What were you disputing about among
yourselves on the road? **34**. But they were silent; for they had
disputed among themselves by the way who was the greatest. **35**. And
when he had sat down, he called the twelve, and said to them, If any man
choose to be first, he shall be last of all,  <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) and servant of all. **36**. And he
took a child, and placed him in the midst of them; and when he had taken
him in his arms, he said to them, **37**. Whosoever shall receive one of
such children in my name receiveth me; and whosoever receiveth me
receiveth not me, but him that sent me.

<span id="ii.lviii-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.lviii-p13"></span> **43**. But while all were wondering at
everything that he did, he said to his disciples, **44**. Put these
words in your ears; for the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands
of men. **45**. But they understood not that saying, and it was hidden
from them, so that they did not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask
him concerning this saying. **46**. And a dispute arose among them,
which of them was the greatest. **47**. But Jesus, seeing the thought of
their heart, took a child, and placed him near him, **48**. And said to
them, Whosoever shall receive this child in my name receiveth me; and
whosoever shall receive me receiveth him that sent me; for he that is
least among you all shall be great.

<span id="ii.lviii-p14"></span> 

<span id="ii.lviii-p15"></span> 

<span id="ii.lviii-p16"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p17"></span>**<span
id="ii.lviii-p17.2"></span>[Matthew
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022)<span
id="ii.lviii-p17.2"></span>.** *And while they remained in Galilee.* The
nearer that the time of his death approached, the more frequently did
Christ warn his disciples, lest that melancholy spectacle might give a
violent shock to their faith. It was shortly after the miracle had been
performed that this discourse was delivered; for Mark says that he went
from that place to Galilee, in order to spend there the intervening time
in privacy; for he had resolved to come to Jerusalem on the day of the
annual sacrifice, because he was to be sacrificed at the approaching
Passover.

<span id="ii.lviii-p18"></span>The disciples had previously received
several intimations on this subject, and yet they are as much alarmed as
if nothing relating to it had ever reached their ears. So great is the
influence of preconceived opinion, that it brings darkness over the mind
in the midst of the clearest light. The apostles had imagined that the
state of Christ’s kingdom would be prosperous and delightful, and that,
as soon as he made himself known, he would be universally received with
the highest approbation. They never thought it possible that the
priests, and scribes, and other rulers of the Church, would oppose him.
Under the influence of this prejudice, they admit nothing that is said
on the other side; for Mark says that they *understood not* what our
Lord meant. Whence came it that a discourse so clear and distinct was
not understood, but because their minds were covered by the thick veil
of a foolish imagination?

<span id="ii.lviii-p19"></span>They did not venture to make any farther
inquiry. This must have been owing, in part, to their reverence for
their Master; but I have no doubt that their grief and astonishment at
what they had heard kept them silent. Such bashfulness was not
altogether commendable; for it kept them in doubt, and hesitation, and
sinful grief. In the meantime, a confused principle of piety, rather
than a clear knowledge of the truth, kept them attached to Christ, and
prevented them from leaving his school. A certain commencement of faith
and right understanding had been implanted in their hearts, which made
their zeal in following Christ not very different from the *implicit
faith* of the Papists; but as they had not yet made such progress as to
become acquainted with the nature of the kingdom of God and of the
renewal which had been promised in Christ, I say that they were guided
by zeal for piety rather than by distinct knowledge.

<span id="ii.lviii-p20"></span>In this way we come to see what there was
in them that deserved praise or blame. But though their stupidity could
not entirely be excused, we have no reason to wonder that a plain and
distinct announcement of the cross of their Master, and of the ignominy
to which he would be subjected, appeared to them a riddle; not only
because they reckoned it to be inconsistent with the glory of the Son of
God that he should be rejected and condemned, but because it appeared to
them to be highly improbable that the grace which was promised in a
peculiar manner to the Jews should be set at naught by the rulers of the
nation. But as the immoderate dread of the cross, which had suddenly
seized upon them, shut the door against the consolation which was
immediately added, arising out of the hope of the resurrection, let us
learn that, when the death of Christ is mentioned, we ought always to
take into view at once the whole of the three days, that his death and
burial may lead us to a blessed triumph and to a new life.

<span id="ii.lviii-p21"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p22"></span>**<span
id="ii.lviii-p22.2"></span>[Matthew
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#001)<span
id="ii.lviii-p22.2"></span>.** *At that time the disciples came to
Jesus.* It is evident from the other two Evangelists, that the disciples
did not come to Christ of their own accord, but that, having secretly
*disputed on the road*, they were brought out of their lurking-places,
and dragged forth to light. There is nothing inconsistent with this in
the account given by Matthew, who hastens to Christ’s reply, and does
not relate all the circumstances of the case, but passes over the
commencement, and relates in a summary manner the reason why Christ
rebuked the foolish ambition of his disciples for the highest rank. When
Christ makes inquiry about a secret conversation, and forces the
disciples to acknowledge what they would willingly have kept back, this
teaches us that we ought to beware of all ambition, however carefully it
may be concealed. We must also attend to the time at which this
occurred. The prediction of his death had made them sad and perplexed;
but as if they had received from it unmingled delight, as if they had
tasted of the nectar which the poets feign,  <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) they immediately enter into a dispute
about the highest rank.  <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497) How was
it possible that their distress of mind vanished in a moment, but
because the minds of men are so devoted to ambition, that, forgetful of
their present state of warfare, they continually rush forward, under the
delusive influence of a false imagination, to obtain a triumph? And if
the apostles so soon forgot a discourse which they had lately heard,
what will become of us if, dismissing for a long period meditation on
the cross, we give ourselves up to indifference and sloth, or to idle
speculations?

<span id="ii.lviii-p25"></span>But it is asked, what occasioned the
dispute among the disciples? I reply, as the flesh willingly shakes off
all uneasiness, they left out of view every thing that had given rise to
grief, and fixed on what had been said about the resurrection; and out
of this a debate sprung up among idle persons. And as they refuse the
first part of the doctrine, for which the flesh has no relish, God
permits them to fall into a mistake about the resurrection, and to dream
of what would never take place, that, by mere preaching, Christ would
obtain a kingdom, an earthly kingdom, and would immediately rise to the
highest prosperity and wealth.

<span id="ii.lviii-p26"></span>There were two faults in this debate.
First, the apostles were to blame for laying aside anxiety about the
warfare to which they had been called, and for demanding beforehand
repose, and wages, and honors, as if they had been soldiers that had
served their time. The second fault is, that, instead of laboring with
one consent, as they ought to have done, to render mutual assistance,
and to secure for their brethren as large a share of honors as for
themselves, they strove with wicked ambition to excel each other. If we
wish that our manner of life should receive the approbation of the Lord,
we must learn to bear patiently the burden of the cross that has been
laid on us, till the proper time arrive for obtaining the crown, and, as
Paul exhorts, *in honor preferring one another*, (<span
id="ii.lviii-p26.1"></span>[Ro
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#010)<span
id="ii.lviii-p26.1"></span>.) To the first of these faults is closely
allied the vain curiosity of those persons in the present day, who,
leaving the proper duties of their calling, eagerly attempt to fly above
the clouds. The Lord, who in the Gospel invites us to his kingdom,
points out to us the road by which we are to reach it. Fickle persons,
who give themselves no concern about faith, patience, calling on God,
and other exercises of religion, dispute about what is going on in
heaven; as if a man who was about to commence a journey made inquiry
where a lodging-place was situated, but did not move a step. Since we
are commanded by the Lord to walk on the earth, those who make the
condition of departed saints in heaven the subject of eager debate will
be found, in so doing, to retard their own progress towards heaven.

<span id="ii.lviii-p27"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p28"></span>**2.** *And Jesus called a child to him.*
The general meaning is, that those who desire to obtain greatness by
rising above their brethren, will be so far from gaining their object
that they do not even deserve to occupy the lowest corner. He reasons
from contraries, because it is humility alone that exalts us. As we are
more powerfully affected by appearances presented to the eyes, he holds
up to them *a little child* as an emblem of humility. When he enjoins
his followers to become *like a child*, this does not extend
indiscriminately to all points. We know that in children there are many
things faulty; and accordingly Paul bids us be *children*, not in
*understanding*, but *in malice*, (<span id="ii.lviii-p28.2"></span>[1Co
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span
id="ii.lviii-p28.2"></span>;) and in another passage he exhorts us to
strive to reach the state of *a perfect man*, (<span
id="ii.lviii-p28.3"></span>[Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span
id="ii.lviii-p28.3"></span>.) But as *children* know nothing about being
preferred to each other, or about contending for the highest rank,
Christ desires that their example should banish from the minds of his
followers those eager longings after distinction, which wicked men and
the children of the world continually indulge, that they may not be
allured by any kind of ambition.

<span id="ii.lviii-p29"></span>It will perhaps be objected, that
children, even from the womb, have a native pride, which leads them to
desire the highest honor and distinction; but the reply is obvious, that
comparisons must not be too closely or too exactly carried out, so as to
apply at all points. The tender age of little children is distinguished
by simplicity to such an extent, that they are unacquainted with the
degrees of honor, and with all the incentives to pride; so that they are
properly and justly held out by Christ as an example.

<span id="ii.lviii-p30"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p31"></span>**3.** *Unless you are converted.* To the
example of *little children* must be referred the *conversion* of which
he now speaks. Hitherto they had been too much habituated to the
ordinary customs of men; and if they would gain their object, they must
pursue a totally different course.  <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) Every one wished for himself the first
or the second rank; but Christ does not allot even the lowest place to
any man who does not lose sight of distinctions and *humble himself* On
the contrary, he says,

<span id="ii.lviii-p33"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p34"></span>**4.** *Whosoever shall humble himself
like this little child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven.*
This is intended to guard us against supposing that we degrade ourselves
in any measure by freely surrendering every kind of distinction. And
hence we may obtain a short definition  <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) of humility. That man is truly humble
who neither claims any personal merit in the sight of God, nor proudly
despises brethren, or aims at being thought superior to them, but
reckons it enough that he is one of the members of Christ, and desires
nothing more than that the Head alone should be exalted.

<span id="ii.lviii-p36"></span><span id="ii.lviii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p37"></span>**5.** *And he that shall receive such a
child.* The term *children* is now applied metaphorically by Christ to
those who have laid aside lofty looks, and who conduct themselves with
modesty and humility. This is added by way of consolation, that we may
not account it troublesome or disagreeable to exercise humility, by
means of which Christ not only receives us under his protection, but
likewise recommends us to the favor of men. And thus believers are
taught in what way they ought to esteem each other: it is by every one
*humbling himself* How is mutual friendship usually maintained among the
children of the world but by every man complying with the wishes of
another? The more desirous a man is to obtain renown, the more
insolently does he grasp at power, that he may be raised to a lofty
station, and that others may be ridiculed or despised; but Christ
enjoins that the more a man abases himself, the more highly shall he be
honored. Such, too, is the import of the words given by Luke, *he that
is least among you shall be great;* for our Lord does not enjoin us to
think more highly of those who justly deserve to be despised, but of
those who divest themselves of all pride, and are perfectly willing to
occupy the lowest place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_494"></span>[495](cc32059.htm#fr_494) <span
id="ii.lviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.lviii-p10.1"></span>Apres
ces choses il veint en Capernaum;” — “after these things he came to
Capernaum.”

<span id="fn_495"></span>[496](cc32059.htm#fr_495) <span
id="ii.lviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.lviii-p11.1"></span>Il
sera (*ou*, *qu’il soit*) le dernier de tous;” — “he shall be (*or*,
*let* *him be*) servant of all.”

<span id="fn_496"></span>[497](cc32059.htm#fr_496) <span
id="ii.lviii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.lviii-p23.1"></span>Comme
si tout alloit a souhait et comme si ce qu’on leur a dit estoit aussi
doux a avaller que sucre;” — “as if every thing went to their wish, and
as if what was said to them were as pleasant to swallow as sugar.”

<span id="fn_497"></span>[498](cc32059.htm#fr_497) <span
id="ii.lviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.lviii-p24.1"></span>De la
primaute;” — “about the primacy.”

<span id="fn_498"></span>[499](cc32059.htm#fr_498) <span
id="ii.lviii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.lviii-p32.1"></span>Il
leur est besoin de tourner bride, et de s’accoustumer a tout cela;” —
“they must wheel round, and get accustomed to all this.”

<span id="fn_499"></span>[500](cc32059.htm#fr_499) <span
id="ii.lviii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lviii-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.lviii-p35.1"></span>La
vraye definition;” — “the true definition.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 18:6-10; Mark 9:42-48; Luke 17:1-2](cc32060)
