[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32076)  [Next](cc32078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
20:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxvi-p1.2"></span>[Mark
10:41-45](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#041)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lxxvi-p1.4"></span>[Luke
22:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
20:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
10:41-45](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#041)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p4"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
22:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#024)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p5"></span> **24**. And when the ten heard it,  <span
id="fr_658"></span>[659](#fn_658) they were displeased with the two
brethren. **25**. And Jesus called them to him, and said, You know that
the princes of the Gentiles rule over them, and they who are great
exercise authority over them. **26**. It shall not be so among you: but
whoever wishes to be great among you, let him be your minister;
**27**. And he that wishes to be chief among you, let him be your
servant: **28**. Even as the Son of man came not that he might be
served, but that he might serve, and that he might give his life a
ransom for many.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p8"></span> **41**. And when the ten heard it, they
began to be displeased with James and John. **42**. And Jesus, when he
had called them to him, saith to them, You know that they who appear to
rule over the Gentiles exercise dominion over them; and they who are
princes among them exercise power over them. **43**. But it shall not be
so among you; but whoever wishes to become great among you, shall be
your minister;. And whoever wishes to be chief among you, shall be your
servant. **45**. For even the Son of man came not that he might be
served, but that he might serve, and that he might give his life a
ransom for many.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p10"></span> **24**. And there arose also a dispute
among them, which of them appeared to be greatest. **25**. And he said
to them, The kings of the Gentiles rule over them; and they that have
power over them are called benefactors. **26**. But you are not so: but
he that is greatest among you, let him become as the younger; and he
that is ruler, as he that serves. **27**. For which is greater, he that
sitteth at table, or her that serveth? Is it not he that sitteth at
table? But I am in the midst of you as he that serveth.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p13"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p14"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p14.2"></span>.** *And when the ten heard it.*  <span
id="fr_659"></span>[660](#fn_659) Luke appears to refer this dispute to
a different time. But any one who shall carefully examine that
twenty-second chapter will plainly see that discourses delivered at
different times are there brought together, without any regard to order.
The dispute about the primacy, therefore which Luke mentions, flowed
from this source, that *the sons of Zebedee* aspired to the first places
in the kingdom of Christ. And yet the displeasure of the rest was far
from being well-founded; for, while the foolish ambition of the *two
disciples* was so severely blamed, that they retired from Christ with
disgrace, what injury was it to the other *ten*, that those disciples
foolishly wished what they did not obtain?  <span
id="fr_660"></span>[661](#fn_660) For though they had a good right to be
offended at the ambition of those disciples, yet when it was put down
they ought to have been satisfied. But our Lord intended to seize on
this occasion for laying open a disease which was lurking within them;
for there was not one of them who would willingly yield to others, but
every one secretly cherished within himself the expectation of the
primacy; in consequence of which, they envy and dispute with one
another, and yet in all there reigns wicked ambition. And if this fault
was found to be natural to uneducated men of ordinary rank, and if it
broke out on a slight occasion, and almost without any occasion at all,
how much more ought we to be on our guard, when there is abundance of
fuel to feed a concealed flame? We see then how ambition springs up in
any man who has great power and honors, and sends out its flames far and
wide, unless the spirit of modesty, coming from heaven, extinguish the
pride which has a firm hold of the nature of man.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p17"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p18"></span>**25.** *You know that the princes of the
Gentiles rule over them.* It is first said that Christ *called them to
him,* that he might reprove them in private; and next we learn from it
that, being ashamed of their ambition, they did not openly complain, but
that a sort of hollow murmur arose, and every one secretly preferred
himself to the rest. He does not explain generally how deadly a plague
ambition is, but simply warns them, that nothing is more foolish than to
fight about nothing.  <span id="fr_661"></span>[662](#fn_661) He shows
that the primacy, which was the occasion of dispute among them, has no
existence in his kingdom. Those persons, therefore, who extend this
saying indiscriminately to all the godly are mistaken; for Christ only
takes occasion from the present occurrence to show that it is absurd in
the apostles to dispute about the degree of power and honor in their own
rank, because the office of teaching, to which they were appointed, has
no resemblance to the governments of the world. I do acknowledge that
this doctrine applies both to private persons and to kings and
magistrates; for no man deserves to be reckoned one of Christ’s flock,
unless he has made such proficiency under the teacher of humility, as to
claim nothing for himself, but condescend to cultivate brotherly love.
This is, no doubt, true; but the design of Christ was, as I have said,
to distinguish between the spiritual government of his Church and the
empires of the world, that the apostles might not look for the favors of
a court; for in proportion as any of the nobles is loved by kings, he
rises to wealth and distinction. But Christ appoints pastors of his
Church, not to *rule*, but to *serve*

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p20"></span>This reflects the error of the
Anabaptists, who exclude kings and magistrates from the Church of God,
because Christ declares  <span id="fr_662"></span>[663](#fn_662) that
they are not like his disciples; though the comparison is here made not
between Christians and ungodly men, but between the nature of their
offices. Besides, Christ did not look so much at the persons of men as
at the condition of his Church. For it was possible that one who was
governor of a village or of a city might, in a case of urgent necessity,
discharge also the office of teaching; but Christ satisfied himself with
explaining what belongs to the apostolic office and what is at variance
with it.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p22"></span>But a question arises, Why does Christ,
who appointed separate orders in his Church, disown in this passage all
degrees? For he appears to throw them all down, or, at least, to place
them on a level, so that not one rises above the rest. But natural
reason prescribes a very different method; and Paul, when describing the
government of the Church, (<span id="ii.lxxvi-p22.1"></span>[Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p22.1"></span>,) enumerates the various departments of the
ministry, in such a manner as to make the rank of apostleship higher
than the office of pastors. Timothy and Titus also, are unquestionably
enjoined by him to exercise authoritative superintendence over others,
according to the command of God. I reply, if we carefully examine the
whole, it will be found that even kings do not rule justly or lawfully,
unless they serve; but that the apostolic office differs from earthly
government in this respect, that the manner in which kings and
magistrates serve does not prevent them from governing, or indeed from
rising above their subjects in magnificent pomp and splendor. Thus
David, Hezekiah, and others of the same class, while they were the
willing servants of all, used a scepter, a crown, a throne, and other
emblems of royalty. But the government of the Church admits nothing of
this sort; for Christ allowed the pastors nothing more than to be
ministers, and to abstain entirely from the exercise of authority. Here,
to it ought to be observed, that the discourse relates to the thing
itself rather than to the disposition. Christ distinguishes between the
apostles and the rank of kings, not because kings have a right to act
haughtily, but because the station of royalty is different from the
apostolic office. While, therefore, both ought to be humble, it is the
duty of the apostles always to consider what form of government the Lord
has appointed for his Church.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p23"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p23.1"></span>As to
the words which Matthew employs, *the princes of the Gentiles rule over
them,* <span id="ii.lxxvi-p23.2"></span>Luke conveys the same import by
saying, *they are called benefactors;* <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p23.3"></span>which means, that kings possess great wealth
and abundance, in order that they may be generous and bountiful. For
though kings have greater delight in their power, and a stronger desire
that it should be formidable, than that it should be founded in the
consent of the people, still they desire the praise of munificence.
 <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p24.2"></span> Hence, too, they take the name in the Hebrew
language, <span id="ii.lxxvi-p24.3"></span>נדיבים<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p24.4"></span>, *(nedibim* *)* <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p24.5"></span>They are so called from *bestowing gifts;*
 <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.14"></span>for taxes and tributes are paid to them for
no other purpose than to furnish the expense necessary to the
magnificence of their rank.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p26"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p27"></span>**26.** *It shall not be so among you.*
There can be no doubt that Christ refers to the foolish imagination by
which he saw that the apostles were deceived. “It is foolish and
improper in you,” he says, “to imagine a kingdom, which is unsuitable to
me; and therefore, if you desire to serve me faithfully, you must resort
to a different method, which is, that each of you may strive to serve
others.”  <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665) *But whoever wishes to
be great among you, let him be your servant.* These words are employed
in an unusual sense; for ambition does not allow a man to be *devoted*,
or, rather, to be *subject* to his brethren. Abject flattery, I do
acknowledge, is practiced by those who aspire to honors, but nothing is
farther from their intention than to *serve* But Christ’s meaning is not
difficult to be perceived. As every man is carried away by a love of
himself, he declares that this passion ought to be directed to a
different object. Let the only greatness, eminence, and rank, which you
desire, be, to submit to your brethren; and let this be your primacy, to
be the *servants* of all.

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p29"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p30"></span>**28.** *As the Son of man* Christ
confirms the preceding doctrine by his own example; for he voluntarily
*took upon himself the form of a servant*, *and emptied himself*, as
Paul also informs us, (<span id="ii.lxxvi-p30.2"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.lxxvi-p30.2"></span>.)
To prove more clearly how far he was from indulging in lofty views, he
reminds them of his death. “Because I have chosen you to the honor of
being near me, you are seized by a wicked ambition to reign. But I — by
whose example you ought to regulate your life — came not to exalt
myself, or to claim any royal dignity. On the contrary, I took upon me,
along with the mean and despised form of the flesh, the ignominy of the
cross. If it be objected, that Christ was:

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p31"></span>exalted by the Father, in order that
every knee might bow to him,  
(<span id="ii.lxxvi-p31.2"></span>[Phil.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span id="ii.lxxvi-p31.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p32"></span>it is easy to reply, that what he now
says refers to the period of his humiliation. Accordingly, Luke adds,
that he lived among them, *as if he were a servant:* not that in
appearance, or in name, or in reality, he was inferior to them, (for he
always wished to be acknowledged as their Master and Lord,) but because
from the heavenly glory he descended to such meekness, that he submitted
to bear their infirmities. Besides, it ought to be remembered that a
comparison is here made between the greater and the less, as in that
passage,

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p33"></span>If I, who am your Master and Lord, have
washed your feet, much more ought you to perform this service to one
another,  
(<span id="ii.lxxvi-p33.2"></span>[Joh
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#014)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p33.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p34"></span>*And to give his life a ransom for many.*
<span id="ii.lxxvi-p34.1"></span>Christ mentioned his death, as we have
said, in order to withdraw his disciples from the foolish imagination of
an earthly kingdom. But it is a just and appropriate statement of its
power and results, when he declares that his life is the price of our
redemption; whence it follows, that we obtain an undeserved
reconciliation with God, the price of which is to be found nowhere else
than in the death of Christ. Wherefore, this single word overturns all
the idle talk of the Papists about their abominable *satisfactions*
<span id="ii.lxxvi-p34.2"></span>Again, while Christ has purchased us by
his death to be his property, this submission, of which he speaks, is so
far from diminishing his boundless glory, that it greatly increases its
splendor. The word *many* <span id="ii.lxxvi-p34.3"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p34.4"></span>πολλῶν<span id="ii.lxxvi-p34.5"></span>) is
not put definitely for a fixed number, but for a large number; for he
contrasts himself with all others.  <span
id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666) <span id="ii.lxxvi-p35.2"></span> And
in this sense it is used in <span id="ii.lxxvi-p35.3"></span>[Ro
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p35.3"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p35.4"></span>, where Paul
does not speak of any part of men, but embraces the whole human race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_658"></span>[659](cc32077.htm#fr_658) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvi-p6.1"></span>*Les
dix* autres *ayans ouy cela;*” — “*the* other *ten having heard
that*.*”*

<span id="fn_659"></span>[660](cc32077.htm#fr_659) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvi-p15.1"></span>*Les
dix* autres *ayans ouy cela;*” — “*the* other *ten having heard
that*.*”*

<span id="fn_660"></span>[661](cc32077.htm#fr_660) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p16"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p16.1"></span>Avoyent follement desire une chose qu’ils
n’ont peu obtenir;” — “had foolishly desired a thing which they could
not obtain.”

<span id="fn_661"></span>[662](cc32077.htm#fr_661) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvi-p19.1"></span>Qu’il
n’y a point de folie plus grande, que de debattre d’une chose qui n’est
point;” — “that there is no greater folly than to debate about a thing
which does not exist.”

<span id="fn_662"></span>[663](cc32077.htm#fr_662) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvi-p21.1"></span>Sous
couleur de ce que Christ dit;” — “under the pretense of what Christ
says.”

<span id="fn_663"></span>[664](cc32077.htm#fr_663) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p23.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p24"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p24.1"></span>Toutesfois ils appetent d’avoir la louange
d’estre magnifiques et liberaux;” — “yet they desire to have the praise
of being sumptuous and liberal.”

<span id="fn_664"></span>[665](cc32077.htm#fr_664) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p24.6"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p25"></span> <span id="ii.lxxvi-p25.1"></span>נדיב
*(nadib*<span id="ii.lxxvi-p25.2"></span>,*)alvrince*<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.3"></span>, <span id="ii.lxxvi-p25.4"></span>which is
derived from <span id="ii.lxxvi-p25.5"></span>נדב *(nadab*<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.6"></span>,*) to be bountiful,* <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.7"></span>is the very word to which allusion is
supposed to be made in the passage, (<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.8"></span>[Lu
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#025)<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.8"></span><span id="ii.lxxvi-p25.9"></span>,) where it
is said that the name *princes* <span id="ii.lxxvi-p25.10"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.11"></span>נדיבים*, nedibim*<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.12"></span>) signifies *benefactors*<span
id="ii.lxxvi-p25.13"></span>. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_665"></span>[666](cc32077.htm#fr_665) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvi-p28.1"></span>De se
rendre serviteur a ses compagnons;” — “to become a servant to his
companions.”

<span id="fn_666"></span>[667](cc32077.htm#fr_666) <span
id="ii.lxxvi-p34.6"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvi-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvi-p35.1"></span>Il
prend PLUSIEURS, non pas pour quelque certain nombre, mais pour les
autres: car il fait une comparaison de sa personne a tout le reste des
hommes;” — “He takes MANY, not for any fixed number, but for the others;
for he makes a comparison of his person with all the rest of men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 20:29-34; Mark 10:46-52; Luke 18:35-43](cc32078)
