[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32004)  [Next](cc32006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="ii.iv-p1.1"></span>MATTHEW
11:16-19; <span id="ii.iv-p1.2"></span>Luke<span id="ii.iv-p1.3"></span>
7:29-35

<span id="ii.iv-p2"></span><span id="ii.iv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
11:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016)<span id="ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p3"></span><span id="ii.iv-p3.1"></span>[Luke
7:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#029)<span id="ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p4"></span>**16**. But to what shall I compare this
generation? It is like children, who sit in the market-place, and call
out to their companions, **17**. And say, We have played on the flute to
you, and you have not danced; we have sung mournful airs to you, and you
have not lamented. **18**. For John came neither eating nor drinking,
and they say, He hath a devil. **19**. The Son of man came eating and
drinking, and they say, Lo, a man who is a glutton and a wine-bibber,
 <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) a friend to publicans and sinners;
and Wisdom is justified by her children.

<span id="ii.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p7"></span>**29**. And all the people hearing, and the
publicans, justified God, having been baptized with the baptism of John.
 <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) **30**. But Pharisees and Lawyers
 <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) despised  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) the counsel of God in themselves,  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) having not been baptized by him.
**31**. And the Lord said, To what then shall I compare the men of this
generation? and to what are they like? **32**. They are like children
sitting in the market-place, and calling out to each other, and saying,
We have played on the flute to you, and you have not danced; we have
sung mournful airs to you, and you have not wept. **33**. For John the
Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, He
hath a devil. **34**. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and you
say, Lo, a man gluttonous and a wine-bibber, a friend to publicans and
sinners.  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) **35**. And Wisdom is
justified by all her children.

<span id="ii.iv-p13"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="ii.iv-p15"></span><span id="ii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p16"></span>**<span id="ii.iv-p16.2"></span>[Luke
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#029)<span id="ii.iv-p16.2"></span>.**
*And all the people hearing.* This part is left out by Matthew, though
it throws no small light on the connection of the words; for it was this
circumstance which gave rise to Christ’s expostulation, when he
perceived that the scribes persisted so obstinately in despising God.
The substance of this passage is, that the common *people* and the
*publicans* gave glory to God; while *the Scribes,* flattering
themselves with confidence in their own knowledge, cared little for what
Christ said. At first sight, this tends only to obscure, and even to
disfigure, the glory of the Gospel, that Christ could not gather
disciples to himself, except from the dregs and offscourings of the
people; while he was rejected by those who had any reputation for
holiness or learning. But the Lord intended, from the beginning, to hold
out this example, that neither the men of that age, nor even posterity,
might judge of the Gospel by the approbation of men; for we are all by
nature inclined to this vice. And yet nothing is more unreasonable than
to submit the truth of God to the judgment of *men,* whose acuteness and
sagacity amounts to nothing more than mere vanity. Accordingly, as Paul
says, *“God* hath chosen that part which is weak and foolish in the eyes
of the world, that he may cast down from its height whatever appears to
be mighty and wise,” (<span id="ii.iv-p16.3"></span>[1Co
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span id="ii.iv-p16.3"></span>.)
Our duty is to prefer this *foolishness of God,* to use Paul’s
expression, (<span id="ii.iv-p16.4"></span>[1Co
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span id="ii.iv-p16.4"></span>,)
to all the display of human wisdom.

<span id="ii.iv-p17"></span>*Justified God.* This is a very remarkable
expression. Those who respectfully embrace the Son of God, and assent to
the doctrine which he has brought, are said to ascribe righteousness to
God. We need not therefore wonder, if the Holy Spirit everywhere honors
faith with remarkable commendations, assigns to it the highest rank in
the worship of God, and declares that it is a very acceptable service.
For what duty can be deemed more sacred than to vindicate God’s
righteousness? The word *justify* applies generally, no doubt, to every
thing connected with the praises of God, and conveys the idea, that God
is beheld with approbation, and crowned with glory, by the people who
embrace that doctrine of which He is the author. Now, since faith
*justifies* God, it is impossible, on the other hand, but that unbelief
must be blasphemy against him, and a disdainful withholding of that
praise which is due to his name. This expression also teaches us, that
men are never brought into complete subjection to the faith until,
disregarding the flesh and sense, they conclude that every thing which
comes from God is just and holy, and do not permit themselves to murmur
against his word or his works.

<span id="ii.iv-p18"></span>*Having been baptized with the baptism of
John.* Luke means that the fruits of *the baptism* which they had
received were then beginning to appear; for it was a useful preparation
to them for receiving the doctrine of Christ. It was already an evidence
of their piety that they presented themselves to be *baptized.* Our Lord
now leads them forward from that slender instruction to a higher degree
of progress, as the scribes, in despising the baptism of John, shut
against themselves, through their pride, the gate of faith. If,
therefore, we desire to rise to full perfection, let us first guard
against despising the very least of God’s invitations,  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) and be prepared in humility to commence
with small and elementary instructions. Secondly, let us endeavor that,
if our faith shall have a feeble beginning, it may regularly and
gradually increase.

<span id="ii.iv-p20"></span><span id="ii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p21"></span>**30.** *Despised the counsel of God within
themselves. The counsel of God* <span id="ii.iv-p21.1"></span>is
mentioned by way of respect, as contrasted with the wicked pride of the
scribes; for the term *counsel* <span id="ii.iv-p21.2"></span>carries
along with it a dignity, which protects the doctrine of God against the
contempt of men. Literally, Luke says, that they *despised* <span
id="ii.iv-p21.3"></span>Against Themselves<span
id="ii.iv-p21.4"></span>: and indeed I do not disapprove of the meaning
which is preferred by some, that the scribes were rebellious to their
own destruction. But as Luke’s narrative is simple, and as the
preposition <span id="ii.iv-p21.5"></span>εἰς<span
id="ii.iv-p21.6"></span> is often used in the sense of <span
id="ii.iv-p21.7"></span>ἐν<span id="ii.iv-p21.8"></span> I have chosen
rather to translate it, *within themselves;* <span
id="ii.iv-p21.9"></span>as meaning, that although they did not openly
and expressly contradict, yet as they inwardly swelled with hidden
pride, they *despised within themselves*

<span id="ii.iv-p22"></span><span id="ii.iv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p23"></span>**31.** *To what shall I compare?* He does
not include all the men of his age, but speaks particularly of the
scribes and their followers. He charges them with this reproach, that
while the Lord endeavored, by various methods, to draw them to himself,
they repelled his grace with incorrigible obstinacy. He employs a
comparison, which was probably taken from a common amusement of
children; for there is probability in the conjecture, that the children
divided themselves into two bands, and sang in that manner. And, indeed,
I think that, in order to abase the pride of the scribes, Christ
intentionally borrowed from children the materials of his reproof: thus
declaring that, however distinguished they were, nothing more was
necessary to condemn them than a song which children were wont to sing
in the market-place for their amusement.

<span id="ii.iv-p24"></span><span id="ii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p25"></span>**33.** *For John the Baptist came.* Leading
an austere life, he thundered out repentance and severe reproofs, and
sung, as it were, a plaintive song; while the Lord endeavored, by a
cheerful and sprightly song, to draw them more gently to the Father.
Neither of those methods had any success, and what reason could be
assigned except their hardened obstinacy? This passage also shows us,
why so wide a difference existed, as to outward life, between Christ and
the Baptist, though both had the same object in view. Our Lord intended,
by this diversity, and by assuming as it were a variety of characters,
to convict unbelievers more fully; since, while he yielded and
accommodated himself to their manners, he did not bend them to himself.
But if the men of that age are deprived of every excuse for repelling,
with inveterate malice, a twofold invitation which God had given them,
we too are held guilty in their persons; for God leaves not untried any
sort of pleasing melody, or of plaintive and harsh music, to draw us to
himself, and yet we remain hard as stones. They called John a
*demoniac,* just as persons of unsound mind, or whose brain is
disturbed, are usually called *madmen.*

<span id="ii.iv-p26"></span><span id="ii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p27"></span>**34.** *The Son of man came.* To *eat and
drink* means here nothing more than to live in the customary way; as
Christ says that John *came neither eating nor drinking,* because he
confined himself to a peculiar diet, and even abstained from ordinary
food. This is more fully expressed by the words of Luke, *neither eating
bread nor drinking wine.* Those who think that the highest perfection
consists in outward austerity of life, and who pronounce it to be an
angelical life when a person is abstemious,  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) or mortifies himself by fasting, ought to
attend to this passage. On this principle John would rank higher than
the Son of God; but, on the contrary, we ought to maintain, that

<span id="ii.iv-p29"></span>bodily exercise profiteth little, but
godliness  
is profitable to all things, (<span id="ii.iv-p29.2"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.iv-p30"></span>And yet we must not make this a pretense for
giving a loose rein to the flesh, by indulging in luxuries and
effeminacy: only we must beware of superstition, lest foolish men,
imagining that perfection lies in matters of a purely elementary nature,
neglect the spiritual worship of God. Besides, while Christ accommodated
himself to the usages of ordinary life, he maintained a sobriety truly
divine, and did not encourage the excesses of others by his
dissimulation or by his example.

<span id="ii.iv-p31"></span><span id="ii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p32"></span>**35.** *And Wisdom is justified* <span
id="ii.iv-p32.1"></span>This passage is variously explained by
commentators. Some maintain that *Wisdom* <span
id="ii.iv-p32.2"></span>was *acquitted* <span id="ii.iv-p32.3"></span>by
the Jews, because, conscious of guilt, and judges of their own unbelief,
they were compelled to acknowledge, that the doctrine which they
rejected was good and holy. By *the children of Wisdom* <span
id="ii.iv-p32.4"></span>they understand the Jews who boasted of that
title. Others think that it was spoken in irony: “It is in this manner
that you approve of the *Wisdom* <span id="ii.iv-p32.5"></span>of God,
of which you boast that you are the *children?*<span
id="ii.iv-p32.6"></span>” <span id="ii.iv-p32.7"></span>But as the Greek
preposition <span id="ii.iv-p32.8"></span>ἀπό  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) <span id="ii.iv-p33.2"></span> does not
properly relate to an agent, some explain it, that *Wisdom is acquitted
by her children,* <span id="ii.iv-p33.3"></span>and is no longer under
obligation to them, in the same manner as when an inheritance is
transferred to another. Thus Paul says, that Christ *was justified*
<span id="ii.iv-p33.4"></span>(<span
id="ii.iv-p33.5"></span>δεδικαίωται<span id="ii.iv-p33.6"></span>) *from
sin,* <span id="ii.iv-p33.7"></span>(<span id="ii.iv-p33.8"></span>[Ro
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span id="ii.iv-p33.8"></span><span
id="ii.iv-p33.9"></span>,) because the curse of sin had no longer any
power over him.

<span id="ii.iv-p34"></span>Some interpret it more harshly, and with
greater excess of freedom, to mean that *Wisdom is estranged from her
children* But granting that this were the import of the Greek
preposition, I look upon the other meaning as more appropriate, that
*Wisdom,* however wickedly she may be slandered by her own sons, loses
nothing of her worth or rank, but remains unimpaired. The Jews, and
particularly the scribes, gave themselves out as *children* of the
*Wisdom* of God; and yet, when they trod their mother under their feet,
they not only flattered themselves amidst such heinous sacrilege, but
desired that Christ should fall by their decision. Christ maintains, on
the contrary, that, however wicked and depraved her *children* may be,
*Wisdom* remains entire, and that the malice of those who wickedly and
malignantly slander her takes nothing from her authority.

<span id="ii.iv-p35"></span><span id="ii.iv-p35.1"></span>I have not yet
brought forward that meaning which appears to my own mind the most
appropriate and natural. First, the words of Christ contain an implied
contrast between true *children* <span id="ii.iv-p35.2"></span>and
bastards, who hold but an empty title without the reality; and they
amount to this: *“Let* <span id="ii.iv-p35.3"></span>those who haughtily
boast of being the *children* <span id="ii.iv-p35.4"></span>of *Wisdom*
<span id="ii.iv-p35.5"></span>proceed in their obstinacy: she will,
notwithstanding, retain the praise and support of her own *children.*
<span id="ii.iv-p35.6"></span>Accordingly, Luke adds a term of
universality, by *all her children;* <span id="ii.iv-p35.7"></span>which
means, that the reluctance of the scribes will not prevent all the elect
of God from remaining steadfast in the faith of the Gospel. With respect
to the Greek word <span id="ii.iv-p35.8"></span>ἀπό<span
id="ii.iv-p35.9"></span>, it undoubtedly has sometimes the same meaning
as <span id="ii.iv-p35.10"></span>ὑπό<span id="ii.iv-p35.11"></span>.
Not to mention other instances, there is a passage in Luke’s Gospel,
(<span id="ii.iv-p35.12"></span>[Lu
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#025)<span
id="ii.iv-p35.12"></span><span id="ii.iv-p35.13"></span>,) where Christ
says, that *he must suffer many things,* <span
id="ii.iv-p35.14"></span>καὶ ἀποδοκιμασθὢναι ἀπὸ τὢς γενεᾶς ταύτης<span
id="ii.iv-p35.15"></span>, *and be rejected* <span
id="ii.iv-p35.16"></span>B<span id="ii.iv-p35.17"></span>y *this
generation.* <span id="ii.iv-p35.18"></span>Everybody will admit, that
the form of expression is the same as in the corresponding clause.
 <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) <span id="ii.iv-p36.2"></span>
Besides, Chrysostom, whose native language was Greek, passes over this
matter, as if there were no room for debate. Not only is this meaning
more appropriate, but it corresponds to a former clause, in which it was
said, that God was *justified* <span id="ii.iv-p36.3"></span>by *the
people,* <span id="ii.iv-p36.4"></span>(v. 29.) Although many apostates
may revolt from the Church of God, yet, among all the elect, who truly
belong to the flock, the faith of the Gospel will always remain
uninjured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc32005.htm#fr_18) <span
id="ii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p5.1"></span>Gourmand et;
yvrongne;” — “a glutton and a drunkard.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc32005.htm#fr_19) <span
id="ii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p8.1"></span>Et tout le
peuple qui oyoit cela, et les Peagers qui estoyent baptizez du baptesme
de Iean, iustiferent Dieu.” — “And all the people who heard that, and
the publicans who were baptized with the baptism of John, justified
God.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc32005.htm#fr_20) <span
id="ii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p9.1"></span>Les Docteurs
de la Loy;” — “the Doctors of the Law.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc32005.htm#fr_21) <span
id="ii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p10.1"></span>Reietterent
le conseil de Dieu;” — “rejected the counsel of God.”

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc32005.htm#fr_22) <span
id="ii.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p11.1"></span>En
eux-mesmes, *ou, a l’encontre d’eux-mesmes*;” — “in themselves, *or,
against themselves.”*

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc32005.htm#fr_23) <span
id="ii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p12.1"></span>Ami des
Peagers et gens du mauvaise vie;” — “a friend of publican and persons of
wicked life.”

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc32005.htm#fr_24) <span
id="ii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p19.1"></span>Gardons
premierement de mespriser un seul moyen par lequel Die nous convie;” —
“let us first guard against despising a single method by which God
invites us.”

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc32005.htm#fr_25) <span
id="ii.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p28.1"></span>Quand un
homme ne boira point de vin;” — “when a person will drink no wine.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc32005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="ii.iv-p32.9"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p33.1"></span>Le mot Grec
que nous avons rendu par *De;*” — “the Greek word which we have
translated *by.”*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc32005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="ii.iv-p35.19"></span>

<span id="ii.iv-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.iv-p36.1"></span>On void bien
que la ce mot *De* se rapporte a la personne qui fait, et non pas a
celuy qui souffre;” — “It is very evident that the word *By* relates to
the person that acts, and not to him who suffers.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 10:1-12](cc32006)
