[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32013)  [Next](cc32015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
12:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025)<span
id="ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xiii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
3:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#023)<span
id="ii.xiii-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.xiii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
11:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016)<span
id="ii.xiii-p1.4"></span>; 12:10

<span id="ii.xiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
12:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025)<span
id="ii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
3:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#023)<span id="ii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p4"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
11:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016)<span
id="ii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p5"></span> **25**. But as Jesus knew their thoughts,
he said to them,  <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) Every kingdom
divided against itself shall be laid waste; and every city or house
divided against itself shall not stand. **26**. And if Satan casteth out
Satan, he is divided against himself, and how then shall his kingdom
stand? **27**. And if I, by the assistance of Beelzebub, cast out
devils, by whose assistance do your children cast them out? therefore
they shall judge concerning you.  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) **28**. But if by the Spirit of God I
cast out devils, then the kingdom of God has come to you.
**29**. Otherwise, how can a man enter into the house of a strong man,
and pillage his property, unless he first bind the strong man, and then
he will pillage his house? **30**. He that is not with me is against me;
and he that gathereth not with me scattereth. **31**. Therefore I say to
you, All sin and blasphemy  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109)
shall be forgiven to men; but the blasphemy against the Spirit shall not
be forgiven to men. **32**. And whosoever shall speak a word against the
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but he who shall speak against the
Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in the present life
nor in the future.

<span id="ii.xiii-p9"></span> **23**. And having called them to him, he
spoke in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan? **24**. And if a
kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
**25**. And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot
stand. **26**. And if Satan hath risen up against himself, and is
divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end.  <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) **27**. No man can enter into the
house of a strong man, and pillage his property, unless he first bind
the strong man, and then he will pillage his house. **28**. Verily I say
to you, All sins shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and blasphemies
with which they shall blaspheme: **29**. But he who shall speak
blasphemy against the Holy Spirit hath not forgiveness to eternity,
 <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) but is exposed to eternal
judgment. **30**. For they said, He hath an unclean spirit.  <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112)

<span id="ii.xiii-p13"></span> **16**. And others tempting him sought
from him a sign from heaven. **17**. But as he knew their thoughts,
 <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) he said to them, Every kingdom
divided against itself is laid waste, and a house against a house
falleth.  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) **18**. But if Satan
also is divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? for you
say that by Beelzebub I cast out devils. **19**. But if I cast out
devils by Beelzebub, by whom do your children cast them out? therefore
they shall be your judges. **20**. But if I cast out devils by the
finger of God, truly has the kingdom of God come to you. **21**. When a
strong man armed keepeth his palace, his property is at peace;
**22**. But when a stronger than he cometh upon him, and overcometh him,
he taketh from him all his armor, in which he trusted, and divideth his
spoils. **23**. He that is not with me is against me, and he that
gathereth not with me scattereth.

<span id="ii.xiii-p16"></span>**<span id="ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>[Luke
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#000)<span
id="ii.xiii-p16.1"></span>**:**10**.

<span id="ii.xiii-p17"></span>And whosoever speaketh a word against the
Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but he who shall blaspheme against
the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him.

<span id="ii.xiii-p18"></span> 

<span id="ii.xiii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p20"></span>**<span id="ii.xiii-p20.2"></span>[Matthew
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#025)<span
id="ii.xiii-p20.2"></span>.** *But as Jesus knew their thoughts.* Though
Christ knew sufficiently well, and had often learned by experience, that
the scribes, in the exercise of their malice  <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) were in the habit of putting an
unfavorable construction on every thing that he did, yet Matthew and
Luke, I have no doubt, mean that Christ was a discerner of their hearts.
 <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) And indeed it is probable, that
they spoke so openly against Christ, that their calumnies reached his
ears; but Christ knew by his Divine Spirit the dispositions which led
them to slander him. For it frequently happens that erroneous judgments
are formed by men who do not intentionally, after all, oppose what is
right, but err through ignorance; who do not cherish a hidden and
concealed venom, but whose rashness carries them headlong.  <span
id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) The meaning therefore is, that Christ
reproved them with the greater severity, because he was a witness and
judge of their inward malice.

<span id="ii.xiii-p24"></span>*Every kingdom divided against itself.* In
refuting the calumny alleged against him, he first quotes a common
proverb. This refutation may appear to be not quite satisfactory. We
know what subtle methods Satan sometimes employs, presenting all the
while an appearance of discord, in order to entrap the minds of men by
superstitions. Thus, for example, the exorcisms of Popery are nothing
else than feats of dexterity, in which Satan pretends to fight with
himself. But no suspicion of this nature fell on Christ; for he cast out
devils in such a manner, as to restore to God the men in whom they dwelt
sound and whole. Whenever Satan enters into a collusion with himself, he
pretends to be vanquished, and yet it is himself that triumphs. But
Christ attacked Satan in open combat, threw him down, and left him
nothing remaining. He did not lay him low in one respect, that he might
give him greater stability in another, but stripped him completely of
all his armor. Christ therefore reasons justly, that there is no
community of interest between him and Satan, because that father of
cunning  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) keeps one object in
view — the preservation of his kingdom.

<span id="ii.xiii-p26"></span>But perhaps it will be objected, that the
devils are often hurried along, by giddiness and blind madness, to
destroy themselves. The answer is easy. The words of Christ mean nothing
more than that it was absurd in the scribes to maintain, that the devil,
who endeavors by every method to make men his slaves, should, of his own
accord, destroy the power which he possessed over them. Besides, it
ought to be remembered, that common proverbs were employed by Christ in
such a manner, as to be merely probable conjectures, and not solid
arguments; and that, when he speaks of what is known and well attested,
he finds it easier to reach the conscience of his adversaries.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) Everybody knew that Christ had driven
Satan from his possession, and nothing was plainer than that all his
miracles tended to this object; and hence it was easy to conclude, that
his power, which was so much opposed to Satan, was divine.

<span id="ii.xiii-p28"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p29"></span>**27.** *By whom do your children cast
them out?* <span id="ii.xiii-p29.3"></span>He charges them with passing
an unjust and malicious decision, because in the same case they did not
decide in a similar manner, but as they were affected towards the
persons. Now this inequality shows, that their prevailing motive was not
a regard to what is just and right, but blind love or hatred; and that
it was even an evidence of wicked self-love (<span
id="ii.xiii-p29.4"></span>φιλαυτίας<span id="ii.xiii-p29.5"></span>) and
envy, to condemn in Christ what they praised in their own *children*
<span id="ii.xiii-p29.6"></span>By *your children* <span
id="ii.xiii-p29.7"></span>some understand the children of the whole
nation; and some think that the Apostles are so called, because they
were acknowledged to be *children,* <span
id="ii.xiii-p29.8"></span>while Christ was treated as if he had been a
foreigner.  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) <span
id="ii.xiii-p30.2"></span> Others refer it to the ancient Prophets. I
have no doubt that he means the *Exorcists,* <span
id="ii.xiii-p30.3"></span>who were at that time generally employed among
the Jews, as is evident from the Acts of the Apostles, (<span
id="ii.xiii-p30.4"></span>[Ac
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xiii-p30.4"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p30.5"></span>.) There is
reason to believe, that no greater kindness would be exercised in
judging of the disciples of Christ than of their Master; and to apply
these words to the dead is a forced construction, when they manifestly
denote a comparison of the present time.

<span id="ii.xiii-p31"></span>There was indeed no statute of the Law for
having *Exorcists* among the Jews; but we know that God, in order to
maintain their fidelity to his covenant, and their purity of worship,
often testified his presence among them by a variety of miracles. It is
even possible that there were persons who cast out devils by calling on
the name of the Lord; and the people, having experienced such a display
of the power of God, rashly concluded that it was an ordinary office.
 <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) The Papists afterwards,
resolving not to occupy a lower rank, imitated them by creating
*Exorcists;* and in this way were apes of apes. Besides, it was not
necessary that Christ should approve of those *exorcisms,* in order to
point out the malice of those who wished to have them regarded as
sacred, and as authorized by the name of God; for the objection was, as
we say, of a personal nature.  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122)

<span id="ii.xiii-p34"></span>*Therefore they shall judge concerning
you.* These words are not to be taken literally, but the meaning is: “We
need not go far to seek your condemnation. You attribute to Beelzebub
the miracles which I have performed, and you praise the same things in
your own children. You have at home what is sufficient to condemn you.”
But if any one prefer to understand them differently, as reproaching
them with the grace of God, which was sometimes exhibited through the
Exorcists, I do not greatly object to that view. Though they were
greatly degenerated, yet the Lord was pleased not to leave them
altogether without evidences of his power, that there might be some
testimony to authorize the priesthood in general, and the service of the
temple; for it was of the highest importance that there should be
evident marks to distinguish them from the superstitions of the
Gentiles. I look upon the former view, however, as the natural one.

<span id="ii.xiii-p35"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p36"></span>**28.** *But if I cast out devils by the
Spirit of God.* Luke says, *if I cast out devils by The Finger of God;*
employing the word *Finger* metaphorically instead of the *Spirit.* As
God works, and exerts his power, by his Spirit, it is with propriety
that the word *Finger* is applied to him. And this mode of expression
was common among the Jews, as Moses relates that Pharaoh’s magicians
said, *This is the finger of God* Now Christ infers from what he has
already stated, that the scribes prove themselves to be ungrateful to
God, by being unwilling that He should reign among them. Hitherto, he
replied to their idle calumny; but now, he treats them as convicted
persons, and charges them not to make ungodly opposition to the kingdom
of God. He does not confine himself to a single miracle, but takes
occasion from it to discourse on the object of his coming, reminds them
that they ought not merely to look at one remarkable fact, but at a far
more important truth, that it was the will of God, by revealing His
Messiah, to raise up their salvation which was fallen, and to restore
his kingdom among them. Thus we see that Christ complains of their
ingratitude, in madly rejecting from the midst of them the inestimable
grace of God. *The kingdom of God hath come to you* The word *come* is
emphatic, and implies that, without any request from them, God appears
as their Redeemer, while they do everything that is in their power to
drive him away, and, when he is present and prepared for their
salvation, refuse to give him a place.

<span id="ii.xiii-p37"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p38"></span>**29.** *How can any one enter into the
house of a strong man?* Though the Evangelists differ a little as to
words, there is a perfect agreement among them as to the substance of
this discourse. Christ is pursuing the subject, on which he had lately
touched, about *the kingdom of God,* and declares it to be necessary
that Satan be violently driven out, in order that God may establish his
*k*i*ngdom* among men. What he now states is nothing else than a
confirmation of the preceding statement. But to ascertain more fully the
intention of Christ, we must call to our recollection that analogy which
Matthew (8:17) traces between the visible and the spiritual layouts
which Christ bestows.  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) Every
benefit which the bodies of men received from Christ was intended to
have a reference to their souls. Thus, in rescuing the bodily senses of
men from the tyranny of the devil, he proclaimed that the Father had
sent him as a Deliverer, to destroy his spiritual tyranny over their
souls.

<span id="ii.xiii-p40"></span>I now return to his words. He maintains
that a *strong* and powerful tyrant cannot be deprived of his dominion,
*till he is stripped of his armor;* for if he is not met by a force
superior to his own, he will never yield of his own accord. Why is this
asserted? First, we know that the devil is everywhere called *the prince
of the world* Now the tyranny which he exercises is defended on every
side by strong ramparts. His snares for entrapping men are beyond all
calculation; nay, men are already his slaves, and so firmly bound by a
variety of fetters, that they rather cherish the slavery, to which they
are devoted, than make any aspirations after freedom. There are also
innumerable evils which he inflicts upon them, by which he holds them in
wretched oppression under his feet. In short, there is nothing to
prevent him from tyrannizing over the world without control. Not that he
can do anything without the permission of the Creator, but because Adam,
having withdrawn from the dominion of God, has subjected all his
posterity to this foreign sway.

<span id="ii.xiii-p41"></span>Now though it is contrary to nature that
the devil reigns, and though it is by, just punishment of God, on
account of sin, that men are subjected to his tyranny, yet he remains in
quiet possession of his kingdom, and may insult us at his pleasure, till
*a stronger than he* shall rise up against him. But this *stronger*
person is not to be found on earth, for men have not sufficient power to
relieve themselves; and therefor it was promised that a Redeemer would
come from heaven. Now this kind of redemption Christ shows to be
necessary, in order to wrench from the devil, by main force, what he
will never quit till he is compelled. By these words he informs us, that
it is in vain for men to expect deliverance, till Satan has been subdued
by a violent struggle.  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124)

<span id="ii.xiii-p43"></span>He expressly accuses the scribes of
ignorance, in not understanding the principles of the kingdom of God.
But this reproof applies almost equally to all, for all are chargeable
with the same folly. There is no man who does not loudly boast that he
desires the kingdom of God; and yet we do not permit Christ to fight
boldly, as the occasion requires, in order to rescue us from the power
of our tyrant; just as if a sick man were to entreat the aid of a
physician, and then to refuse every remedy. We now see the reason why
Christ introduced this parable. It was to show, that the scribes were
hostile to the kingdom of God, the beginnings of which they maliciously
resisted. Let us also learn that, as we are all subject to the tyranny
of Satan, there is no other way in which he commences his reign within
us, than when he rescues us, by the powerful and victorious arm of
Christ, from that wretched and accursed bondage.

<span id="ii.xiii-p44"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p45"></span>**30.** *He that is not with me.* There
are two ways of explaining this passage. Some suppose that it is an
argument drawn from contraries, and that Christ’s meaning is: *“*I
cannot reign till the devil is overthrown; for the object of all his
attempts is, to *scatter* whatever I *gather.”* And certainly we see
abundant evidence of the earnestness with which that enemy labors to
destroy the kingdom of Christ. But I rather agree in opinion with those
who explain it to denote, that the scribes are declared to be, in two
respects, opposed to the kingdom of God, because they intentionally
hinder its progress. *“*It was your duty to assist me, and to give me
your hand in establishing the kingdom of God; for whoever does not
assist is, in some measure, opposed to me, or, at least, deserves to be
reckoned among enemies. What then shall be said of you, whose furious
rage drives you into avowed opposition?*”*  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125)

<span id="ii.xiii-p47"></span>*And he that gathereth not with me
scattereth* The truth of this is abundantly manifest from what has been
already said; for so strong is our propensity to evil, that the justice
of God can have no place but in those who apply to it in good earnest.
This doctrine has a still more extensive bearing, and implies that they
are unworthy to be considered as belonging to the flock of Christ, who
do not apply to it all the means that are in their power; because their
indolence tends to retard and ruin the kingdom of God, which all of us
are called to advance.

<span id="ii.xiii-p48"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p49"></span>**31.** *Therefore I say to you.* This
inference ought not to be confined to the clause immediately preceding,
but depends on the whole discourse. Having proved that the scribes could
not blame him for casting out devils, without opposing the kingdom of
God, he at length concludes that it is no light or ordinary offense, but
an atrocious crime, knowingly and willingly to pour contempt on the
Spirit of God. We have already said, that Christ did not pronounce this
decision on the mere words which they uttered, but on their base and
wicked thought.

<span id="ii.xiii-p50"></span>*All sin and blasphemy.* As our Lord
declares *blasphemy against the Holy Ghost* to be more heinous than all
other sins, it is of importance to inquire what is the meaning of that
term. Those who define it to be *impenitence*  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) may be refuted without any difficulty;
for it would have been in vain and to no purpose for Christ to say, that
*it is not forgiven in the present life.* Besides, the word *blasphemy*
cannot be extended indiscriminately to every sort of crimes; but from
the comparison which Christ makes, we shall easily obtain the true
definition. Why is it said that he who *blasphemes against the Spirit*
is a more heinous sinner than he who *blasphemes against Christ?* Is it
because the majesty of the Spirit is greater, that a crime committed
against him must be punished with greater severity? Certainly that is
not the reason; for as *the fullness of the Godhead* (<span
id="ii.xiii-p51.2"></span>[Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="ii.xiii-p51.2"></span>)
shines in Christ, he who pours contempt upon him overturns and destroys,
as far as it lies in his power, the whole glory of God. Now in what
manner shall Christ be separated from his Spirit, so that those who
treat the Spirit with contempt offer no injury or insult to Christ?

<span id="ii.xiii-p52"></span>Already we begin to perceive, that the
reason why *blasphemy against the Spirit* exceeds other sins, is not
that the Spirit is higher than Christ, but that those who rebel, after
that the power of God has been revealed, cannot be excused on the plea
of ignorance. Besides, it must be observed, that what is here said about
*blasphemy* does not refer merely to the essence of *the Spirit,* but to
the grace which He has bestowed upon us. Those who are destitute of the
light of the Spirit, however much they may detract from the glory of the
Spirit, will not be held guilty of this crime.  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) We do not maintain, that those persons
are said to pour contempt on the Spirit of God, who oppose his grace and
power by hardened malice; and farther we maintain, that this kind of
sacrilege is committed only when we knowingly endeavor to extinguish the
Spirit who dwells in us.

<span id="ii.xiii-p54"></span>The reason why contempt is said to be
poured on the Spirit, rather than on the Son or the Father, is this. By
detracting from the grace and power of God, we make a direct attack on
*the Spirit,* from whom they proceed, and in whom they are revealed to
us. Shall any unbeliever curse God? It is as if a blind man were dashing
against a wall. But no man curses the Spirit who is not enlightened by
him, and conscious of ungodly rebellion against him; for it is not a
superfluous distinction. that all other *blasphemies* shall be forgiven,
except that one *blasphemy* which is directed against the Spirit. If a
man shall simply blaspheme against God, he is not declared to be beyond
the hope of pardon; but of those who have offered outrage to *the
Spirit,* it is said that God will never forgive them. Why is this, but
because those only are *blasphemers* against the Spirit, who slander his
gifts and power, contrary to the conviction of their own mind? Such also
is the import of the reason assigned by Mark for the extreme severity of
Christ’s threatening against the Pharisees; *because they had said that
he had the unclean spirit;* for in this manner they purposely and
maliciously turned light into darkness; and, indeed, it is in the manner
of the *giants,*  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) as the phrase
is, to make war against God.

<span id="ii.xiii-p56"></span>But here a question arises. Do men proceed
to such a pitch of madness as not to hesitate, knowingly and willfully,
to rush against God? for this appears to be monstrous and incredible. I
reply: Such audacity does indeed proceed from mad blindness, in which,
at the same time, malice and virulent rage predominate. Nor is it
without reason that Paul says, that though he was

<span id="ii.xiii-p57"></span>a blasphemer, he obtained pardon, because
he had done it ignorantly in his unbelief,  
(<span id="ii.xiii-p57.2"></span>[1Ti
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="ii.xiii-p57.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xiii-p58"></span>for this term draws a distinction between
his sin and voluntary rebellion. This passage refutes also the error of
those who imagine that every sin which is voluntary, or which is
committed in opposition to the conscience, is unpardonable. On the
contrary, Paul expressly limits that sin to the First Table of the Law;
 <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) and our Lord not less plainly
applies the word *blasphemy* to a single description of sin, and at the
same time shows, that it is of a kind which is directly opposed to the
glory of God.  <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130)

<span id="ii.xiii-p61"></span>From all that has been said, we may
conclude that those persons sin and blaspheme against the Holy Spirit,
who maliciously turn to his dishonor the perfections of God, which have
been revealed to him by the Spirit, in which His glory ought to be
celebrated, and who, with Satan, their leader, are avowed enemies of the
glory of God. We need not then wonder, if for such sacrilege there is no
hope of pardon; for they must be desperate who turn the only medicine of
salvation into a deadly venom. Some consider this to be too harsh, and
betake themselves to the childish expedient, that it is said to be
unpardonable, because the pardon of it is rare and difficult to be
obtained. But the words of Christ are too precise to admit of so silly
an evasion. It is excessively foolish to argue that God will be cruel if
he never pardon a sin, the atrocity of which ought to excite in us
astonishment and horror.  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) Those
who reason in that manner do not sufficiently consider what a monstrous
crime it is, not only to profane intentionally the sacred name of God,
but to spit in his face when he shines evidently before us. It shows
equal ignorance to object, that it would be absurd if even repentance
could not obtain pardon; for *blasphemy against the Spirit* is a token
of reprobation, and hence it follows, that whoever have fallen into it,
have been *delivered over to a reprobate mind,* (<span
id="ii.xiii-p62.2"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="ii.xiii-p62.2"></span>.)
As we maintain, that he who has been truly regenerated by the Spirit
cannot possibly fall into so horrid a crime, so, on the other hand, we
must believe that those who have fallen into it never rise again; nay,
that in this manner God punishes contempt of his grace, by hardening the
hearts of the reprobate, so that they never have any desire towards
repentance.

<span id="ii.xiii-p63"></span><span id="ii.xiii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p64"></span>**32.** *Neither in the present life* What
these words mean, Mark briefly explains by saying, that *those who have
spoken against the Spirit are exposed to eternal judgment* Every day we
ask from God the forgiveness of sins, and every day he reconciles us to
Him; and, finally, at death, he takes away all our sins, and declares
that he is gracious to us. The fruit of this mercy will appear at the
last day. The meaning therefore is: — “There is no reason to expect that
those who shall have blasphemed against the Spirit will obtain pardon in
this life, or will be acquitted in the last judgment.”

<span id="ii.xiii-p65"></span>With regard to the inference drawn by the
Papists, that the sins of men are forgiven after death, there is no
difficulty in refuting their slander. First, they act foolishly in
torturing the expression, *future life,* to mean an intermediate period,
while any one may perceive that it denotes “the last judgment.” But it
is likewise a proof of their dishonesty; for the objection which they
sophistically urge is inconsistent with their own doctrine. Who knows
not their distinction, that sins are freely pardoned in respect of
guilt, but that punishment and satisfaction are demanded? This is an
acknowledgment, that there is no hope of salvation to any one whose
guilt is not pardoned before death. To the dead, therefore, there
remains no forgiveness, except as regards punishment; and surely they
will not venture to deny that the subject of this discourse is guilt.
Let them now go and light their fire of purgatory with these cold
materials, if ice can kindle a flame.  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc32014.htm#fr_107) <span
id="ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p6.1"></span>Mais
Iesus, cognoissant leurs pensees, leur dit;” — “but Jesus, knowing their
thoughts, said to them.”

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc32014.htm#fr_108) <span
id="ii.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>Parquoy
iceux seront vos iuges;” — “therefore they shall be your judges.”

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc32014.htm#fr_109) <span
id="ii.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>Toute
sorte de peche et blaspheme;” — “every description of sin and
blasphemy.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc32014.htm#fr_110) <span
id="ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p10"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p10.1"></span>Ains il
prend fin;” — “and so he comes to an end.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc32014.htm#fr_111) <span
id="ii.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>N’aura
point de remission eternellement;” — “will have no forgiveness
eternally.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc32014.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.xiii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>Il a
l’esprit immonde;” — “he hath the unclean spirit.”

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc32014.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p14.1"></span>Mais luy
cognoissant leurs pensees;” — “but he knowing their thoughts.”

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc32014.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.xiii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>Et
‘toute’ maison ‘divisee’ contre soy-mesme dechet;”— “and every house
divided against itself falleth.”

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc32014.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ii.xiii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p21.1"></span>Comme
c’estoyent gens tout pleins d’un malin vouloir;” — “as they were people
entirely full of a wicked disposition.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc32014.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ii.xiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p22.1"></span>Que
Christ a cognu ce qui estoit cache dedans leur coeurs;” — “that Christ
knew what was concealed within their hearts.”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc32014.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ii.xiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p23"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p23.1"></span>Mais se
laissent trop aisement transporter d’une temerite ne voyans pas le mal
qu’ils font;” — “but allow themselves too easily to be carried away by
rashness, not perceiving the evil that they do.”

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc32014.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ii.xiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p25.1"></span>Ce pere
de toute finesse et malice;” — “that father of all dexterity and
malice.”

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc32014.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ii.xiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p27.1"></span>Il ne va
pas chercher fort loin les choses pour poindre les consciences de ses
adversaires;” — “he does not go far to see things fitted to affect the
consciences of his adversaries.”

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc32014.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.xiii-p29.9"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p30.1"></span>Et
cependant les scribes tenoyent Christ pour estranger;” — “and yet the
scribes held Christ to be a foreigner.”

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc32014.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.xiii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p32.1"></span>Le
peuple en a fait un office ordinaire sans regarder comment;”— “the
people made it to be an ordinary office, without considering in what
manner.”

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc32014.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.xiii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p33.1"></span>Car
l’objection s’addresse a la personne, comme on dit, et non pas a la
chose: c’est a dire, Christ ne regarde point ce qu’a la verite il
falloit dire de ces Exorcistes, mais ce qu’en pensoyent les scribes;” —
“for the objection is addressed to the person, as we say, and not to the
thing: that is to say, Christ does not consider what in truth ought to
be said of these Exorcists, but what the Jews thought of them.”

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc32014.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.xiii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p39"></span> Harmony, volume 1 p. 251.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc32014.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.xiii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p42"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p42.1"></span>Que
c’est folie aux hommes d’attendre deliverance, si Satan n’est
premierement mis bas en choquant a bon escient contre luy;” — “that it
is folly in men to expect deliverance, if Satan is not first put down by
encountering him in good earnest.”

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc32014.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.xiii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p46"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p46.1"></span>A
batailler ouvertement contre Dieu;” — “to fight openly against God.”

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc32014.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.xiii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p51"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p51.1"></span>Quant a
ceux qui disent que c’est un endurcissement jusqu’a la mort;” — “as to
those who say that it is hardened obstinacy even to death.”

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc32014.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.xiii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p53"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p53.1"></span>Ne
seront pas toutesfois tenus coulpables de ce grand crime duquel il est
ici parle;” — “will not, on that account, be held guilty of the great
crime here spoken of.”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc32014.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.xiii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p55"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p55.1"></span>Et cela
c’est desfier Dieu, et luy faire la guerre, comme les Geans des Poetes,
ainsique porte le proverbe Latin;” — “and that is to defy God, and make
war with him, like the Giants of the Poets, as the Latin proverb bears.”

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc32014.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.xiii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p59"></span> “<span
id="ii.xiii-p59.1"></span>Restreint nommement a la Premiere Table de la
Loy ce peche contre l’Esprit;” — “expressly limits to the First Table of
the Law this sin against the Spirit.”

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc32014.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.xiii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p60"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p60.1"></span>Que
c’est un peche qui battaille directement contre la gloire de Dieu;” —
“that it is a sin which fights directly against the glory of God.”

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc32014.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ii.xiii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p62"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p62.1"></span>Veu que
l’horreur d’iceluy nous devroit a tous faire dresser les cheveux en la
teste;” — “since the horror at it ought to have such an effect on all of
us, as to make the hair stand on our head.”

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc32014.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.xiii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xiii-p66"></span> “<span id="ii.xiii-p66.1"></span>Voire
s’i1 est possible de tant souffler la glace, qu’on la face flamber;” —
“that is, if it be possible to blow upon the ice in such a manner as to
produce a flame.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 12:33-37](cc32015)
