[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32046)  [Next](cc32048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p1"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
15:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xlvi-p1.2"></span>[Mark
7:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p1.2"></span>; <span id="ii.xlvi-p1.3"></span>[Luke
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039)<span id="ii.xlvi-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
15:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
7:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#014)<span id="ii.xlvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039)<span id="ii.xlvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p5"></span> **10**. And having called the multitudes
to him, he said to them, Hear and understand. **11**. What entereth into
the mouth polluteth not the man, but what goes out of the mouth
polluteth the man. **12**. Then his disciples approaching said to him,
Knowest thou that the Pharisees were offended when they heard that
saying? **13**. But he answering, said, Every plant which my heavenly
Father hath not planted shall be rooted up. **14**. Let them alone: they
are blind leaders of the blind. And if a blind man shall lead a blind
man, both will fall into the ditch. **15**. And Peter answering said to
him, Explain to us that parable. **16**. And Jesus said, Are you also
still void of understanding? **17**. Do you not yet understand that
whatever entereth into the mouth passeth into the belly, and is thrown
into the sink? **18**. But those things which proceed out of the mouth
come from the heart itself, and they pollute the man. **19**. For our of
the heart proceed wicked thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false testimonies, calumnies. **20**. These are the things which
pollute the man. But to take food with unwashed hands polluteth not the
man.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p6"></span> **14**. And when he had called to him the
whole multitude, he said to them, Listen to me, all of you, and
understand. **15**. There is nothing from without a man which, entering
into him, can pollute him; but those things which come out of a man are
the things which pollute a man. **16**. If any man have ears to hear,
let him hear. **17**. And when he had entered into the house, and
withdrawn from the multitude, his disciples asked him concerning the
parable. **18**. And he saith to them, Are you also void of
understanding? Do you not yet understand that whatsoever entereth into a
man from without cannot pollute him? **19**. Because it entereth not
into his heart, but into the belly, and goeth out into the sink,
purifying all the food? **20**. And he said, It is what goeth out of a
man that polluteth him. **21**. For from within, out of the heart of man
proceed wicked thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,
**22**. Thefts, evil desires, frauds, deceit, wantonness, an evil eye,
calumnies, pride, foolishness: **23**. All these evil things proceed
from within, and pollute the man.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlvi-p8"></span> **39**. And he spoke a parable to them,
 <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) Can a blind man lead a blind
man? Will not both fall into the ditch?

<span id="ii.xlvi-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlvi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlvi-p12"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p13"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvi-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p13.2"></span>.** *And having called the multitudes to him.*
Here Christ turns  <span id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) to those who
are ready to receive instruction, and explains more fully the truth at
which he had formerly glanced, that *the kingdom of God does not consist
in meat and drink,* as Paul also teaches us, (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p14.2"></span>[Ro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p14.2"></span>;) for, since outward things are by nature
pure, the use of them is free and pure, and uncleanness is not
contracted from the good creatures of God. It is therefore a general
statement, that pollution does not come from without into a man, but
that the fountain is concealed within him. Now when he says that all the
evil actions which any man performs come *out of the mouth of man,* he
employs a *synecdoche;*  <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) for he
says so by way of allusion to the subject in hand, and conveys this
instruction, that we do not draw uncleanness into our mouth along with
*meat and drink,* but that every kind of defilement proceeds from
ourselves.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p16"></span>*Knowest thou that the Pharisees were
offended?* As the scribes were presumptuous and rebellious, Christ did
not take great pains to pacify them, but satisfied himself with
repelling their hypocrisy and pride. The offense which they had formerly
taken up was doubled, when they perceived that—not through oversight,
but seemingly on purpose—Christ despised their *washings* as trifles.
Now when Christ did not hesitate to inflame still more, by keen
provocation, wicked and malicious persons, let us learn from his
example, that we ought not to be exceedingly solicitous to please every
one by what we say and do. His disciples, however—as is usually the case
with ignorant and unlearned people—no sooner perceive the result to be
unfavorable, than they conclude that Christ’s reply had been
unseasonable and improper.  <span id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) For
the object of their advice was, to persuade Christ to soothe the rage of
the Pharisees by softening the harsh expression which he had employed.
 <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406)

<span id="ii.xlvi-p19"></span>It almost always happens with weak
persons, that they form an unfavorable judgment about a doctrine, as
soon as they find that it is regarded with doubt or meets with
opposition. And certainly it were to be wished, that it should give no
offense, but receive the calm approbation of all; but, as the minds of
many are blinded, and even their hearts are kindled into rage, by Satan,
and as many souls are held under the benumbing influence of brutal
stupidity, it is impossible that all should relish the true doctrine of
salvation. Above all, we ought not to be surprised to behold the rage of
those who inwardly nourish the venom of malice and obstinacy. Yet we
ought to take care that, so far as may be in our power, our manner of
teaching shall give no offense; but it would be the height of madness to
think of exercising greater moderation than we have been taught to do by
our heavenly Master. We see how his discourse was made an occasion of
offense by wicked and obstinate men; and we see at the same time, how
that kind of offense which arose from malignity was treated by him with
contempt.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p20"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p21"></span>**13.** *Every plant.* As the indifferent
success of the doctrine had wounded their weak minds, Christ intended to
remedy this evil. Now the remedy which he proposes is, that good men
ought not to be distressed, or entertain less reverence for the
doctrine, though to many it be an occasion of death. It is a mistaken
view of this passage which some have adopted, that all the inventions of
men, and every thing that has not proceeded from the mouth of God, must
be *rooted up* and perish; for it was rather to men that Christ
referred, and the meaning is, that there is no reason to wonder if the
doctrine of salvation shall prove deadly to the reprobate, because they
are always carried headlong to the destruction to which they are doomed.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p22"></span>By the persons that have been *planted* by
the hand of God we are to understand those who, by his free adoption,
have been ingrafted into the tree of life, as Isaiah also, when speaking
of the Church renewed by the grace of God, calls it a branch planted by
the Lord, (<span id="ii.xlvi-p22.1"></span>[Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p22.1"></span>.) Now as salvation depends solely on the
election of God, the reprobate must perish, in whatever way this may be
effected; not that they are innocent, and free from all blame, when God
destroys them, but because, by their own malice, they turn to their
destruction all that is offered to them, however salutary it may be. To
those who willingly perish the Gospel thus becomes, as Paul assures us,
*the savor of death unto death,* (<span id="ii.xlvi-p22.2"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ii.xlvi-p22.2"></span>;)
for, though it is offered to all for salvation, it does not yield this
fruit in any but the elect. It belongs to a faithful and honest teacher
to regulate every thing which he brings forward by a regard to the
advantage of all; but whenever the result is different, let us take
comfort from Christ’s reply. It is beautifully expressed by the parable,
that the cause of perdition does not lie in the doctrine, but that the
reprobate who have no root in God, when the doctrine is presented to
them, throw out their hidden venom, and thus accelerate that death to
which they were already doomed.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p23"></span>*Which my heavenly Father hath not
planted.* Hypocrites, who appear for a time to have been *planted* like
good trees, are particularly described by Christ; for Epicureans, who
are noted for open and shameful contempt of God, cannot properly be said
to resemble trees, but the description must be intended to apply to
those who have acquired celebrity by some vain appearance of godliness.
Such were *the scribes,* who towered in the Church of God like the
cedars in Lebanon, and whose revolt might on that account appear the
more strange. Christ might have said that it is right that those should
perish who disdainfully reject salvation; but he rises higher, and
asserts that no man will remain steadfast, unless his salvation be
secured by the election of God. By these words he expressly declares,
that the first origin of our salvation flows from that grace by which
God elected us to be his children before we were created.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p24"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p25"></span>**14.** *Let them alone.* He sets them
aside as unworthy of notice, and concludes that the offense which they
take ought not to give us much uneasiness. Hence has arisen the
distinction, of which we hear so much, about avoiding offenses, that we
ought to beware of offending the weak, but if any obstinate and
malicious person take offense, we ought not to be uneasy; for, if we
determined to satisfy all obstinate people, we must bury Christ, who is
*the stone of offense,* (<span id="ii.xlvi-p25.1"></span>[1Pe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.xlvi-p25.1"></span>.)
Weak persons, who are offended through ignorance, and afterwards return
to just views, must be distinguished from haughty and disdainful men who
are themselves the authors of offenses. It is of importance to attend to
this distinction, in order that no one who is weak may be distressed
through our fault. But when wicked men dash themselves through their
obstinacy, let us walk on unmoved in the midst of offenses; for he who
spares not weak brethren tramples, as it were, under foot those to whom
we are commanded to stretch out the hand. It would be idle to attend to
others, whom we cannot avoid offending, if we wish to keep the right
path; and when, under the pretext of taking offense, they happen to fall
off and revolt from Christ, we must *let them alone,* that they may not
drag us along with them.  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407)

<span id="ii.xlvi-p27"></span>*They are blind leaders of the blind.*
Christ means that all who allow themselves to be driven hither and
thither at the disposal of those men will miserably perish; for when
they stumble on a plain road, it is evident that they are willfully
blind. Why then should any one allow himself to be directed by them,
except that he might fall into the same ditch? Now Christ, who has risen
upon us as *the Sun of righteousness,* (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p27.1"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="ii.xlvi-p27.1"></span>,)
and not only points out the road to us by the torch of his Gospel, but
desires that we should keep it before us, justly calls on his disciples
to shake off that slothfulness, and not to wander, as it were, in the
dark, for the sake of gratifying the blind.  <span
id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) Hence also we infer that all who,
under the pretense of simplicity or modesty, give themselves up to be
deceived or ensnared by errors, are without excuse.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p29"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p30"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvi-p30.2"></span>[Luke
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p30.2"></span>.** *And he spake to them a parable.* Luke
relates this saying without mentioning any occurrence, but states
generally, that Christ made use of this *parable;* as in recording many
of Christ’s discourses he says nothing as to the occasion on which they
were delivered. It is no doubt possible that Christ may have spoken this
parable more than once; but, as no place more appropriate was to be
found, I have not hesitated to insert here what Luke relates without
fixing the time.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p31"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p32"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvi-p32.2"></span>[Matthew
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p32.2"></span>.** *And Peter answering said.* As the
disciples betray excessive ignorance, Christ justly reproves and
upbraids them for being *still void of understanding,* and yet does not
fail to act as their teacher. What Matthew ascribes in a peculiar manner
to Peter is related by Mark, in the same sense, as a question put by
them all; and this is evident from Christ’s reply, in which he reproves
the ignorance, not of Peter only, but of all of them alike. The general
meaning is, that men are not polluted by food, but that they have within
themselves the pollution of sins, which afterwards shows itself in the
outward actions. Is it objected that intemperance in eating is
defilement? The solution is easy. Christ speaks only of the proper and
lawful use of those things which God has put in our power. To eat and
drink are things in their own nature free and indifferent: if any
corruption be added, it proceeds from the man himself, and therefore
must be regarded not as external, but internal.  <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409)

<span id="ii.xlvi-p34"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p35"></span>**19.** *For out of the heart proceed
wicked thoughts* <span id="ii.xlvi-p35.2"></span>Hence we infer that the
word *mouth,* <span id="ii.xlvi-p35.3"></span>as I have mentioned, was
used by Christ in a former verse by way of allusion to the context; for
now he makes no mention of *the mouth,* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.4"></span>but merely says that *out of the heart* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.5"></span>of man proceeds all that is sinful and that
corrupts by its pollution. Mark differs from Matthew in this respect,
that he gives a larger catalogue of sins, such as *lusts,* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.6"></span>or *irregular desires.* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.7"></span>The Greek word (<span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.8"></span>πλεονεξίαι<span id="ii.xlvi-p35.9"></span>)
<span id="ii.xlvi-p35.10"></span>is by some rendered *covetousness;*
<span id="ii.xlvi-p35.11"></span>but I have preferred to take it in a
general acceptation. Next come *fraud* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.12"></span>and intemperance, and those which immediately
follow. Though the mode of expression be figurative, it is enough to
understand Christ’s meaning to be, that all sins proceed from the wicked
and corrupt affections of the heart. To say that *an evil eye* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.13"></span>proceeds from the heart is not strictly
accurate, but it involves nothing that is absurd or ambiguous; for it
means, that an unholy heart pollutes the eyes by making them the
ministers, or organs, of wicked desires. And yet Christ does not speak
as if every thing that is evil in man were confined to open sins; but,
in order to show more clearly that the heart of man is the abode of all
evils,  <span id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p36.2"></span> he says that the proofs and results appear in
the sins themselves.

<span id="ii.xlvi-p37"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p38"></span>*And pollute the man.* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.2"></span>Instead of the verb *pollute,* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.3"></span>the Greek term is <span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.4"></span>κοινοῖ<span id="ii.xlvi-p38.5"></span>, *make
common;* <span id="ii.xlvi-p38.6"></span>as Mark, a little before,
(<span id="ii.xlvi-p38.7"></span>[Mr
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#002)<span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.7"></span><span id="ii.xlvi-p38.8"></span>,) used the
phrase, <span id="ii.xlvi-p38.9"></span>κοιναῖς χερσὶ<span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.10"></span>, *with* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.11"></span>common *hands,* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.12"></span>for *with* <span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.13"></span>unclean *hands.*  <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) <span id="ii.xlvi-p39.2"></span>It is
a Hebrew phrase;  <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p40.2"></span> for, since God had set apart the Jews on the
condition that they should separate themselves from all the pollutions
of the Gentiles, everything that was inconsistent with this holiness was
called *common,* <span id="ii.xlvi-p40.3"></span>that is, *profane.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](cc32047.htm#fr_402) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p9"></span> “<span
id="ii.xlvi-p9.1"></span>Pareillement il leur disoit une similitude;” —
“in like manner he spoke to them a parable.”

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](cc32047.htm#fr_403) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p14.1"></span>Christ
laissant la ces orgueilleux, se retourne vers les dociles;” — “Christ,
leaving there these proud men, turns towards the teachable.”

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc32047.htm#fr_404) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p15.1"></span>Au
reste, quand il dit que les maux qu’un chacun fait *procedent de la
bouche,* c’est autant comme s’il disoit qu’ils procedent de la personne
mesme; et c’est une figure et maniere de parler qu’on appelle
*Synecdoche,* quand on prend une partie pour le tout;” — “besides, when
he says that the evils which any man does *proceed out of the mouth,* it
is as much as if he said that they proceed from the person himself; and
it is a figure and way of speaking that is called *Synecdoche,* when a
part is taken for the whole.”

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc32047.htm#fr_405) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p17.1"></span>Voyans
que le propos n’avoit pas este bien prins, il leur semble avis que
Christ a respondu peu autrement qu’il ne faloit;” — “perceiving that the
discourse was not well taken, they conclude that Christ had replied
somewhat differently from what he ought to have done.”

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc32047.htm#fr_406) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p18.1"></span>En
redressant ce qu’il avoit dit un peu trop asprement, comme il leur
sembloit;” — “by correcting what he had said a little too harshly, as
they imagined.”

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](cc32047.htm#fr_407) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p26"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p26.1"></span>De peur
qu’ils nous tirent en perdition avec eux;” — “lest they draw us to
perdition along with them.”

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](cc32047.htm#fr_408) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p28.1"></span>A bon
droict retire ses disciples de ceste nonchalance et stupidite de suyvre
les aveugles, et pour leur faire plaisir d’aller tastonnant en tenebres
comme eux;” — “properly withdraws his disciples from that indifference
and stupidity in following the blind, and—for the sake of gratifying
them—in groping in the dark like them.”

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc32047.htm#fr_409) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p33.1"></span>Et
pourtant le vice est tousiours interieur, et ne vient point d’ailleurs;”
— “and therefore sin is always internal, and does not come from
without.”

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc32047.htm#fr_410) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p35.14"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p36.1"></span>Que le
coeur de l’homme est le siege et la source de tous maux;” — “that the
heart of man is the seat and the source of all evils.”

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](cc32047.htm#fr_411) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p38.14"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p39"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p39.1"></span>*Les
mains communes* pour *souillees* et *non lavees;*” — “*common hands* for
*polluted* and *not washed.”*

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](cc32047.htm#fr_412) <span
id="ii.xlvi-p39.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvi-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvi-p40.1"></span>C’est
une facon de parler propre aux Hebrieux;” — “it is a mode of speaking
peculiar to the Hebrews.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 15:21-28; Mark 7:24-30](cc32048)
