[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32025)  [Next](cc32027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Luke
12:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p2.1"></span>[Luke
12:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013)<span id="ii.xxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p3"></span> **13**. And one out of the multitude said
to him, Master, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me.
**14**. And he said to him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over
you? **15**. And he said to them, Take heed and beware of covetousness;
for the life of any man does not consist in the abundance of those
things which he possesseth.  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)
**16**. And he spoke a parable to them, saying, The field of a certain
rich man yielded an abundant produce. **17**. And he thought within
himself, saying, What shall I do? for I have no place in which I can
collect my fruits. **18**. And he said, I will do this: I will pull down
my barns, and will build larger ones, and there I will collect all my
fruits and my goods. **19**. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast
many goods laid up for many, years: take thine ease, eat, drink, and
enjoy thyself.  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) **20**. But God
said to him, Fool, this night they shall demand thy soul from thee;
 <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262) and as to the things which thou
hast provided, to whom shall they go? **21**. So is he that layeth up
for himself:  <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) and is not rich
toward God.

<span id="ii.xxv-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxv-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p10"></span>**13.** *Bid my brother divide* Our Lord,
when requested to undertake the office of *dividing an inheritance,*
refuses to do so. Now as this tended to promote brotherly harmony, and
as Christ’s office was, not only to reconcile men to God, but to bring
them into a state of agreement with one another, what hindered him from
settling the dispute between the two brothers?  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) There appear to have been chiefly two
reasons why he declined the office of *a judge.* First, as the Jews
imagined that the Messiah would have an earthly kingdom,  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) he wished to guard against doing any
thing that might countenance this error. If they had seen him divide
*inheritances,* the report of that proceeding would immediately have
been circulated. Many would have been led to expect a carnal redemption,
which they too ardently desired; and wicked men would have loudly
declared, that he was effecting a revolution in the state, and
overturning the Roman Empire. Nothing could be more appropriate,
therefore, than this reply, by which all would be informed, that the
kingdom of Christ is spiritual. Let us learn from this to regulate our
conduct by prudence, and to undertake nothing which may admit of an
unfavorable construction.

<span id="ii.xxv-p13"></span>Secondly, our Lord intended to draw a
distinction between the political kingdoms of this world and the
government of his Church; for he had been appointed by the Father to be
a Teacher, who should

<span id="ii.xxv-p14"></span>divide asunder, by the sword of the word,
the thoughts and feelings, and penetrate into the souls of men,  
(<span id="ii.xxv-p14.2"></span>[Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)<span id="ii.xxv-p14.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.xxv-p15"></span>but was not a magistrate to *divide
inheritances* This condemns the robbery of the Pope and his clergy, who,
while they give themselves out to be pastors of the Church, have dared
to usurp an earthly and secular jurisdiction, which is inconsistent with
their office; for what is in itself lawful may be improper in certain
persons.

<span id="ii.xxv-p16"></span>There was also in my opinion, a third
reason of great weight. Christ saw that this man was neglecting
doctrine, and was looking only to his private concerns. This is too
common a disease. Many who profess the Gospel do not scruple to make use
of it as a false pretense for advancing their private interests, and to
plead the authority of Christ as an apology for their gains. From the
exhortations  <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) which is
immediately added, we may readily draw this inference; for if that man
had not availed himself of the Gospel as a pretext for his own
emolument, Christ would not have taken occasion to give this warning
against *covetousness* The context, therefore, makes it sufficiently
evident, that this was a pretended disciple, whose mind was entirely
occupied with lands or money.

<span id="ii.xxv-p18"></span>It is highly absurd in the Anabaptists to
infer from this reply, that no Christian man has a right to *divide
inheritances,* to take a part in legal decisions, or to discharge any
public office. Christ does not argue from the nature of the thing
itself, but from his own calling. Having been appointed by the Father
for a different purpose, he declares that he is not a *judge,* because
he has received no such command. Let us hold by this rule, that every
one keep within the limits of the calling which God has given him.

<span id="ii.xxv-p19"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p20"></span>**15.** *Take heed and beware of
covetousness.* Christ first guards his followers against *covetousness,*
and next, in order to cure their minds entirely of this disease, he
declares, that *our life consisteth not in abundance.* These words point
out the inward fountain and source, from which flows the mad eagerness
for gain. It is because the general belief is, that a man is happy in
proportion as he possesses much, and that the happiness of life is
produced by riches. Hence arise those immoderate desires, which, like a
fiery furnace, send forth their flames, and yet cease not to burn
within. If we were convinced that riches, and any kind of *abundance,*
are evils of the present life, which the Lord bestows upon us with his
own hand, and the use of which is accompanied by his blessing, this
single consideration would have a powerful influence in restraining all
wicked desires; and this is what believers have come to learn from their
own experience.  <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) For whence
comes it, that they moderate their wishes, and depend on God alone, but
because they do not look upon their life as necessarily connected with
*abundance,* or dependent upon it, but rely on the providence of God,
who alone upholds us by his power, and supplies us with whatever is
necessary?

<span id="ii.xxv-p22"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p23"></span>**16.** *And he spoke a parable to them*
This parable presents to us, as in a mirror, a lively portrait of this
sentiment, that men *do not live by their abundance.* Since the life
even of the richest men is taken away in a moment, what avails it that
they have accumulated great wealth? All acknowledge it to be true, so
that Christ says nothing here but what is perfectly common, and what
every man has constantly in his mouth. But where is the man that
honestly believes it? Do not all, on the contrary, regulate their life,
and arrange their schemes and employments in such a manner as to
withdraw to the greatest distance from God, making their life to rest on
a present abundance of good things? It is therefore necessary that all
should immediately arouse themselves, lest, by imagining their happiness
to consist in riches, they entangle themselves in the snares of
*covetousness.*

<span id="ii.xxv-p24"></span>This parable shows us, first, that the
present life is short and transitory. Secondly, it points out to us,
that riches are of no avail for prolonging life. We must add a third,
which is not expressed, but may easily be inferred from the other two;
that it is a most excellent remedy for believers, to ask from the Lord
their daily bread, and to rely on his providence alone, whether they are
rich or poor.

<span id="ii.xxv-p25"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p26"></span>**17.** *What shall I do?* Wicked men are
driven to perplexity in their deliberations, because they do not know
how any thing is to be lawfully used;  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) and, next, because they are
intoxicated with a foolish confidence which makes them forget
themselves. Thus we find that this *rich man* lengthens out his
expectation of life in proportion to his large income, and drives far
away from him the remembrance of death. And yet this pride is
accompanied by distrust; for those men, when they have had their fill,
are still agitated by insatiable desire, like this *rich man,* who
enlarges his *barns,* as if his belly, which had been filled with his
former *barns,* had not got enough. At the same time, Christ does not
expressly condemn this man for acting the part of a careful householder
in storing up his produce, but because his ravenous desire, like a deep
whirlpool, swallows up and devours many *barns;* from which it follows
that he does not comprehend the proper use of an abundant produce.

<span id="ii.xxv-p28"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p29"></span>**19.** *Take thine ease, eat, drink, enjoy
thyself.* When he exhorts himself to *eat and drink,* he no longer
remembers that he is a man, but swells into pride by relying on his
abundance. We daily perceive striking instances of this disdainful
conduct  <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) in irreligious men, who
hold up the mass of their riches, as if it were nothing less than a
brazen rampart against death. When he says, *Eat, my soul, and enjoy
thyself,* there is an emphatic meaning in this Hebrew idiom;  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) for he addresses himself in such a
manner as to imply, that he has all that is necessary for gratifying all
his senses and all his desires.

<span id="ii.xxv-p32"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p33"></span>**20.** *Fool, this night they will demand
thy soul from thee.* <span id="ii.xxv-p33.1"></span>The word *soul*
<span id="ii.xxv-p33.2"></span>carries an allusion. Formerly, the *rich
man* <span id="ii.xxv-p33.3"></span>addressed his *soul* <span
id="ii.xxv-p33.4"></span>as the seat of all the affections: but now, he
speaks of the life itself, or the vital spirit. The words, *they will
demand, (*<span id="ii.xxv-p33.5"></span>ἀπαιτοῦσιν*)* <span
id="ii.xxv-p33.6"></span>though in the plural number, are used
indefinitely, and mean nothing more than that the *life* <span
id="ii.xxv-p33.7"></span>of the *rich man,* <span
id="ii.xxv-p33.8"></span>which he imagined to be in his own power, was
at the disposal of another. I advert to this, because some take occasion
from them to make unfounded speculations about angels. The design of
Christ is simply to show that the life of men, which they imagine to be
strongly protected by the fortress of their riches, is every moment
 <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) <span id="ii.xxv-p34.2"></span>
taken away. The *rich man* <span id="ii.xxv-p34.3"></span>is thus
convicted of folly, in not knowing that his life depended on another.

<span id="ii.xxv-p35"></span><span id="ii.xxv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p36"></span>**21.** *So is he that layeth up for
himself.* <span id="ii.xxv-p36.1"></span>As the two clauses are
evidently contrasted, the one must be taken into account for the
exposition of the other. Let us ascertain, therefore, what is meant by
being *rich in God,* <span id="ii.xxv-p36.2"></span>or, “towards God”
or, “with respect to God.” Those who are tolerably acquainted with the
Scriptures know that the preposition <span
id="ii.xxv-p36.3"></span>εἰς<span id="ii.xxv-p36.4"></span> not
unfrequently takes the sense of <span id="ii.xxv-p36.5"></span>ἐν<span
id="ii.xxv-p36.6"></span>. But whether it be understood in the one sense
or in the other, is of little consequence; for the meaning comes to
this, that they are *rich according to God,* <span
id="ii.xxv-p36.7"></span>who do not trust to earthly things, but depend
solely on his providence. It matters not whether they are in abundance
or in want, provided that both classes present their sincere prayers to
the Lord for their daily bread. The corresponding phrase, *layeth up for
himself,* <span id="ii.xxv-p36.8"></span>conveys the idea that this man
paid no attention to the blessing of God, but anxiously heaped up an
immense store, so that his confidence was shut up in his *barns.*  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) <span id="ii.xxv-p37.2"></span>Hence
we may easily conclude that the parable was intended to show, that vain
are the deliberations and foolish attempts of those who, trusting to the
abundance of their wealth, do not rely on God alone, and are not
satisfied with their own share, or prepared for whatever may befall
them;  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) <span
id="ii.xxv-p38.2"></span> and, finally, that such persons will suffer
the penalty of their own folly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_260"></span>[261](cc32026.htm#fr_260) <span
id="ii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p4.1"></span>Car encore
que ‘les biens’ abondent a quelqu’un, si n’a-il pas vie par les biens;”
— “for though a man may abound in wealth, yet he has no life by his
wealth.”

<span id="fn_261"></span>[262](cc32026.htm#fr_261) <span
id="ii.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p5.1"></span>Et fay
grand’chere;” — “and make great cheer.”

<span id="fn_262"></span>[263](cc32026.htm#fr_262) <span
id="ii.xxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p6.1"></span>En ceste
nuict ton ame to sera ostee, *ou, on to redemandera ton* *ame*;” — “this
night thy soul shall be taken from thee, *or, thy soul shall be asked
again from thee.”*

<span id="fn_263"></span>[264](cc32026.htm#fr_263) <span
id="ii.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p7.1"></span>Ainsi est
celuy qui thesaurize *(ou, a fait grand areas de biens)* pour soy;” —
“so is he that hoards up *(or, has formed a great heap of goods)* for
himself.”

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](cc32026.htm#fr_264) <span
id="ii.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p11.1"></span>On
pourroit demander qui a empesche qu’il ne se soit entremis d’oster toute
occasion de debat entre deux freres?” — “It might be asked, what
hindered him from undertaking to remove all ground of quarrel between
two brothers?”

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](cc32026.htm#fr_265) <span
id="ii.xxv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p12.1"></span>Que le
Messias regneroit a la facon des princes terriens;” — “that the Messiah
would reign in the manner of earthly princes.”

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](cc32026.htm#fr_266) <span
id="ii.xxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p17.1"></span>En
considerant la circonstance de l’exhortation qui est ici adioustee, il
est aise a iuger que cestuy-ci estoit mene d’une telle affection
perverse;” —”by considering the circumstance of the exhortation which is
here added, it may easily be inferred that this man was under the
influence of such a wicked disposition.”

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](cc32026.htm#fr_267) <span
id="ii.xxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p21.1"></span>Ce que les
fideles experimentent ton les iours en eux-mesmes estre vray;” — “which
believers every day experience in themselves to be true.”

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc32026.htm#fr_268) <span
id="ii.xxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p27.1"></span>Pource
qu’ils ne scavent point quel est le droit et legitime usage des
creatures de Dieu;” — “because they know not what is the proper and
lawful use of the creatures of God.”

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc32026.htm#fr_269) <span
id="ii.xxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p30.1"></span>D’une
telle mecognoissance et fierte;” — “of such ingratitude and pride.”

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc32026.htm#fr_270) <span
id="ii.xxv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p31.1"></span>En ceste
locution Hebraique il y a une vehemence et proprie plus que les mots
n’emportent de prime face;” — “in that Hebrew form of expression there
is greater force and propriety than the words at first sight bear.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc32026.htm#fr_271) <span
id="ii.xxv-p33.9"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p34.1"></span>Que
d’heure en heure la vie est ostee aux hommes;” — “that from hour to hour
the life of man is taken away.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc32026.htm#fr_272) <span
id="ii.xxv-p36.9"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p37.1"></span>En sorte
que la fiance de l’homme est en ses greniers, ou en ses coffres;” — “so
that the confidence of the man is in his granaries, or in his chests.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc32026.htm#fr_273) <span
id="ii.xxv-p37.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxv-p38"></span> “<span id="ii.xxv-p38.1"></span>Estans
prests a recevoir ce qu’il plaira a Dieu leur envoyer;” — “being
prepared to receive what God may be pleased to send to them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 13:1-9](cc32027)
