[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32034)  [Next](cc32036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>[Luke
16:19-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>[Luke
16:19-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p3"></span> **19**. There was a certain rich man, who
was clothed in purple and fine linen,  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) and feasted sumptuously every day:
**20**. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, who lay at his
gate, full of sores, **21**. And desiring to be fed from the crumbs
which fell from the rich man’s table: and even the dogs came and licked
his sores. **22**. And it happened that the beggar died, and was carried
by the angels into Abraham’s bosom: the rich man also died, and was
buried; **23**. And, lifting up his eyes in hell, when he was in
torments, he seeth Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom.
**24**. And he, crying out, said, Father Abraham, have compassion on me,
and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue; for I am tormented in this flame. **25**. And Abraham said, Son,
remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and
Lazarus likewise evil things: but now he enjoys comfort, and thou art
tormented. **26**. And besides all these things, a vast gulf lieth
between us and you; so that they who wish to pass hence to you cannot,
nor can they pass to us thence. **27**. And he said, I beseech thee,
therefore, father, to send him to my father’s house: **28**. For I have
five brothers, that he may testify to them, lest they also come into
this place of torment. **29**. Abraham saith to him, They have Moses and
the prophets: let them hear them. **30**. But he said, Nay, father
Abraham; but if one went to them from the dead, they will repent.
**31**. And he said to him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p7"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p8"></span>Though Luke introduces some things between
them, there can be no doubt that this example was intended by Christ to
confirm the discourse which we have last examined. He points out what
condition awaits those  <span id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) who
neglect the care of the poor, and indulge in all manner of gluttony; who
give themselves up to drunkenness and other pleasures, and allow their
neighbors to pine with hunger; nay, who cruelly kill with famine those
whom they ought to have relieved, when the means of doing so were in
their power. Some look upon it as a simple parable; but, as the name
*Lazarus* occurs in it, I rather consider it to be the narrative of an
actual fact. But that is of little consequence, provided that the reader
comprehends the doctrine which it contains.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p10"></span>**19.** *There was a certain rich man* He
is, first of all, described as *clothed in purple and fine linen,* and
enjoying every day splendor and luxury. This denotes a life spent amidst
delicacies, and superfluity, and pomp. Not that all elegance and
ornaments of dress are in themselves displeasing to God, or that all the
care bestowed on preparing victuals ought to be condemned; but because
it seldom happens that such things are kept in moderation. He who has a
liking for fine dress will constantly increase his luxury by fresh
additions; and it is scarcely possible that he who indulges in sumptuous
and well garnished tables shall avoid falling into intemperance. But the
chief accusation brought against this man is his cruelty in suffering
*Lazarus,* poor and *full of sores, to lie* out of doors *at his gate.*

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p11"></span>These two clauses Christ has exhibited in
contrast. The *rich man,* devoted to the pleasures of the table and to
display, swallowed up, like an unsatiable gulf, his enormous wealth, but
remained unmoved by the poverty and distresses of *Lazarus,* and
knowingly and willingly suffered him to pine away with hunger, cold, and
the offensive smell of his *sores.* In this manner Ezekiel (<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>[Eze
16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p11.1"></span>) accuses *Sodom* of not stretching out her
hand to the poor amidst *fullness of bread* and wine. The *fine linen,*
which is a peculiarly delicate fabric, is well-known to have been used
by the inhabitants of eastern countries for elegance and splendor; a
fashion which the Popish priests have imitated in what they call their
*surplices.*

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p12"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p13"></span>**21.** *And even the dogs came.* It was
quite enough to prove the hardened cruelty of the *rich man,* that the
sight of wretchedness like this did not move him to compassion. Had
there been a drop of humanity in him, he ought at least to have ordered
a supply from his kitchen for the unhappy man. But the crowning
exhibition of his wicked, and savage, and worse than brutal disposition
was, that he did not learn pity even from *the dogs* There can be no
doubt that those *dogs* were guided by the secret purpose of God, to
condemn that man by their example. Christ certainly produces them here
as witnesses to convict him of unfeeling and detestable cruelty. What
could be more monstrous than to see *the dogs* taking charge of a man,
to whom his neighbor is paying no attention; and, what is more, to see
the very crumbs of bread refused to a man perishing of hunger, while
*the dogs* are giving him the service of their tongues for the purpose
of healing his *sores?* When strangers, or even brute animals, supply
our place, by performing an office which ought rather to have been
discharged by ourselves, let us conclude that they are so many witnesses
and judges appointed by God, to make our criminality the more manifest.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p15"></span>**22.** *And it happened that the beggar
died.* Christ here points out the vast change which death effected in
the condition of the two men. Death was no doubt common to both; but to
be after death *carried by angels into Abraham’s bosom* was a happiness
more desirable than all the kingdoms of the world. On the other hand, to
be sentenced to everlasting torments is a dreadful thing, for avoiding
which a hundred lives, if it were possible, ought to be employed. In the
person of *Lazarus* there is held out to us a striking proof that we
ought not to pronounce men to be accursed by God, because they drag out,
in incessant pain, a life which is full of distresses. In him the grace
of God was so entirely hidden, and buried by the deformity and shame of
the cross, that to the eye of the flesh nothing presented itself except
the curse; and yet we see that in a body which was loathsome and full of
rottenness there was lodged a soul unspeakably precious, which is
*carried by angels* to a blessed life. It was no loss to him that he was
forsaken, and despised, and destitute of every human comfort, when
heavenly spirits deign to accompany him on his removal from the prison
of the flesh.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p16"></span>*And the rich man also died, and was
buried.* In *the rich man* we see, as in a bright mirror, how
undesirable is that temporal happiness which ends in everlasting
destruction. It deserves our attention, that Christ expressly mentions
the *burial of the rich man,* but says nothing of what was done to
*Lazarus.* Not that his dead body was exposed to wild beasts, or lay in
the open air, but because it was thrown carelessly, and without the
slightest attention, into a ditch; for it may naturally be inferred from
the corresponding clause, that no more attention was paid to him when he
was dead than when he was alive. *The rich man,* on the other hand,
buried magnificently according to his wealth, still retains some remnant
of his former pride.  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) In this
respect, we see ungodly men striving, as it were, against nature, by
affecting a pompous and splendid funeral for the sake of preserving
their superiority after death; but their souls *in hell* attest the
folly and mockery of this ambition.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p18"></span>*And Lazarus was carried by angels.* When
he says that *Lazarus was carried,* it is a figure of speech by which a
part is taken for the whole; for the soul being the nobler part of man,
properly takes the name of the whole man.  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) This office is, not without reason,
assigned by Christ to angels, who, we are aware, have been appointed to
be *ministering spirits* (<span id="ii.xxxiv-p19.2"></span>[Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014)<span id="ii.xxxiv-p19.2"></span>)
to believers, that they may devote their care and labor to their
salvation.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p20"></span>*Into Abraham’s bosom.* To detail the
variety of speculations about *Abraham’s bosom,* in which many
commentators of Scripture have indulged, is unnecessary, and, in my
opinion, would serve no good purpose. It is quite enough that we receive
what readers well acquainted with Scripture will acknowledge to be the
natural meaning. As Abraham is called *the father* of believers, because
to him was committed the covenant of eternal life, that he might first
preserve it faithfully for his own children, and afterwards transmit it
to all nations, and as all who are heirs of the same promise are called
*his children;* so those who receive along with him the fruit of the
same faith are said, after death, to be collected into his *bosom.* The
metaphor is taken from a father  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309)
, in whose *bosom,* as it were, the children meet, when they all return
home in the evening from the labors of the day. The children of God are
scattered during their pilgrimage in this world; but as, in their
present course, they follow the faith of their *father* *Abraham,* so
they are received at death into that blessed rest, in which he awaits
their arrival. It is not necessary to suppose that reference is made
here to any one place; but the assemblage of which I have spoken is
described, for the purpose of assuring believers, that they have not
been fruitlessly employed in fighting for the faith under the banner of
*Abraham,* for they enjoy the same habitation in heaven.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p22"></span>It will perhaps be asked, Is the same
condition reserved after death for the godly of our own day, or did
Christ, when he rose, open his *bosom* to admit *Abraham* himself, as
well as all the godly? I reply briefly: As the grace of God is more
clearly revealed to us in the Gospel, and as Christ himself, *the Sun of
Righteousness,* (<span id="ii.xxxiv-p22.1"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="ii.xxxiv-p22.1"></span>,)
has brought to us that salvation, which the fathers were formerly
permitted to behold at a distance and under dark shadows, so there
cannot be a doubt that believers, when they die, make a nearer approach
to the enjoyment of the heavenly life. Still, it must be understood,
that the glory of immortality is delayed till the last day of
redemption. So far as relates to the word *bosom,* that quiet harbor at
which believers arrive after the navigation of the present life, may be
called either *Abraham’s bosom* or *Christ’s bosom;* but, as we have
advanced farther than the fathers did under the Law, this distinction
will be more properly expressed by saying, that the members of Christ
are associated with their Head; and thus there will be an end of the
metaphor about *Abraham’s bosom,* as the brightness of the sun, when he
is risen, makes all the stars to disappear. From the mode of expression
which Christ has here employed, we may, in the meantime, draw the
inference, that the fathers under the Law embraced by faith, while they
lived, that inheritance of the heavenly life into which they were
admitted at death.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p23"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p24"></span>**23.** *And, lifting up, his eyes in
hell.* Though Christ is relating a history, yet he describes spiritual
things under figures, which he knew to be adapted to our senses. Souls
have neither *fingers* nor *eyes,* and are not liable to thirst, nor do
they hold such conversations among themselves as are here described to
have taken place between *Abraham* and *the rich man;* but our Lord has
here drawn a picture, which represents the condition of the life to come
according to the measure of our capacity. The general truth conveyed is,
that believing souls, when they have left their bodies, lead a joyful
and blessed life out of this world, and that for the reprobate there are
prepared dreadful torments, which can no more be conceived by our minds
than the boundless glory of the heavens. As it is only in a small
measure—only so far as we are enlightened by the Spirit of God—that we
taste by hope the glory promised to us, which far exceeds all our
senses, let it be reckoned enough that the inconceivable vengeance of
God, which awaits the ungodly, is communicated to us in an obscure
manner, so far as is necessary to strike terror into our minds.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p25"></span>On these subjects the words of Christ
give us slender information, and in a manner which is fitted to restrain
curiosity. The wicked are described as fearfully tormented by the misery
which they feel; as desiring some relief, but cut off from hope, and
thus experiencing a double torment; and as having their anguish
increased by being compelled to remember their crimes, and to compare
the present blessedness of believers with their own miserable and lost
condition. In connection with this a conversation is related, as if
persons who have no intercourse with each other were supposed to talk
together. When *the rich man* says, *Father Abraham,* this expresses an
additional torment, that he perceives, when it is too late, that he is
cut off from the number of the children of *Abraham*

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p26"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p27"></span>**25.** *Son, remember.* The word *son*
appears to be used ironically, as a sharp and piercing reproof to *the
rich man,* who falsely boasted in his lifetime that he was one of the
*sons* of Abraham. It seems as if pain inflicted by a hot iron wounded
his mind, when his hypocrisy and false confidence are placed before his
eyes. When it is said that he is tormented in hell, because he *had
received his good things in his lifetime,* we must not understand the
meaning to be, that eternal destruction awaits all who have enjoyed
prosperity in the world. On the contrary, as Augustine has judiciously
observed, poor Lazarus was carried into the bosom of rich Abraham, to
inform us, that riches do not shut against any man the gate of the
kingdom of heaven, but that it is open alike to all who have either made
a sober use of riches, or patiently endured the want of them. All that
is meant is, that *the rich man,* who yielded to the allurements of the
present life, abandoned himself entirely to earthly enjoyments, and
despised God and His kingdom, now suffers the punishment of his own
neglect.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p28"></span>*Receivedst THY good things.* The pronoun
*thy* is emphatic, as if Abraham had said: Thou wast created for an
immortal life, and the Law of God raised time on high to the
contemplation of the heavenly life; but thou, forgetting so exalted a
condition, didst choose to resemble a sow or a dog, and thou therefore
receivest a reward which befits brutal pleasures. *But now he enjoys
comfort* When it is said of Lazarus, on the other hand, that *he enjoys
comfort,* because he had suffered many distresses in the world, it would
be idle to apply this to all whose condition is wretched; because their
afflictions, in many cases, are so far from having been of service to
them, that they ought rather to bring upon them severer punishment. But
*Lazarus* is commended for patient endurance of the cross, which always
springs from faith and a genuine fear of God; for he who obstinately
resists his sufferings, and whose ferocity remains unsubdued, has no
claim to be rewarded for patience, by receiving from God *comfort* in
exchange for the cross.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p29"></span>To sum up the whole, they who have
patiently endured the burden of the cross laid upon them, and have not
been rebellious against the yoke and chastisements of God, but, amidst
uninterrupted sufferings, have cherished the hope of a better life, have
a rest laid up for them in heaven, when the period of their warfare
shall be terminated. On the contrary, wicked despisers of God, who are
wholly engrossed in the pleasures of the flesh, and who by a sort of
mental intoxication, drown every feeling of piety, will experience,
immediately after death, such torments as will efface their empty
enjoyments. It must also be recollected, that this *comfort,* which the
sons of God enjoy, lies in this, that they perceive a crown of glory
prepared for them, and rest in the joyful expectation of it; as, on the
other hand, the wicked are tormented by the apprehension of the future
judgment, which they see coming upon them.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p30"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p31"></span>**26.** *A vast gulf lieth.* These words
describe the permanency of the future state, and denote, that the
boundaries which separate the reprobate from the elect can never be
broken through. And thus we are reminded to return early to the path,
while there is yet time, lest we rush headlong into that abyss, from
which it will be impossible to rise. The words must not be strictly
interpreted, when it is said, that no one is permitted to pass who would
wish to descend from heaven to hell; for it is certain, that none of the
righteous entertain any such desire.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p32"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p33"></span>**27.** *I beseech thee, father.* To
bring the narrative into more full accordance with our modes of
thinking, he describes *the rich man* as wishing that his brothers, who
were still alive, should be warned by *Lazarus.* Here the Papists
exercise their ingenuity very foolishly, by attempting to prove that the
dead feel solicitude about the living. Any thing more ridiculous than
this sophistry cannot be conceived; for with equal plausibility I might
undertake to prove, that believing souls are not satisfied with the
place assigned to them, and are actuated by a desire of removing from it
to hell, were it not that they are prevented by *a vast gulf.* If no man
holds such extravagant views, the Papists are not entitled to
congratulate themselves on the other supposition. It is not my
intention, however, to debate the point, or to defend either one side or
another; but I thought it right to advert, in passing, to the futility
of the arguments on which they rest their belief that the dead intercede
with God on our behalf. I now return to the plain and natural meaning of
this passage.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p34"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p35"></span>**29.** *They have Moses and the
prophets.* In the persons of *the rich man* and *Abraham* Christ reminds
us, that we have received an undoubted rule of life, and that therefore
we have no right to expect that the dead will rise to instruct and
persuade us. *Moses and the prophets* were appointed to instruct, while
they lived, the men of their own age; but it was with the design, that
the same advantage should be derived by posterity from their writings.
As it is the will of God that we should receive instructions, in this
manner, about a holy life, there is no reason why the dead should assure
us of the rewards and punishments of the future state; nor is there any
excuse for the indifference of those who shelter themselves under the
pretext, that they do not know what is going on beyond this world. Among
irreligious men, we are aware, is frequently heard this wicked saying,
or rather this grunting of hogs, that it is foolish in men to distress
themselves with fears about a matter of uncertainty, since no one has
ever returned to bring us tidings about hell.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p36"></span>With the view of counteracting every
enchantment of Satan of this description, Christ draws their attention
to the Law and the Prophets, agreeably to that passage in the writings
of Moses:

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p37"></span>It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest
say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may
hear it, and do it? Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest
say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may
hear it, and do it? But the word is very nigh unto thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou shouldest do it,  
(<span id="ii.xxxiv-p37.2"></span>[De
30:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p37.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p38"></span>They who ridicule as fabulous what
Scripture testifies as to the future judgment, will one day feel how
shocking is the wickedness of giving the lie to the holy oracles of God.
From such lethargy Christ arouses his followers, that they may not be
deceived by the hope of escaping punishment, and thus fail to improve
the time allowed for repentance.

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p39"></span>*Abraham’s* reply amounts to this: By
*Moses and the prophets* God had sufficiently made known to his people
the doctrine of salvation, and nothing remains for us but that it obtain
the assent of all. So thoroughly infected is the mind of man with a
depraved curiosity, that the greater part of men are always gaping after
new revelations. Now as nothing is more displeasing to God than when men
are so eager to go beyond due bounds, he forbids them to inquire at
magicians and soothsayers respecting the truth, and to consult pretended
oracles after the manner of the Gentiles; and in order to restrain that
itching curiosity, he promises, at the same time, that he will give
*prophets,* from whom the people may learn whatever is necessary to be
known for salvation, (<span id="ii.xxxiv-p39.1"></span>[Deut.
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015)<span id="ii.xxxiv-p39.1"></span>.)
But if *the prophets* were sent for the express purpose; that God might
keep his people under the guidance of his word, he who is not satisfied
with this method of instruction is not actuated by a desire to learn,
but tickled by ungodly wantonness; and therefore God complains that He
is insulted, when He alone is not heard *from the living to the dead,*
(<span id="ii.xxxiv-p39.2"></span>[Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xxxiv-p39.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p40"></span>The division of the word of God, which
Abraham makes, into the Law and the Prophets, refers to the time of the
Old Testament. Now that the more ample explanation of the Gospel has
been added, there is still less excuse for our wickedness, if our
dislike of that doctrine hurries us in every possible direction, and, in
a word, if we do not permit ourselves to be regulated by the word of
God. Hence too we infer how solid is the faith of Papists about
purgatory and such fooleries, when it rests on nothing but phantoms.
 <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p42"></span><span id="ii.xxxiv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p43"></span>**30.** *Nay, father Abraham.* This is a
personification, as we have said, which expresses rather the feelings of
the living than the anxiety of the dead. The doctrine of the *Law* is
little esteemed by the world, the *Prophets* are neglected, and no man
submits to hear God speaking in his own manner. Some would desire that
angels should descend from heaven; others, that the dead should come out
of their graves; others, that new miracles should be performed every day
to sanction what they hear; and others, that voices should be heard from
the sky.  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) But if God were
pleased to comply with all their foolish wishes, it would be of no
advantage to them; for God has included in his word all that is
necessary to be known, and the authority of this word has been attested
and proved by authentic seals. Besides, faith does not depend on
miracles, or any extraordinary sign, but is the peculiar gift of the
Spirit, and is produced by means of the word. Lastly, it is the
prerogative of God to draw us to himself, and he is pleased to work
effectually through his own word. There is not the slightest reason,
therefore, to expect that those means, which withdraw us from obedience
to the word, will be of any service to us. I freely acknowledge, that
there is nothing to which the flesh is more strongly inclined than to
listen to vain revelations; and we see how eagerly those men, to whom
the whole of Scripture is an object of dislike, throw themselves into
the snares of Satan. Hence have arisen necromancy and other delusions,
which the world not only receives with avidity, but runs after with
furious rage. But all that is here affirmed by Christ is, that even the
dead could not reform,  <span id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) or bring
to a sound mind, those who are deaf and obstinate against the
instructions of the law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc32035.htm#fr_305) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>De
pourpre et de soye;” — “in purple and silk.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc32035.htm#fr_306) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p9"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p9.1"></span>Quelle
sera hors de ce monde la condition de ceux;” — “what will be out of this
world the condition of those.”

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc32035.htm#fr_307) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p17.1"></span>De
l’orgueil de sa vie passee;” — “of the pride of his past life.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc32035.htm#fr_308) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p19.1"></span>A bon
droict on dit simplement, L’homme, encore que cela ne convient qu’a
l’ame;” — “we properly say simply *Man*, though it applies only to the
soul.”

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc32035.htm#fr_309) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p21.1"></span>D’un
pere terrien;” — “from an earthly father.”

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc32035.htm#fr_310) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p41"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p41.1"></span>Veu
qu’elle n’est appuyee et fondee qu’en des apparitions et vaines
imaginations d’aucuns cerveaux esventez;” — “since it rests and is
founded only on apparitions and vain imaginations of certain giddy
brains.”

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc32035.htm#fr_311) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p44"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p44.1"></span>Les
autres, que Dieu parlast a eux du ciel en personne;”— “others, that God
would speak to them from heaven in person.”

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc32035.htm#fr_312) <span
id="ii.xxxiv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxiv-p45"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxiv-p45.1"></span>Ne
s’amenderont point, mesmes quand les morts viendroyent parler a eux, et
les advertir;” — “will not reform, even though the dead should come to
talk to them and warn them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 17:7-10](cc32036)
