[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32023)  [Next](cc32025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p1"></span>LUKE 7:36-50

<span id="ii.xxiii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
7:36-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036)<span
id="ii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p3"></span>**36**. And one of the Pharisees requested
him to take food with him; and he entered into the house of the
Pharisee, and sat down at table. **37**. And, lo, a woman in the city,
who was a sinner, when she knew that he sat at table in the house of the
Pharisee, brought an alabaster box of ointment:  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) **38**. And sitting at his feet behind
him, and weeping, she began to wash his feet with tears, and wiped them
with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with
ointment.  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) **39**. And the
Pharisee, who had invited him, seeing it, said, speaking within himself,
If this man were a Prophet, he would certainly know who and what sort of
woman this is that toucheth him; for she is a sinner.  <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) **40**. And Jesus answering, said to
him, Simon, I have something to say to thee. And he said, Master, say
on. **41**. A certain creditor had two debtors: one owed five hundred
pence, and another fifty. **42**. And when they had nothing to pay, he
forgave them both. Tell me then, which of them will love him more?
**43**. Simon answering said, I suppose that it will be he to whom he
forgave more. And he said to him, Thou hast decided aright. **44**. And
turning to the woman, he said to Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered
into thy house, thou gavest not water for my feet; but she hath
moistened my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head.
**45**. Thou gavest me not a kiss; but she, since the time that I
entered, hath not ceased to kiss my feet. **47**. For which reason I say
to thee, Her many sins are forgiven, for she hath loved much; but he to
whom less is forgiven loveth less. **48**. And he said to her, Thy sins
are forgiven thee. **49**. And those who sat at table with him began to
say within themselves, Who is this that even forgiveth sins? **50**. And
he said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxiii-p9"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p10"></span>**36.** *And one of the Pharisees
requested him.* This narrative shows the captious disposition, not only
to take, but to seek out, offenses, which was manifested by those who
did not know the office of Christ. A *Pharisee* invites Christ; from
which we infer, that he was not one of those who furiously and violently
opposed, nor of those who haughtily despised his doctrine. But whatever
might be his mildness, he is presently offended when he sees Christ
bestow a gracious reception on a woman who, in his opinion, ought not to
have been permitted to approach or to converse with him; and,
accordingly, disowns him as *a prophet,* because he does not acknowledge
him to be the Mediator, whose peculiar office it was to bring miserable
sinners into a state of reconciliation with God. It was something, no
doubt, to bestow on Christ the honor due to a prophet; but he ought also
to have inquired for what purpose he was sent, what he brought, and what
commission he had received from the Father. Overlooking the grace of
reconciliation, which was the main feature to be looked for in Christ,
the Pharisee concluded that he was *not a prophet* And, certainly, had
it not been that through the grace of Christ this woman had obtained the
forgiveness of her sins, and a new righteousness, she ought to have been
rejected.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p11"></span>Simon’s mistake lies only in this: Not
considering that Christ came to save what was lost, he rashly concludes
that Christ does not distinguish between the worthy and the unworthy.
That we may not share in this dislike, let us learn, first, that Christ
was given as a Deliverer to miserable and lost men,  <span
id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238) and to restore them from death to
life. Secondly, let every man examine himself and his life, and then we
will not wonder that others are admitted along with us, for no one will
dare to place himself above others. It is hypocrisy alone that leads men
to be careless about themselves,  <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) and haughtily to despise others.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p15"></span>**37.** *A woman who was a sinner* <span
id="ii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>The words stand literally as I have
translated them,(<span id="ii.xxiii-p15.2"></span>ἥτις ἧν ἁμαζτωλὸς<span
id="ii.xxiii-p15.3"></span>.) *Erasmus* <span
id="ii.xxiii-p15.4"></span>has chosen to take the pluperfect tense, *who
Had Been a sinner,*  <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p16.2"></span>lest any one should suppose that at that time
she still *was a sinner* <span id="ii.xxiii-p16.3"></span>But by so
doing, he departed from the natural meaning; for Luke intended to
express the place which the woman held in society, and the opinion
universally entertained respecting her. Though her sudden conversion had
rendered her a different person in the sight of God from what she had
previously been, yet among men the disgrace attaching to her former life
had not yet been effaced. She was, therefore, in the general estimation
of men *a sinner,* <span id="ii.xxiii-p16.4"></span>that is, a woman of
wicked and infamous life; and this led *Simon* <span
id="ii.xxiii-p16.5"></span>to conclude, though erroneously, that Christ
had not the Spirit of discernment, since he was unacquainted with that
infamy which was generally known.  <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p18"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p19"></span>**40.** *And Jesus answering said.* By
this reply Christ shows how egregiously Simon was mistaken. Exposing to
public view his silent and concealed thought, he proves himself to
possess something more excellent than what belonged to the *Prophets;*
for he does not reply to his words, but refutes the sentiment which he
kept hidden within his breast. Nor was it only on Simon’s account that
this was done, but in order to assure every one of us, that we have no
reason to fear lest any sinner be rejected by him, who not only gives
them kind and friendly invitations, but is prepared with equal
liberality, and—as we might say—with outstretched arms, to receive them
all.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p20"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p21"></span>**41.** *A certain creditor had two
debtors* The scope of this parable is to demonstrate, that Simon is
wrong in condemning the woman who is acquitted by the heavenly judge. He
proves that she is righteous, not because she pleased God, but because
*her sins were forgiven;* for otherwise her case would not correspond to
the parable, in which Christ expressly states, that the creditor *freely
forgave the debtors who were not able to pay. We* cannot avoid
wondering, therefore, that the greater part of commentators have fallen
into so gross a blunder as to imagine that this woman, by her *tears,*
and her *anointing,* and her *kissing his feet,* deserved the pardon of
her sins. The argument which Christ employs was taken, not from the
cause, but from the effect; for, until a favor has been received, it
cannot awaken gratitude,  <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) and
the cause of reciprocal love is here declared to be a free forgiveness.
In a word, Christ argues from the fruits or effects that follow it, that
this woman has been reconciled to God.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p23"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p24"></span>**44.** *And turning to the woman.* The
Lord appears to compare Simon with the woman, in such a manner as to
make him chargeable with nothing more than light offenses. But this is
spoken only in the way of concession. “Suppose now, Simon,” he says,
“that the guilt from which God discharges thee was light,  <span
id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) and that this woman has been guilty of
many and very heinous offenses. Yet you see how she proves by the effect
that she has obtained pardon. For what mean those profuse tears, those
frequent kisses of the feet, that precious ointment? What mean they but
to acknowledge, that she had been weighed down by an enormous burden of
condemnation? And now she regards the mercy of God with fervor of love
proportioned to her conviction that her necessity had been great.”

<span id="ii.xxiii-p26"></span>From the words of Christ, therefore, we
are not at liberty to infer, that Simon had been a debtor to a small
amount, or that he was absolved from guilt.  <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244) It is more probable that, as he was a
blind hypocrite, he was still plunged in the filth of his sins. But
Christ insists on this single point, that, however wicked the woman may
have been, she gave undoubted proofs of her righteousness, by leaving no
kind of duty undone to testify her gratitude, and by acknowledging, in
every possible way, her vast obligations to God. At the same time,
Christ reminds Simon, that he has no right to flatter himself, as if he
were free from all blame; for that he too needed mercy; and that if even
he does not obtain the favor of God without pardon, he ought to look
upon this woman’s gifts, whatever might have been her former sins, as
evidences of repentance and gratitude.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p28"></span>We must attend to the points of contrast,
in which the woman is preferred to Simon. She *moistened his feet with
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head;* while *he* did not
even order *water* to be given, according to custom. She *did not cease
to kiss his feet,* while *he* did not deign to receive Christ with the
kiss of hospitality.  <span id="fr_245"></span>[246](#fn_245) *She*
poured precious *ointment on his feet,* while *he* did not even *anoint
his head with oil.* But why did our Lord, who was a model of frugality
and economy, permit the expense of the *ointment?* It was because, in
this way, the wretched sinner testified that she owed all to him. He had
no desire of such luxuries, was not gratified by the sweet odor, and did
not approve of gaudy dress. But he looked only at her extraordinary zeal
to testify her repentance, which is also held out to us by Luke as an
example; for her sorrow, which is the commencement of repentance, was
proved by her tears. By placing herself *at Christ’s feet behind him,*
and there lying on the ground, she discovered her modesty and humility.
By the *ointment,* she declared that she offered, as a sacrifice to
Christ, herself and all that she possessed. Every one of these things it
is our duty to imitate; but the pouring of the *ointment* was an
extraordinary act, which it would be improper to consider as a rule.
 <span id="fr_246"></span>[247](#fn_246)

<span id="ii.xxiii-p31"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p32"></span>**47.** *Her many sins are forgiven*
<span id="ii.xxiii-p32.1"></span>Some interpret the verb differently,
*may her many sins be forgiven,* <span id="ii.xxiii-p32.2"></span>and
bring out the following meaning: — “As this woman evinces by remarkable
actions, that she is full of ardent love to Christ, it would be improper
for the Church to act harshly and severely towards her; but, on the
contrary, she ought to be treated with gentleness, whatever may have
been the aggravations of her offenses.” But as <span
id="ii.xxiii-p32.3"></span>ἀφέωνται <span id="ii.xxiii-p32.4"></span>is
used, in accordance with the Athic dialect, for <span
id="ii.xxiii-p32.5"></span>ἀφεῖνται*,* <span
id="ii.xxiii-p32.6"></span>we must dispense with that subtlety of
exposition which is disapproved by the context; for a little after,
Christ uses the same words in his address to the woman, where the
imperative mood would not apply. Here, too is added a corresponding
clause, that *he to whom less is forgiven loveth less*

<span id="ii.xxiii-p33"></span>The verb, which is in the present tense,
must, no doubt, be resolved into a preterite.  <span
id="fr_247"></span>[248](#fn_247) From the eager desire which she had
manifested to discharge all the duties of piety, Christ infers that,
although this woman might have been guilty of many sins, the mercy of
God was so abundant towards her, that she ought no longer to be regarded
as a sinner. Again, *loving* is not here said to be the cause of pardon,
 <span id="fr_248"></span>[249](#fn_248) but a subsequent manifestation,
as I have formerly mentioned; for the meaning of the words is this: —
“They who perceive the display of deep piety in the woman form an
erroneous judgment, if they do not conclude that God is already
reconciled to her;” so that the free pardon of sins comes first in
order. Christ does not inquire at what price men may purchase the favor
of God, but argues that God has already forgiven this wretched sinner,
and that, therefore, a mortal man ought not to treat her with severity.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p36"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p37"></span>**48.** *Thy sins are forgiven.* It may
be asked, why does Christ now promise to her the pardon which she had
obtained, and of which she had been assured? Some reply that these words
were uttered, not so much on her own account, as for the sake of others.
For my own part, I have no doubt that it was chiefly on her own account;
and this appears more clearly from the words that follow. Nor ought we
to wonder, that the voice of Christ again pronounces an absolution of
the woman, who had already tasted his grace, and who was even convinced
that he was her only refuge of salvation. Thus, at the present day,
faith is previously necessary, when we pray that the Lord would forgive
our sins; and yet this is not a useless or superfluous prayer, but the
object of it is, that the heavenly Judge may more and more seal his
mercy on our hearts, and in this manner may give us peace. Though this
woman had brought with her a confident reliance on that grace which she
had obtained, yet this promise was not superfluous, but contributed
greatly to the confirmation of her faith.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p38"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p39"></span>**49.** *And those who sat at table with
him began to say within themselves.* Hence we again learn, that
ignorance of Christ’s office constantly leads men to conceive new
grounds of offense. The root of the evil is, that no one examines his
own wretched condition, which undoubtedly would arouse every man to seek
a remedy. There is no reason to wonder that hypocrites, who slumber
amidst their vices,  <span id="fr_249"></span>[250](#fn_249) should
murmur at it as a thing new and unexpected, when Christ forgives sins.

<span id="ii.xxiii-p41"></span><span id="ii.xxiii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p42"></span>**50.** *Thy faith hath saved thee.* To
repress those murmurings,  <span id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250) and,
at the same time, to confirm the woman, Christ commends her faith. Let
others grumble as they may, but do thou adhere steadfastly to that faith
which has brought thee an undoubted salvation.  <span
id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) At the same time, Christ claims for
himself the authority which had been given to him by the Father; for, as
he possesses the power of healing, to him faith is properly directed.
And this intimates that the woman was not led by rashness or mistake to
come to him, but that, through the guidance of the Spirit, she had
preserved the straight road of faith. Hence it follows, that we cannot
believe in any other than the Son of God, without considering that
person to have the disposal of life and death. If the true reason for
believing in Christ be, that God hath given him authority to forgive
sins, whenever faith is rendered to another, that honor which is due to
Christ must of necessity be taken from him. This saying refutes also the
error of those who imagine that the forgiveness of sins is purchased by
charity; for Christ lays down a quite different method, which is, that
we embrace by faith the offered mercy. The last clause, *Go in peace,*
denotes that inestimable fruit of faith which is so frequently commended
in Scripture. It brings *peace* and joy to the consciences, and prevents
them from being driven hither and thither by uneasiness and alarm.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc32024.htm#fr_235) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Or voyci
il y avoit une femme de la ville qui avoit este de mauvaise vie,
laquelle ayant cognu qu’il estoit assis a table en la maison du
Pharisien, apporta une boiste d’ongnement;” — “but, lo, there was a
woman of the city who was of wicked life, who, having learned that he
sat at table in the house of the Pharisee, brought a box of ointment.”

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc32024.htm#fr_236) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>Et les
frottoit d’ongnement;” — “and rubbed them with ointment.”

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc32024.htm#fr_237) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>Car elle
est de mauvaise vie;” — “for she is of wicked life.”

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc32024.htm#fr_238) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>Que
Christ a este donne pour liberateur au genre humain, miserable et
perdu;” — “that Christ was given as a deliverer to the human race,
miserable and lost.”

<span id="fn_239"></span>[240](cc32024.htm#fr_239) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>Qui
fait que les hommes se me cognoissent;” — “which makes men forget
themselves.”

<span id="fn_240"></span>[241](cc32024.htm#fr_240) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p16"></span> *“*<span
id="ii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>*Quoe fuerat peccatrix*

<span id="fn_241"></span>[242](cc32024.htm#fr_241) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p16.6"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>Veu
qu’il ne cognoist point l’infamie de la vie de ceste femme qui estoit
notoire a un chacun;” — “since he does not know the infamy of the life
of this woman, which was notorious to every one.”

<span id="fn_242"></span>[243](cc32024.htm#fr_242) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p22.1"></span>Veu
que le remerciment presuppose tousiours qu’on ait avant receuquelque
bien;” — “since gratitude always presupposes that some favor has been
received.”

<span id="fn_243"></span>[244](cc32024.htm#fr_243) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p25"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>Mettons le cas, Simon, que le fardeau des
pechez, desquels Dieu t’a descharge fust petit;” — “let us put the case,
Simon, that the burden of the sins, from which God has discharged thee,
was small.”

<span id="fn_244"></span>[245](cc32024.htm#fr_244) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>Et
s’il avoit este absous de la condamnation qu’il avoit encourue;” —”and
if he had been absolved from the condemnation which he had incurred.”

<span id="fn_245"></span>[246](cc32024.htm#fr_245) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>En
lieu que l’autre n’a pas mesme daigne le baiser par une facon commune de
civilite;” — “whereas the other did not even deign to kiss him,
according to an ordinary custom of civility.”

<span id="fn_246"></span>[247](cc32024.htm#fr_246) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>A este
un acte special et extraordinaire, duquel si on vouloit faire une reigle
generale, ce seroit un abus;” — “was a special and extraordinary act, of
which, if we wished to make a general rule, it would be a mistake.”

<span id="fn_247"></span>[248](cc32024.htm#fr_247) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p34"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxiii-p34.1"></span>Combien qu’il faut resoudre le verbe du temps
present en un temps passe: comme quand il dit, *Ses pechez luy sont
pardonnez:* il faut entendre, *Ont este pardonnez*;” — “though the verb
must be resolved from the present tense into a past tense: as when he
says, *Her sins are forgiven,* we must understand it to mean, *Have been
forgiven.*”

<span id="fn_248"></span>[249](cc32024.htm#fr_248) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p35.1"></span>Il
n’est pas dit ici que la dilection ou amour des hommes envers Dieu soit
la cause de la remission des pechez;” — “it is not here said that the
*loving,* or the love of men towards God, is the cause of the
forgiveness of sins.”

<span id="fn_249"></span>[250](cc32024.htm#fr_249) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p40.1"></span>Qui se
plaisent et fiattent en leurs vices;” — “who please and flatter
themselves amidst their vices.”

<span id="fn_250"></span>[251](cc32024.htm#fr_250) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p43"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p43.1"></span>Pour
reprimer les murmures de ces gens;” — “to repress the murmurings of
those people.”

<span id="fn_251"></span>[252](cc32024.htm#fr_251) <span
id="ii.xxiii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxiii-p44"></span> “<span id="ii.xxiii-p44.1"></span>Qui
t’a apporte certitude de salut;” — “which has brought thee certainty of
salvation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 10:38-42](cc32025)
