[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32010)  [Next](cc32012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p1"></span><span id="ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
12:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#009)<span id="ii.x-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.x-p1.2"></span>[Mark
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001)<span id="ii.x-p1.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.x-p1.3"></span>[Luke
6:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006)<span id="ii.x-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p2"></span><span id="ii.x-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
12:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#009)<span id="ii.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p3"></span><span id="ii.x-p3.1"></span>[Mark
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#001)<span id="ii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p4"></span><span id="ii.x-p4.1"></span>[Luke
6:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#006)<span id="ii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p5"></span>**9**. And having departed thence, he came
into their synagogue: **10**. And, lo, there was a man having a withered
hand, and they asked him, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbaths?
that they might accuse him. **11**. But he said to them, What man shall
there be among you who shall have one sleep, and if it fall on the
Sabbath into a ditch, will not lay hold on it, and lift it out?
**12**. How much more then is a man better than a sheep? Therefore it is
lawful to do well on the Sabbaths. **13**. Then he saith to the man,
Stretch out thy hand. And he stretched it out, and it was restored to
soundness like the other.

<span id="ii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.x-p7"></span>**1**. And he entered again into the
synagogue, and there was a man there having a withered hand. **2**. And
they watched him, if he would heal that man on the Sabbath, that they
might accuse him. **3**. And he said to the man having the withered
hand, Rise up in the midst. **4**. Whether is it lawful on the Sabbath
to do good or to do evil? to save life or to kill? But they were silent.
**5**. And when he had looked round upon them with indignation, grieving
on account of the blindness of their heart, he saith to the man, Stretch
out thy hand; and he stretched it out, and his hand was restored to
soundness like the other.

<span id="ii.x-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.x-p9"></span>**6**. And it happened also on another
Sabbath, that he entered into the synagogue, and taught; and there was a
man there whose right hand was withered. **7**. And the scribes and
Pharisees watched him, if he would heal on the Sabbath, that they might
find an opportunity of accusing him. **8**. But he knew their thoughts,
and said to the man that had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand in
the midst. And he rose up and stood. **9**. Jesus therefore saith to
them, I will ask you, Whether is it lawful on the Sabbaths to do good or
to do evil? to save life or to destroy it? **10**. And when he had
looked round about upon them all, he said to the man, Stretch out thy
hand. And he did so: and his hand was restored sound like the other.

<span id="ii.x-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.x-p11"></span><span id="ii.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p12"></span>**<span id="ii.x-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#009)<span id="ii.x-p12.2"></span>.**
*And having departed thence.* This narrative and that which immediately
precedes it have the same object; which is to show, that the scribes
watched with a malicious eye for the purpose of turning into slander
every thing that Christ did, and consequently that we need not wonder if
men, whose minds were so depraved, were his implacable enemies. We see
also, that it is usual with hypocrites to pursue what is nothing more
than a shadow of the righteousness of the Law, and as the common saying
is, to stickle more about the form than about the substance. First,
then, let us learn from this passage to keep our minds pure, and free
from every wicked disposition, when we are about to form a decision on
any question; for if hatred, or pride, or anything of that description,
reign within us, we will not only do injury to men, but will insult God
himself, and turn light into darkness. No man, who was free from malice,
would have refused to acknowledge that it was a Divine work, which those
good teachers do not scruple to condemn.  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) Whence comes such fury, but because all
their senses are affected by a wicked hatred of Christ, so that they are
blind amidst the full brightness of the sun? We learn also, that we
ought to beware lest, by attaching undue importance to ceremonial
observances, we allow other things to be neglected, which are of far
higher value in the sight of God, and which Christ in another passage
calls *the more important matters of the Law,* (<span
id="ii.x-p13.2"></span>[Mt 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023)<span
id="ii.x-p13.2"></span>.) For so strongly are we inclined to outward
rites, that we shall never preserve moderation in this respect, unless
we constantly remember, that whatever is enjoined respecting the worship
of God is, in the first place, spiritual; and, secondly, ought to be
regulated by the rule which Christ has laid down to us in this passage.

<span id="ii.x-p14"></span><span id="ii.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p15"></span>**10.** *They asked him, saying.* Mark and
Luke say only that they *watched* what our Lord would do; but Matthew
states more clearly that they also attacked him by words. It is
probable, that some others had been previously cured on Sabbath-days;
and hence they take occasion to ask if he believes it to be *lawful* for
him to do again what he had formerly done. They ought to have considered
whether it was a work of God, or of man, to restore a withered hand by a
mere touch, or by a single word. When God appointed the Sabbath, he did
not lay down a law for himself, or impose upon himself any restraint
from performing operations on the Sabbath, when he saw it to be proper,
in the same manner as on other days. It was excessive folly, therefore,
to call this in question, and thus to prescribe rules for God himself,
and to restrain the freedom of his operations.

<span id="ii.x-p16"></span><span id="ii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p17"></span>**11.** *What man shall there be among you
who shall have a sheep?* Christ again points out what is the true way of
keeping the Sabbath; and, at the same time, reproves them for slander,
in bringing as a charge against him what was a universal custom. For if
any man’s *sheep had fallen into a ditch,* no person would have hindered
it from being taken out: but in proportion as *a man is of more value
than a sheep,* so much the more are we at liberty to assist him. It is
plain, therefore, that if any man should relieve the necessity of
brethren, he did not, in any degree, violate the rest which the Lord has
enjoined. Mark and Luke take no notice of this comparison, but only
state that Christ inquired, *Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good or
to do evil?*

<span id="ii.x-p18"></span>He who takes away the life of a man is held
to be a criminal; and there is little difference between manslaughter
and the conduct of him who does not concern himself about relieving a
person in distress. So then Christ indirectly charges them with
endeavoring, under the pretense of a holy act, to compel him *to do
evil;* for sin is committed, as we have already said, not only by him
who does any thing contrary to the Law, but also by him who neglects his
duty. Hence also we perceive, that Christ did not always employ the same
arguments in refuting this slander; for he does not reason here about
his divinity as he does in the case mentioned by John, (<span
id="ii.x-p18.1"></span>[Joh 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018)<span
id="ii.x-p18.1"></span>.) Nor was there any necessity for doing so;
since the Pharisees were completely refuted by this single defense, that
nothing could be more unreasonable than to pronounce a man, who imitated
God, to be a transgressor of the Sabbath.

<span id="ii.x-p19"></span><span id="ii.x-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p20"></span>**<span id="ii.x-p20.2"></span>[Luke
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#008)<span id="ii.x-p20.2"></span>.**
*But he knew their thoughts* If Matthew states the truth, they had
openly declared by their language what was in their minds; and therefore
Christ replies not to *their secret thoughts,* but to express words. But
both may be true, that they spoke plainly, and yet that Christ discerned
their secret *thoughts*; for they did not openly avow their designs, and
Matthew himself tells us that their question was intended to take Christ
by surprise; and, consequently, Luke means nothing more than that Christ
was aware of their insidious designs, though not expressed in words.

<span id="ii.x-p21"></span><span id="ii.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p22"></span>**<span id="ii.x-p22.2"></span>[Mark
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005)<span id="ii.x-p22.2"></span>.**
*And when he had looked around upon them with indignation* To convince
us that this was a just and holy anger, Mark explains the reason of it
to be, that he was *grieved on account of the blindness of their
hearts.* First, then, Christ *is grieved,* because men who have been
instructed in the Law of God are so grossly *blind;* but as it was
malice that *blinded* them, his *grief* is accompanied by *indignation.*
This is the true moderation of zeal, to be distressed about the
destruction of wicked men, and, at the same time, to be filled with
wrath at their ungodliness. Again, as this passage assures us, that
Christ was not free from human passions, we infer from it, that the
passions themselves are not sinful, provided there be no excess. In
consequence of the corruption of our nature, we do not preserve
moderation; and our anger, even when it rests on proper grounds, is
never free from sin. With Christ the case was different; for not only
did his nature retain its original purity, but he was a perfect pattern
of righteousness. We ought therefore to implore from heaven the Spirit
of God to correct our excesses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc32011.htm#fr_84) <span
id="ii.x-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.x-p13.1"></span>N’ont point de
honte de condamner;” — “are not ashamed to condemn.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 12:14-21; Mark 3:6-12; Luke 6:11](cc32012)
