[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32081)  [Next](cc32083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxxi-p1.1"></span>[Luke
19:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041)<span
id="ii.lxxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxxi-p2.1"></span>[Luke
19:41-44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041)<span
id="ii.lxxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p3"></span> **41**. And when he came near, he beheld
the city, and wept over it, saying, **42**. O if even thou, and at least
in this thy day, hadst known and considered the things which belong to
thy peace! but now they are hid from thy eyes. **43**. For the days will
come upon thee, and thy enemies will encompass thee with a rampart;
 <span id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719) and will enclose thee, and will
shut thee in on all sides; **44**. And will level thee with the ground,
and thy children who are within thee; and will not leave in thee one
stone upon another; because thou didst not know the time of thy
visitation.

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p8"></span><span id="ii.lxxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p9"></span>**41.** *And wept over it.* As there was
nothing which Christ more ardently desired than to execute the office
which the Father had committed to him, and as he knew that the end of
his calling was to gather *the lost sheep of the house of Israel,*
(<span id="ii.lxxxi-p9.1"></span>[Mt
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span
id="ii.lxxxi-p9.1"></span>,) he wished that his coming might bring
salvation to all. This was the reason why he was moved with compassion,
and *wept over* the approaching destruction of the city of Jerusalem.
For while he reflected that this was the sacred abode which God had
chosen, in which the covenant of eternal salvation should dwell — the
sanctuary from which salvation would go forth to the whole world, it was
impossible that he should not deeply deplore its ruin. And when he saw
the people, who had been adopted to the hope of eternal life, perish
miserably through their ingratitude and wickedness, we need not wonder
if he could not refrain from tears.

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p10"></span>As to those who think it strange that
Christ should bewail an evil which he had it in his power to remedy,
this difficulty is quickly removed. For as he came down from heaven,
that, clothed in human flesh, he might be the witness and minister of
the salvation which comes from God, so he actually took upon him human
feelings, as far as the office which he had undertaken allowed. And it
is necessary that we should always give due consideration to the
character which he sustains, when he speaks, or when he is employed in
accomplishing the salvation of men; as in this passage, in order that he
may execute faithfully his Father’s commission, he must necessarily
desire that the fruit of the redemption should come to the whole body of
the elect people. Since, therefore, he was given to this people as a
minister for salvation, it is in accordance with the nature of his
office that he should deplore its destruction. He was God, I
acknowledge; but on all occasions when it was necessary that he should
perform the office of teacher, his divinity rested, and was in a manner
concealed, that it might not hinder what belonged to him as Mediator. By
this *weeping* he proved not only that he loved, like a brother, those
for whose sake he became man, but also that God made to flow into human
nature the Spirit of fatherly love.

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p11"></span><span id="ii.lxxxi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p12"></span>**42.** *O if even thou hadst known!* The
discourse is pathetic, and therefore abrupt; for we know that by those
who are under the influence of vehement passion their feelings are not
more than half-expressed. Besides, two feelings are here mingled; for
not only does Christ bewail the destruction of the city, but he likewise
reproaches the ungrateful people with the deepest guilt, in rejecting
the salvation which was offered to them, and drawing down on themselves
a dreadful judgment of God. The word *even*, which is interwoven with
it, is emphatic; for Christ silently contrasts Jerusalem with the other
cities of Judea, or rather, of the whole world, and the meaning is: “If
Even *thou*, who art distinguished by a remarkable privilege above the
whole world, — if *thou at least,* (I say,) who art a heavenly sanctuary
in the earth, *hadst known* *”* This is immediately followed by another
amplification taken from the time: “Though hitherto thou hast wickedly
and outrageously rebelled against God, *now at least* there is time for
repentance.” For he means that the day is now at hand, which had been
appointed by the eternal purpose of God for the salvation of Jerusalem,
and had been foretold by the prophets. *Thus* (says Isaiah) *is the
accepted time*, *this is the day of salvation*, (<span
id="ii.lxxxi-p12.1"></span>[Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)<span id="ii.lxxxi-p12.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.lxxxi-p12.2"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="ii.lxxxi-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p13"></span>Seek the Lord while he may be found; call
upon him while he is near,  
(<span id="ii.lxxxi-p13.2"></span>[Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006)<span
id="ii.lxxxi-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p14"></span>*The things which belong to thy peace*
Under the word *peace* he includes, according to the meaning of the
Hebrew phrase, all that is essential to happiness. Nor does he simply
say, that Jerusalem did not *know her peace, but the things which
belonged to her peace;* for it frequently happens that men are far from
being unacquainted with their happiness, but they are ignorant of the
way and means, (as we say,) because they are blinded by their
wickedness. Now since the compassion is mingled with reproach, let us
observe, that men deserve the heavier punishment in proportion to the
excellence of the gifts which they have received, because to other sins
there is added an impious profanation of heavenly grace. Secondly, let
us observe, that the nearer God approaches to us, and holds out the
light of sound doctrine, the less excusable are we, if we neglect this
opportunity. The gate of salvation, indeed, is always open; but as God
is sometimes silent, it is no ordinary privilege, when He invites us to
himself with a loud voice, and in a familiar manner, and therefore the
contempt will be visited by severer punishment.

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p15"></span>*But now they are hid from thy eyes.*
This is not said for the purpose of extenuating the guilt of Jerusalem;
for, on the contrary, it marks with disgrace the monstrous stupidity of
that city, that, when God is present, it does not perceive him. I do
acknowledge that it belongs to God alone to open the eyes of the blind,
and that no man is qualified for understanding the mysteries of the
heavenly kingdom, unless God enlighten him inwardly by his Spirit; but
it does not follow from this that they who perish through their own
brutal blindness are excusable. Christ intended also to remove an
offense, which might otherwise have perplexed the ignorant and weak; for
when the eyes of all were directed to that city, his example might have
very great influence in both respects, either for evil or for good. That
no man then may be perplexed by its unbelief and proud contempt of the
Gospel, *Jerusalem* is condemned for disgraceful blindness.

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p16"></span><span id="ii.lxxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p17"></span>**43.** *For the days shall come upon
thee.* He now assumes, as it were, the character of a judge, and
addresses Jerusalem with greater severity. In like manner the prophets
also, though they shed tears over the destruction of those about whom
they ought to feel anxiety, yet they summon up courage to pronounce
severe threatenings, because they know that not only are they commanded
to watch over the salvation of men, but that they have also been
appointed to be the heralds of the judgment of God. Under these terms
Jesus declares that Jerusalem will suffer dreadful punishment, *because
she did not know the time of her visitation;* that is, because she
despised the Redeemer who had been exhibited to her, and did not embrace
his grace. Let the fearful nature of the punishments which she endured
now alarm us, that we may not, by our carelessness, extinguish the light
of salvation, but may be careful to receive the grace of God, and may
even run with rigor to meet it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_719"></span>[720](cc32082.htm#fr_719) <span
id="ii.lxxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p4"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxxi-p4.1"></span>T’assiegeront de rempars;” — “will besiege
thee with ramparts.”

<span id="ii.lxxxi-p5"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc32083)
