[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32017)  [Next](cc32019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
12:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038)<span
id="ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xvii-p1.2"></span>[Luke
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#029)<span id="ii.xvii-p1.2"></span>-32

<span id="ii.xvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
12:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038)<span
id="ii.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#029)<span id="ii.xvii-p3.1"></span>-32

<span id="ii.xvii-p4"></span> **38**. Then some of the scribes and
Pharisees asked him, saying, Master, we desire to see a sign from thee.
**39**. But he answering said to them, A wicked and adulterous
generation seeketh a sign,  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) and
a sign shall not be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet.
**40**. For as Jonah was in the belly of the whale three days and three
nights, so will the Son of man be three days and three nights in the
heart of the earth. **41**. The men of Nineveh will rise in judgment
with this generation, and will condemn it: for they repented at the
preaching of Jonah; and, lo, a greater than Jonah is here.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) **42**. The queen of the south will
rise in judgment with this generation, and will condemn it: for she came
from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, lo, a
greater than Solomon is here.  <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="ii.xvii-p8"></span> **16**. And others tempting, sought from
him a sign from heaven. — (A little after.) **29**. And while the
multitudes were crowding together, he began to say, This is a wicked
generation: it seeketh a sign, and a sign shall not be given to it,
except the sign of Jonah the prophet. **30**. For as Jonah was a sign to
the Ninevites, so shall the Son of man be also to this nation.
**31**. The queen of the south will rise in judgment with the men of
this nation, and will condemn them: for she came from the ends of the
earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, lo, a great than Solomon is
here. **32**. The men of Nineveh will rise in judgment with this nation,
and will condemn it: for they were brought to repentance by the
preaching of Jonah; and, lo, a greater than Jonah is here.

<span id="ii.xvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p11"></span>**<span id="ii.xvii-p11.2"></span>[Luke
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#016)<span
id="ii.xvii-p11.2"></span>.** *And others tempting sought from him a
sign.* Something similar to this is afterwards related by Matthew,
(<span id="ii.xvii-p11.3"></span>[Mt
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#004)<span id="ii.xvii-p11.3"></span>,)
and by Mark, (<span id="ii.xvii-p11.4"></span>[Mark
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012)<span id="ii.xvii-p11.4"></span>.)
Hence it is evident, that Christ repeatedly attacked them on this
subject, so that there was no end to the wickedness of those men who had
once resolved  <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) to oppose the
truth. There can be no doubt that they ask a sign, in order to plead, as
a plausible pretense for their unbelief, that Christ’s calling has not
been duly attested. They do not express such submissiveness as to be
prepared to yield to two or three miracles, and still less to be
satisfied with a single miracle; but as I hinted a little before, they
apologize for not believing the Gospel on this pretense, that Christ
shows no sign of it from heaven.  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) He had already performed miracles
before their eyes sufficiently numerous and manifest; but as if these
were not enough for the confirmation of doctrine, they wish to have
something exhibited from heaven, by which God will, as it were, make a
visible appearance. They call him *Master,* according to custom; for
such was the appellation given at that time to all scribes and
expounders of the law. But they do not acknowledge him to be a prophet
of God, till he produce a testimony from heaven. The meaning therefore
is: “Since thou professest to be a teacher and Master, if thou desirest
that we should be thy disciples, let God declare from heaven that He is
the Author of thy teaching, and let Him confirm thy calling by a
miracle.”

<span id="ii.xvii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p15"></span>**<span id="ii.xvii-p15.2"></span>[Matthew
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)<span
id="ii.xvii-p15.2"></span>.** *A wicked generation* <span
id="ii.xvii-p15.3"></span>He does not merely charge that age with
malice, but pronounces the Jews—or at least the scribes, and those who
resembled them—to be a *wicked nation;* <span
id="ii.xvii-p15.4"></span>thus declaring that they labored under a
hereditary disease of obstinacy. The word <span
id="ii.xvii-p15.5"></span>γενεά<span id="ii.xvii-p15.6"></span>
sometimes denotes an *age,* <span id="ii.xvii-p15.7"></span>and
sometimes a *people* <span id="ii.xvii-p15.8"></span>or *nation.* <span
id="ii.xvii-p15.9"></span>He calls them *adulterous,* <span
id="ii.xvii-p15.10"></span>that is, spurious or illegitimate,  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) <span id="ii.xvii-p16.2"></span>
because they were degenerated from the holy fathers; as the prophets
reproach the men of their age with being not the descendants of Abraham,
but the ungodly seed of Canaan.

<span id="ii.xvii-p17"></span>*Seeks a sign.* This leads to the inquiry,
Does Christ address them with such harshness of language, because they
wished to have a sign given them? for on other occasions God manifests
that He is not so much displeased on this account. Gideon asks *a sign,*
(<span id="ii.xvii-p17.2"></span>[Jud
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#017)<span id="ii.xvii-p17.2"></span>,)
and God is not angry, but grants his request; and though Gideon becomes
importunate and asks another sign, yet God condescends to his weakness.
Hezekiah does not ask a *sign,* and it is offered to him, though
unsolicited, (<span id="ii.xvii-p17.3"></span>[Isa.
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008)<span id="ii.xvii-p17.3"></span>.)
Ahaz is severely blamed for refusing to ask a sign, as the prophet had
enjoined him to do, (<span id="ii.xvii-p17.4"></span>[Isa
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#011)<span id="ii.xvii-p17.4"></span>.)
It is not solely, therefore, because they *ask a sign,* that Christ
makes this attack upon the scribes, but because they are ungrateful to
God, wickedly despise so many of his wonderful works, and try to find a
subterfuge for not obeying his word. What a display was this, I do not
say of indifference, but of malice, in shutting their eyes against so
many *signs!* There was, therefore, no proper ground for this annoyance;
and they had no other object in view than to appear to have a good
reason for rejecting Christ. Paul condemns their posterity for the same
crime, when he says that the Jews *require a sign,* (<span
id="ii.xvii-p17.5"></span>[1Co
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022)<span id="ii.xvii-p17.5"></span>)

<span id="ii.xvii-p18"></span>*A sign shall not be given to it.* They
had already been convicted by various miracles, and Christ does not
abstain from exerting his power among them, for the purpose of rendering
them inexcusable, but only means that *one sign* would stand for all,
because they were unworthy of having their ungodly desire granted. “Let
them rest satisfied,” says he, “with this sign, that as Jonah, brought
up from the bottom of the sea, preached to the Ninevites, so they will
hear the voice of a prophet risen from the dead.” The most of
commentators, I am aware, display greater ingenuity in expounding this
passage; but as the resemblance between Christ and Jonah does not hold
at every point, we must inquire in what respect Christ compares himself
to Jonah. For my own part, leaving the speculations of other men, I
think that Christ intends to mark out that single point of resemblance
which I have already hinted, that he will be their prophet after that he
is risen from the dead. “You despise,” he says, “the Son of God, who has
come down to you from heaven: but I am yet to die, and to rise from the
grave, and to speak to you after my resurrection, as Jonah came from the
bottom of the sea to Nineveh.” In this manner our Lord cuts off every
pretense for their wicked demands, by threatening that he will be their
Prophet after his resurrection, since they do not receive him while
clothed with mortal flesh.

<span id="ii.xvii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p20"></span>**<span id="ii.xvii-p20.2"></span>[Luke
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#030)<span
id="ii.xvii-p20.2"></span>.** *As Jonah was a sign to the Ninevites.* He
declares that he will be *a sign* to them, as *Jonah* was to the
inhabitants of Nineveh. But the word *sign* is not taken in its ordinary
sense, as pointing out something, but as denoting what is widely removed
from the ordinary course of nature. In this sense Jonah’s mission was
miraculous, when he was brought out of the belly of the fish, as if from
the grave, to call *the Ninevites* to repentance. *Three days and three
nights* This is in accordance with a well-known figure of speech.  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) As the *night* is an appendage to the
*day,* or rather, as the day consists of two parts, light and darkness,
he expresses a day by a day and a night, and where there was half a day,
he puts down a whole day.

<span id="ii.xvii-p22"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p23"></span>**<span id="ii.xvii-p23.2"></span>[Matthew
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041)<span
id="ii.xvii-p23.2"></span>.** *The men of Nineveh will rise in
judgment.* Having spoken of the Ninevites, Christ takes occasion to show
that the scribes and others, by whom his doctrine is rejected, are worse
than the Ninevites were. “Ungodly men,” he says, “who never had heard a
word of the true God, repented at the voice of an unknown and foreign
person who came to them; while this country, which is the sanctuary of
heavenly doctrine, hears not the Son of God, and the promised Redeemer.”
Here lies the contrast which is implied in the comparison. We know who
the Ninevites were, men altogether unaccustomed to hear prophets, and
destitute of the true doctrine. *Jonah* had no rank to secure their
respect, but was likely to be rejected as a foreigner. The Jews, on the
other hand, boasted that among them the Word of God had its seat and
habitation. If they had beheld Christ with pure eyes,  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) they must have acknowledged, not only
that he was a teacher sent from heaven, but that he was the Messiah, and
the promised Author of Salvation. But if that nation was convicted of
desperate ungodliness, for despising Christ while he spoke to them on
earth, we are worse than all the unbelievers that ever existed, if the
Son of God, now that he inhabits his sanctuary in heaven, and addresses
us with a heavenly voice, does not bring us to obey him. Whether *the
men of Nineveh* were truly and perfectly turned to God I judge it
unnecessary to inquire. It is enough for the present purpose that they
were so deeply affected by the teaching of Jonah, as to have their minds
directed to repentance.

<span id="ii.xvii-p25"></span><span id="ii.xvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p26"></span>**42.** *The queen of the south.* As
Ethiopia lies in a southerly direction from Judea, I willingly concur
with Josephus and other writers, who assert that she was the queen of
Ethiopia. In sacred history she is called *the queen of Sheba,* (<span
id="ii.xvii-p26.2"></span>[2Ch
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001)<span id="ii.xvii-p26.2"></span>.)
We must not suppose this *Sheba* to be the country of *Saba,* which
rather lay toward the east, but a town situated in Meroe, an island on
the Nile, which was the metropolis of the kingdom. Here, too, we must
attend to the points of contrast. A woman who had not been at all
educated in the school of God, was induced, by the desire of
instruction, to come from a distant region to Solomon, an earthly king;
while the Jews, who had been instructed in the divine law, reject their
highest and only teacher, the Prince of all the prophets. The word
*condemn* relates not to the persons, but to the fact itself, and the
example which it yields.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc32018.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>Ausquels
il respondit, et leur dit, La nation meschante et adultere *(ou,
bastarde)* requiert un signe;” — “to whom he answered, and said to them,
The wicked and adulterous *(or, bastard)* nation demandeth a sign.”

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc32018.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ii.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>Et voyci,
il y a ici plus que Ionas;” — “and, lo, there is here a greater than
Jonah.”

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc32018.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ii.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>Et voyci,
il y a ici plus que Salomon;” — “and, lo, there is here a greater than
Solomon.”

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc32018.htm#fr_162) <span
id="ii.xvii-p11.5"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p12.1"></span>Qui une
fois s’estoyent endurcis;” — “who had once become hardened.”

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc32018.htm#fr_163) <span
id="ii.xvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>Que
Christ ne leur monstre aucun signe d’enhaut qui soit pour seelet ceste
doctrine;” — “that Christ shows them no sign from above that is
sufficient to seal this doctrine.”

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc32018.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ii.xvii-p15.11"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p16.1"></span>Il
entend qu’ils sont enfans bastars;” — “he means that they are bastard
children.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc32018.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ii.xvii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p21.1"></span>Quant
aux *trois nuits,* il y a ici (cornme on scait bien) une figure que les
Grecs et Latins appellent Synecdoche;” — “as to the *three nights,*
there is here (as is well known) a figure which the Greek and Latin
writers call Synecdoche.”

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc32018.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ii.xvii-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvii-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xvii-p24.1"></span>D’un
oeil pur, et sans mauvaise affection;” — “with a pure eye, and without
evil disposition.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 13:1-17; Mark 4:1-12, 24-25; Luke 8:1-10, 18;
10:23-24](cc32019)
