[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32077)  [Next](cc32079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
20:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxvii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
10:46-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p1.2"></span>;  
<span id="ii.lxxvii-p1.4"></span>[Luke
18:35-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p1.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
20:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
10:46-52](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#046)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p4"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
18:35-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p5"></span> **29**. And while they were departing
from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. **30**. And, lo, two blind
men sitting near the road, when they heard that Jesus was passing by,
cried aloud, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David.
**31**. And the multitude rebuked them, that they might be silent; but
they cried out the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of
David. **32**. And Jesus stood, and called them, and said, What do you
wish that I should do to you? **33**. They say to him, Lord, that our
eyes may be opened. **34**. And Jesus, moved with compassion, touched
their eyes; and immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed
him.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p7"></span> **46**. And they come to Jericho: and
while they was departing from the city Jericho, and his disciples, and a
great multitude, Bartimeus, son of Timeus, a blind man, was sitting hear
the road begging. **47**. And when he heard that it was Jesus of
Nazareth, he began to cry aloud, and to say, Jesus, Son of David, have
mercy on me. **48**. And many rebuked him, that he might be silent: but
he cried out so much the more, Son of David, have mercy on me.
**49**. And Jesus stood, and commanded him to be called. And they call
the blind man, saying to him, Be of good courage, rise; he calleth thee.
**50**. And he, throwing away his mantle, arose, and came to Jesus.
**51**. And Jesus answering, saith to him, What dost thou wish that I
should do to thee? And the blind man said to him, Master,  <span
id="fr_667"></span>[668](#fn_667) that I may receive sight. **52** And
Jesus said to him, Go away; thy faith hath cured thee. And immediately
he received sight, and followed Jesus in the way.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p10"></span> **35**. And it happened that, while he
was approaching Jericho, a certain blind man was sitting near the road
begging: **36**. And when he heard a multitude passing by, he asked what
it was. **37**. And they said to him, that Jesus of Nazareth was passing
by. **38**. And he cried out, saying, Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on
me. **39**. And they that were going before rebuked him, that he might
be silent: but he cried out so much the more, Son of David, have mercy
on me. **40**. And Jesus, standing still, commanded him to be brought to
him: and while he was approaching, he asked him, **41**. Saying, What
dost thou wish that I should do to thee? And he said, Lord, that I may
receive sight. **42**. Then Jesus said to him, Receive sight: thy faith
hath cured thee. **43**. And immediately he received sight, and followed
him, glorifying God: and all the people when they saw it, gave praise to
God.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p12"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p13"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p14"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p14.2"></span>.** *And while they were departing from
Jericho. Osiander* has resolved to display his ingenuity by making four
blind men out of one. But nothing can be more frivolous than this
supposition. Having observed that the Evangelists differ in a few
expressions, he imagined that *one blind man received sight* when they
were entering into the city, and that the second, and other two,
*received sight* when Christ *was departing from it.* But all the
circumstances agree so completely, that no person of sound judgment will
believe them to be different narratives. Not to mention other matters,
when Christ’s followers had endeavored to put the first to silence, and
saw him cured contrary to their expectation, would they immediately have
made the same attempt with the other three? But it is unnecessary to go
into particulars, from which any man may easily infer that it is one and
the same event which is related.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p15"></span>But there is a puzzling contradiction in
this respect, that *Matthew* and *Mark* say that the miracle was
performed on *one* or on *two blind men,* when Christ had already
*departed from the city;* while Luke relates that it was done before he
came to the city. Besides, *Mark* and *Luke* speak of not more than *one
blind man*, while *Matthew* mentions *two*. But as we know that it
frequently occurs in the Evangelists, that in the same narrative one
passes by what is mentioned by the others, and, on the other hand,
states more clearly what they have omitted, it ought not to be looked
upon as strange or unusual in the present passage. My conjecture is,
that, while Christ was approaching to the city, the *blind man cried
out,* but that, as he was not heard on account of the noise, he placed
himself in the way, *as they were departing from the city,*  <span
id="fr_668"></span>[669](#fn_668) and then was at length called by
Christ. And so *Luke,* commencing with what was true, does not follow
out the whole narrative, but passes over Christ’s stay in the city;
while the other Evangelists attend only to the time which was nearer to
the miracle. There is probability in the conjecture that, as Christ
frequently, when he wished to try the faith of men, delayed for a short
time to relieve them, so he subjected this *blind man* to the same
scrutiny.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p17"></span>The second difficulty may be speedily
removed; for we have seen, on a former occasion, that Mark and *Luke*
speak of *one* demoniac as having been cured, while *Matthew*, as in the
present instance, mentions *two*, (<span id="ii.lxxvii-p17.1"></span>[Mt
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p17.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxvii-p17.2"></span>[Mr
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#002)<span id="ii.lxxvii-p17.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.lxxvii-p17.3"></span>[Lu
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#027)<span id="ii.lxxvii-p17.3"></span>
 <span id="fr_669"></span>[670](#fn_669) ) And yet this involves no
contradiction between them; but it may rather be conjectured with
probability, that at first *one blind man* implored the favor of Christ,
and that another was excited by his example, and that in this way *two*
persons *received sight* *Mark* and *Luke* speak of *one* only, either
because he was better known, or because in him the demonstration of
Christ’s power was not less remarkable than it was in both. It certainly
appears to have been on account of his having been extensively known
that he was selected by *Mark*, who gives both his own name and that of
his father: *Bartimeus, son of Timeus* By doing so, he does not claim
for him either illustrious descent or wealth; for he was a beggar of the
lowest class. Hence it appears that the miracle was more remarkable in
his person, because his calamity had been generally known. This appears
to me to be the reason why *Mark* and *Luke* mention him only, and say
nothing about the other, who was a sort of inferior appendage. But
*Matthew*, who was an eye-witness,  <span
id="fr_670"></span>[671](#fn_670) did not choose to pass by even this
person, though less known.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p20"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p21"></span>**30.** *Have mercy on me, O Lord.* I
stated, a little ago, that there was at first but *one* who *cried out*,
but the other was induced by a similar necessity to join him. They
confer on Christ no ordinary honor, when they request him to *have
mercy*, and relieve them; for they must have been convinced that he had
in his power the assistance or remedy which they needed. But their faith
is still more clearly exhibited by their acknowledgment of him as
Messiah, to whom we know that the Jews gave this designation, Son *of
David* They therefore apply to Christ, not only as some Prophet, but as
that person whom God had promised to be the only Author of salvation.
The *cry* proved the ardor of the desire; for, though they knew that
what they said exposed them to the hatred of many, who were highly
displeased with the honor done to Christ, their fear was overcome by the
ardor of desire, so that they did not refrain, on this account, from
raising their voice aloud.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p22"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p23"></span>**31.** *And the multitude reproved
them.* It is surprising that the disciples of Christ, who follow him
through a sense of duty and of respect, should wish to drive wretched
men from the favor of Christ, and, so far as lies in them, to prevent
the exercise of his power. But it frequently happens that the greater
part of those who profess the name of Christ, instead of inviting us to
him, rather hinder or delay our approach. If Satan endeavored to throw
obstacles in the way of *two blind men*, by means of pious and simple
persons, who were induced by some sentiments of religion to follow
Christ, how much more will he succeed in accomplishing it by means of
hypocrites and traitors, if we be not strictly on our guard.
Perseverance is therefore necessary to overcome every difficulty, and
the more numerous the obstacles are which Satan throws in the way, the
more powerfully ought we to be excited to earnestness in prayer, as we
see that the *blind men* redoubled their *cry*

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p24"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p25"></span>**32.** *What do you wish that I should
do to you?* He gently and kindly asks what they desire; for he had
determined to grant their requests. There is no reason to doubt that
they prayed by a special movement of the Holy Spirit; for, as the Lord
does not intend to grant to all persons deliverance from bodily
diseases, so neither does he permit them simply to pray for it. A rule
has been prescribed for us what we ought to ask, and in what manner, and
to what extent; and we are not at liberty to depart from that rule,
unless the Lord, by a secret movement of the Spirit, suggest to us some
special prayer, which rarely happens. Christ puts the question to them,
not for their sake as individuals, but for the sake of all the people;
for we know how the world swallows God’s benefits without perceiving
them, unless they are stimulated and aroused. Christ, therefore, by his
voice, awakens the assembled crowd to observe the miracle, as he awakens
them shortly afterwards by a visible sign, when he opens their eyes by
touching them.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p26"></span>**34.** *And Jesus, moved with
compassion, etc.* <span id="ii.lxxvii-p26.1"></span>Σπλαγχνισθείς*,
moved with compassion*<span id="ii.lxxvii-p26.2"></span>, <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p26.3"></span>is not the participle of the same verb which
Matthew had just now employed in reference to the *blind man,* <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p26.4"></span>ἐλέησον<span id="ii.lxxvii-p26.5"></span>,
*have mercy*  <span id="fr_671"></span>[672](#fn_671) <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p27.2"></span>They implored the *mercy* <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p27.3"></span>of Christ, that he might relieve their
wretchedness; but now the Evangelist expresses that Christ was induced
to cure them, not only by undeserved goodness, but because he pitied
their distress. For the metaphor is taken from the *bowels*<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p27.4"></span>, <span id="ii.lxxvii-p27.5"></span>(<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p27.6"></span>σπλάγχνα<span id="ii.lxxvii-p27.7"></span>,)
in which dwells that kindness and mutual compassion which prompts us to
assist our neighbors.

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p28"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p29"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p29.2"></span>[Mark
10:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#052)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p29.2"></span>.** *Thy faith hath saved thee* By the word
*faith* is meant not only a confident hope of recovering sight, but a
loftier conviction, which was, that this *blind man* had acknowledged
Jesus to be the Messiah whom God had promised. Nor must we imagine that
it was only some confused knowledge; for we have already seen that this
confession was taken from the Law and the Prophets. For the *blind man*
did not at random bestow on Christ the name of *Son of David*, but
embraced him as that person whose coming he had been taught by the
divine predictions to expect. Now Christ attributes it to faith that
*the blind man received sight;* for, though the power and grace of God
sometimes extend even to unbelievers, yet no man enjoys His benefits in
a right and profitable manner, unless he receive them by faith; nay, the
use of the gifts of God is so far from being advantageous to
unbelievers, that it is even hurtful. And therefore, when Christ says,
*thy faith hath saved thee,* the word *saved* is not limited to an
outward *cure*, but includes also the *health* and *safety* of the soul;
as if Christ had said, that by *faith* the blind man obtained that God
was gracious to him, and granted his wish. And if it was in regard *to
faith* that God bestowed his favor on the blind man, it follows that he
was justified by *faith*

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p30"></span><span id="ii.lxxvii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p31"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p31.2"></span>[Matthew
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#034)<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p31.2"></span>.** *And followed him.* This was an
expression of gratitude,  <span id="fr_672"></span>[673](#fn_672) when
the blind men became *followers* of Christ; for, though it is uncertain
how long they discharged this duty, yet it showed a grateful mind, that
they presented themselves to many, in that journey, as mirrors of the
grace of Christ. Luke adds, that *the people gave praise to God,* which
tends to prove the certainty of the miracle.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_667"></span>[668](cc32078.htm#fr_667) <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p8"></span> “Rabboni;” — “<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p8.1"></span>Maistre.”

<span id="fn_668"></span>[669](cc32078.htm#fr_668) <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvii-p16.1"></span>Mais
pource qu’il ne peut estre ouy a cause du bruit du peuple, qu’il s’en
alla, l’autre porte de la ville par laquelle Christ devoit sortir, pour
l’attendre la au chemin;” — “but, because he could not be heard on
account of the noise of the people, that he went away to the other gate
by which Christ was to go out, to wait for him there on the road.”

<span id="fn_669"></span>[670](cc32078.htm#fr_669) <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p17.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p18"></span> See *Harmony*, vol. 1 p. 428.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[671](cc32078.htm#fr_670) <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvii-p19.1"></span>Qui
avoit este present au miracle;” — “who had been present at the miracle.”

<span id="fn_671"></span>[672](cc32078.htm#fr_671) <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p26.6"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p27"></span> “<span
id="ii.lxxvii-p27.1"></span>Quand ils disoyent, *Fils de David*, *aye
misericorde de nous;”* — “when they said, *Son of David*, *have mercy on
us*.*”*

<span id="fn_672"></span>[673](cc32078.htm#fr_672) <span
id="ii.lxxvii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxvii-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxvii-p32.1"></span>Ceci
a este un signe de recognoissance du bien receu de Christ;” — “this was
an expression of gratitude for the favor received from Christ.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 19:1-10](cc32079)
