[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32016)  [Next](cc32018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 12:46-50; <span
id="ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Mark
3:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#031)<span
id="ii.xvi-p1.1"></span>;  
<span id="ii.xvi-p1.3"></span>[Luke
11:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027)<span
id="ii.xvi-p1.3"></span>; 8:19-21

<span id="ii.xvi-p2"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
12:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#046)<span id="ii.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p3"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
3:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#031)<span id="ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p4"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
11:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027)<span id="ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p5"></span> **46**. And while he was still talking to
the multitudes, lo, his mother and his brethren stood without, desiring
to speak to him. **47**. And one said to him, Lo, thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to speak to thee. **48**. But he
answering said to him who had told him, Who is my mother, or who are my
brethren? **49**. And stretching out his hand toward his disciples, he
said, Lo, my mother and my brethren. **50**. For whosoever shall do the
will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and
mother.

<span id="ii.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvi-p7"></span> **31**. And his mother and brethren came,
and standing without, sent to him to call him.  <span
id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) **32**. And the multitude was sitting
around him, and they say to him, Lo, thy mother and thy brethren without
seek thee. **33**. And he answered, saying to them, Who is my mother and
my brethren? **34**. And when he had looked all around on the disciples
sitting around him, he said, Lo, my mother and my brethren. **35**. For
he who shall do the will of God is my brother, and my sister, and
mother.

<span id="ii.xvi-p9"></span> **27**. And it happened while he was saying
these things, a certain woman from among the multitude, raising her
voice, said to him, Blessed is the womb that bore thee, and the breasts
which thou hath sucked. **28**. but he said, Nay, rather, blessed are
they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

<span id="ii.xvi-p10"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>[Luke
8:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#019)<span id="ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p11"></span>**19**. And his mother and his brethren
came to him, and could not reach him on account of the crowd.
**20**. And it was related and told him, Thy mother and thy brethren
stand without, desiring to see thee. **21**. Who answering said to them,
My mother and my brethren are those who hear the word of God, and do it.
 <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152)

<span id="ii.xvi-p13"></span> 

<span id="ii.xvi-p14"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p15"></span>**<span id="ii.xvi-p15.2"></span>[Luke
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027)<span
id="ii.xvi-p15.2"></span>.** *Blessed is the womb.* By this eulogium the
woman intended to magnify the excellence of Christ; for she had no
reference to Mary,  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) whom,
perhaps, she had never seen. And yet it tends in a high degree to
illustrate the glory of Christ, that she pronounces *the womb that bore
him* to be noble and *blessed.* Nor was the blessing inappropriate, but
in strict accordance with the manner of Scripture; for we know that
offspring, and particularly when endued with distinguished virtues, is
declared to be a remarkable gift of God, preferable to all others. It
cannot even be denied that God conferred the highest honor on Mary, by
choosing and appointing her to be the mother of his Son. And yet
Christ’s reply is so far from assenting to this female voice, that it
contains an indirect reproof.

<span id="ii.xvi-p17"></span>*Nay, rather, blessed are they that hear
the word of God.* We see that Christ treats almost as a matter of
indifference that point on which the woman had set a high value. And
undoubtedly what she supposed to be Mary’s highest honor was far
inferior to the other favors which she had received; for it was of
vastly greater importance to be regenerated by the Spirit of God than to
conceive Christ, according to the flesh, in her womb; to have Christ
living spiritually within her than to suckle him with her breasts. In a
word, the highest happiness and glory of the holy Virgin consisted in
her being a member of his Son, so that the heavenly Father reckoned her
in the number of new creatures.

<span id="ii.xvi-p18"></span>In my opinion, however, it was for another
reason, and with a view to another object, that Christ now corrected the
saying of the woman. It was because men are commonly chargeable with
neglecting even those gifts of God, on which they gaze with
astonishment, and bestow the highest praise. This woman, in applauding
Christ, had left out what was of the very highest consequence, that in
him salvation is exhibited to all; and, therefore, it was a feeble
commendation, that made no mention of his grace and power, which is
extended to all. Christ justly claims for himself another kind of
praise, not that his mother alone is reckoned *blessed,* but that he
brings to us all perfect and eternal happiness. We never form a just
estimate of the excellence of Christ, till we consider for what purpose
he was given to us by the Father, and perceive the benefits which he has
brought to us, so that we who are wretched in ourselves may become happy
in him. But why does he say nothing about himself, and mention only the
word of God? It is because in this way he opens to us all his treasures;
for without the word he has no intercourse with *us,* nor we with him.
Communicating himself to us by *the word,* he rightly and properly calls
us to *hear and keep it,* that by faith he may become ours.

<span id="ii.xvi-p19"></span>We now see the difference between Christ’s
reply and the woman’s commendation; for the *blessedness,* which she had
limited to his own relatives, is a favor which he offers freely to all.
He shows that we ought to entertain no ordinary esteem for him, because
he has all *the treasures* of life, *blessedness,* and glory, *hidden in
him,* (<span id="ii.xvi-p19.1"></span>[Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="ii.xvi-p19.1"></span>,)
which he dispenses by the word, that they may be communicated to those
who embrace *the word* by faith; for God’s free adoption of us, which we
obtain by faith, is the key to the kingdom of heaven. The connection
between the two things must also be observed. We must first *hear,* and
then *keep;* for as *faith cometh by hearing,* (<span
id="ii.xvi-p19.2"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="ii.xvi-p19.2"></span>,)
it is in this way that the spiritual life must be commenced. Now as the
simple hearing is like a transitory *looking into a mirror,*  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) as James says, (1:23,) he likewise
adds, *the keeping of the word,* which means the effectual reception of
it, when it strikes its roots deep into our hearts, and yields its
fruit. The forgetful hearer, whose ears alone are struck by the outward
doctrine, gains no advantage. On the other hand, they who boast that
they are satisfied with the secret inspiration, and on this ground
disregard the outward preaching, shut themselves out from the heavenly
life. What the Son of God *hath joined let not men,* with wicked
rashness, *put asunder,* (<span id="ii.xvi-p20.2"></span>[Mt
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span id="ii.xvi-p20.2"></span>.)
The Papists discover amazing stupidity by singing, in honor of Mary,
those very words by which their superstition is expressly condemned, and
who, in giving thanks, detach the woman’s saying, and leave out the
correction.  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) But it was proper
that such a universal stupefaction should come upon those who
intentionally profane, at their pleasure, the sacred word of God.

<span id="ii.xvi-p22"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p23"></span>**<span id="ii.xvi-p23.2"></span>[Luke
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#019)<span id="ii.xvi-p23.2"></span>.**
*And his mother and his brethren came to him.* There is an apparent
discrepancy here between Luke and the other two Evangelists; for,
according to their arrangement of the narrative, they represent Christ’s
mother and cousins as having come, while he was discoursing about *the
unclean spirit,* while he refers to a different occasion, and mentions
only the woman’s exclamation, which we have just now explained. But we
know that the Evangelists were not very exact as to the order of dates,
or even in detailing minutely every thing that Christ did or said, so
that the difficulty is soon removed. Luke does not state at what precise
time Christ’s mother came to him; but what the other two Evangelists
relate before the parable of the sower he introduces after it. The
account which he gives of the exclamation of the woman from among the
multitude bears some resemblance to this narrative; for inconsiderate
zeal may have led her to exalt to the highest pitch what she imagined
that Christ had unduly lowered.

<span id="ii.xvi-p24"></span>All the three Evangelists agree in stating,
that while Christ was discoursing in the midst of a crowd of people, his
*mother and brethren came to him* The reason must have been either that
they were anxious about him, or that they were desirous of instruction;
for it is not without some good reason that they endeavor to approach
him, and it is not probable that those who accompanied the holy mother
were unbelievers. Ambrose and Chrysostom accuse Mary of ambition, but
without any probability. What necessity is there for such a conjecture,
when the testimony of the Spirit everywhere bestows commendation on her
distinguished piety and modesty? The warmth of natural affection may
have carried them beyond the bounds of propriety: this I do not deny,
but I have no doubt that they were led by pious zeal to seek his
society. Matthew relates that the message respecting their arrival was
brought by *one* individual: Mark and Luke say that he was informed by
many persons. But there is no inconsistency here; for the message which
his mother sent to call him would be communicated, as usually happens,
from one hand to another, till at length it reached him.

<span id="ii.xvi-p25"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p26"></span>**<span id="ii.xvi-p26.2"></span>[Matthew
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span
id="ii.xvi-p26.2"></span>.** *Who is my mother?* These words were
unquestionably intended to reprove Mary’s eagerness, and she certainly
acted improperly in attempting to interrupt the progress of his
discourse.  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) At the same time, by
disparaging the relationship of flesh and blood, our Lord teaches a very
useful doctrine; for he admits all his disciples and all believers to
the same honorable rank, as if they were his nearest relatives, or
rather he places them in the room of his *mother and brethren* Now this
statement is closely connected with the office of Christ; for he tells
us that he has been given, not to a small number of individuals, but to
all the godly, who are united in one body with him by faith. He tells us
also, that there is no tie of relationship more sacred than spiritual
relationship, because we ought not to think of him according to the
flesh, but according to the power of his Spirit which he has received
from the Father to renew men, so that those who are by nature the
polluted and accursed seed of Abraham begin to be by grace the holy and
heavenly sons of God. In like manner, Paul affirms that to *know Christ
after the flesh* is not to know him properly, (<span
id="ii.xvi-p27.2"></span>[2Co
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span id="ii.xvi-p27.2"></span>,)
because we ought rather to consider that renovation of the world, which
far exceeds human power, and which takes place when he forms us anew by
his Spirit to the image of God. To sum up the whole, this passage,
first, teaches us to behold Christ with the eyes of faith; and,
secondly, it informs us, that every one who is regenerated by the
Spirit, and gives himself up entirely to God for true justification, is
thus admitted to the closest union with Christ, and becomes one with
him.

<span id="ii.xvi-p28"></span><span id="ii.xvi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p29"></span>**50.** *For whosoever shall do the will of
my Father who is in heaven.* When he says that they *do the will of his
Father,* he does not mean that they fulfill, in a perfect manner, the
whole righteousness of the law; for in that sense the name *brother,*
which is here given by him to his disciples, would not apply to any man.
 <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) But his design is, to bestow
the highest commendation on faith, which is the source and origin of
holy obedience, and at the same time covers the defects and sins of the
flesh, that they may not be imputed. *This,* says Christ in a well-known
passage,

<span id="ii.xvi-p31"></span>is the will of my Father, that whosoever
seeth the Son, and believeth in him, may not perish, but have eternal
life,  
(<span id="ii.xvi-p31.2"></span>[Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)<span id="ii.xvi-p31.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xvi-p32"></span>Although these words seem to imply that
Christ has no regard to the ties of blood, yet we know that in reality
he paid the strictest attention to human order,  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) and discharged his lawful duties
towards relatives; but points out that, in comparison of spiritual
relationship, no regard, or very little, is due to the relationship of
the flesh. Let us therefore attend to this comparison, so as to perform
all that nature can justly claim, and, at the same time, not to be too
strongly attached to flesh and blood. Again, as Christ bestows on the
disciples of his Gospel the inestimable honor of being reckoned as his
brethren, we must be held guilty of the basest ingratitude, if we do not
disregard all the desires of the flesh, and direct every effort towards
this object.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc32017.htm#fr_151) <span
id="ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p8.1"></span>Et estans
dehors envoyerent quelques uns vers luy pour l’appeler;” — “and being
without, sent some persons to him to call him.”

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc32017.htm#fr_152) <span
id="ii.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p12.1"></span>Mais luy
respondant leur dit, Ceux-la sont ma mere et mes freres, qui oyent la
parole de Dieu, et la mettent en effect;” — “but he answering said to
them, Those are my mother and my brethren, who hear the word of God, and
put it in practice.”

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc32017.htm#fr_153) <span
id="ii.xvi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p16.1"></span>Il ne faut
pas penser qu’elle eust regard a Marie;” — “we must not suppose that she
had reference to Mary.”

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc32017.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ii.xvi-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p20.1"></span>Autant que
l’ouye simple est comme quand on regarde en un mirroir, et que la
memoire s’en escoule incontinent;” — “since the simple hearing is as
when we look into a mirror, and the remembrance of it immediately passes
away.”

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc32017.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ii.xvi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p21.1"></span>Et en
leurs graces apres le repas, ils prenent le dire de la femme, laissans
la correction qui estoit le principal;” — “and in their thanksgivings
after a meal, they employ the woman’s saying leaving out the correction,
which was the most important matter,”

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc32017.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ii.xvi-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p27.1"></span>Et de
faict, c’estoit mal avise a elle de vouloir ainsi rompre son propos,
lors qu’il enseignoit;” — “and in fact, it was foolish in her to wish to
break off his discourse in this manner, while he was teaching.”

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc32017.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ii.xvi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p30"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p30.1"></span>Ne
conviendroit a homme vivant;” — “would not apply to any man living.”

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc32017.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ii.xvi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xvi-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xvi-p33.1"></span>Qu’a la
verite il a observe et entretenu en toute sainctete l’ordre qui est
entre les hommes;” — “that in reality he observed and maintained.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 12:38-42; Luke 11:16, 29-32](cc32018)
