[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32045)  [Next](cc32047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p1"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001)<span id="ii.xlv-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xlv-p1.2"></span>[Mark
7:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#001)<span id="ii.xlv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001)<span id="ii.xlv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
7:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#001)<span id="ii.xlv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p4"></span>**1**. Then scribes and Pharisees, who had
come from Jerusalem, approach to Jesus, saying, **2**. Why do thy
disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not
their hands when they eat bread. **3**. But he answering said to them,
Why do you also transgress the commandment of God on account of  <span
id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389) your tradition? **4**. For God
commanded, saying, Honor thy father and mother; and, He that curseth
father or mother, dying let him die. **5**. But you say, Whosoever shall
say to his father or mother, Whatever is a gift from me shall profit
thee; and shall not honor his father or his mother. **6**. Therefore you
have annulled the commandment of God on account of your tradition.
**7**. Hypocrites, Isaiah hath justly prophesied concerning you, saying,
**8**. This people draw nigh to me with their mouth, and honor me with
the lips; but their heart is far distant from me. **9**. But in vain do
they worship me, teaching doctrines, commandments of men.

<span id="ii.xlv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlv-p7"></span>**1**. And the Pharisees, and some of the
scribes, who had come from Jerusalem, assemble to him. **2**. And when
they saw some of his disciples eat bread with common, that is to say,
with unwashen hands, they found fault. **3**. For the Pharisees. and all
the Jews, do not take food without frequently washing their hands,
holding the traditions of the elders; **4**. And returning from market,
they eat not till they have washed; and many other things are there
which they have undertaken to keep, namely, the washings of cups, and
pots, and brazen vessels, and beds. **5**. Then the Pharisees and
scribes ask him, saying, Why do not thy disciples walk according to the
tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? **6**. And
he answering said to them, Well hath Isaiah prophesied concerning you
hypocrites, as it is written, This people honor me with the lips, but
their heart is far from me. **7**. But in vain do they worship me,
teaching doctrines, commandments of men. **8**. For, laying aside the
commandments of God, you keep a tradition of men, the washings of pots
and cups, and many other things similar to these you do. **9**. And he
said to them, Well do you reject the commandment of God, that you may
keep your own tradition. **10**. For Moses said, Honor thy father and
mother; and, He that curseth father or mother, dying let him die.
**11**. But you say, If a man shall say to his father and mother, Every
Corban (that is, gift) that cometh from me shall profit thee.
**12**. And you do not permit him to do any thing more to his father or
his mother. **13**. Annulling the word of God by your tradition, which
you have delivered; and many things similar to this you do.

<span id="ii.xlv-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlv-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlv-p10"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p11"></span>**<span id="ii.xlv-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001)<span id="ii.xlv-p11.2"></span>.**
*Then scribes and Pharisees.* As the fault that is here corrected is not
only common but highly dangerous, the passage is particularly worthy of
our attention. We see the extraordinary insolence that is displayed by
men as to the form and manner of worshipping God; for they are
perpetually contriving new modes of worship, and when any one wishes to
be thought wiser than others, he displays his ingenuity on this subject.
I speak not of foreigners, but of the very domestics of the Church, on
whom God has conferred the peculiar honor of declaring with their lips
the rule of godliness. God has laid down the manner in which he wishes
that we should worship him, and has included in his law the perfection
of holiness. Yet a vast number of men, as if it were a light and trivial
matter to obey God and to keep what he enjoins, collect for themselves,
on every hand, many additions. Those who occupy places of authority
bring forward their inventions for this purpose, as if they were in
possession of something more perfect than the word of the Lord. This is
followed by the slow growth of tyranny; for, when men have once assumed
to themselves the right to issue commands, they demand a rigid adherence
to their laws, and do not allow the smallest iota to be left out, either
through contempt or through forgetfulness. The world cannot endure
lawful authority, and most violently rebels against enduring the Lord’s
yoke, and yet easily and willingly becomes entangled in the snares of
vain traditions; nay, such bondage appears to be, in the case of many,
an object of desire. Meanwhile, the worship of God is corrupted, of
which the first and leading principle is obedience. The authority of men
is preferred to the command of God. Sternly, and therefore tyrannically,
are the common people compelled to give their whole attention to
trifles. This passage teaches us, first, that all modes of worship
invented by men are displeasing to God, because he chooses that he alone
shall be heard, in order to train and instruct us in true godliness
according to his own pleasure; secondly, that those who are not
satisfied with the only law of God, and weary themselves by attending to
the traditions of men, are uselessly employed; thirdly, that an outrage
is committed against God, when the inventions of men are so highly
extolled, that the majesty of his law is almost lowered, or at least the
reverence for it is abated.

<span id="ii.xlv-p12"></span>*Scribes who had come from Jerusalem.* With
what design those *scribes* came to Jesus is not stated; but I think it
probable that their attention was excited by his fame, and that they
came with the desire of receiving instruction, provided that they should
approve of him as a competent teacher;  <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390) though it is possible that they were
sent to spy. However that may be, as they had brought their haughty
disdain along with them, they are easily provoked by the slightest
offense to bite or snarl at Christ. Hence we see with what difficulty
those who are influenced by ambition and the lust of power are brought
to submit to sound doctrine. Those especially whose attachment to
ceremonies has been strengthened by long practice cannot endure any
novelty, but loudly condemn every thing to which they have not been
accustomed. In short, any thing more haughty or more disdainful than
this class of men cannot be imagined.

<span id="ii.xlv-p14"></span>Both Evangelists mention that they were
*scribes and Pharisees;* but Matthew puts the *scribes* first, and Mark
puts them second. They convey the same meaning, that the *scribes*
belonged to various sects, but that the *Pharisees* were the leaders,
because they occupied an honorable station, and at that time held the
government. That the Pharisees should be the first to take offense at
disregard of the laws of which they were authors ought not to excite
surprise; for, as we have said, though they boasted that they were
expounders of the law, and though their name was derived from that
circumstance,  <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) they had
corrupted by their inventions the purity of the word of God. All the
traditions that then existed among the Jews had come out of their
workshop;  <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) and this was the
reason why they displayed more than ordinary zeal and bitterness in
defending them.

<span id="ii.xlv-p17"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p18"></span>**2.** *Why do thy disciples transgress?*
When we speak of human traditions, this question has no reference to
political laws, the use and object of which are widely different from
enjoining the manner in which we ought to worship God. But as there are
various kinds of human traditions, we must make some distinction among
them. Some are manifestly wicked, for they inculcate acts of worship
which are wicked and diametrically opposed to the word of God. Others of
them mingle profane trifles with the worship of God, and corrupt its
purity. Others, which are more plausible, and are not chargeable with
any remarkable fault, are condemned on this ground., that they are
imagined to be necessary to the worship of God; and thus there is a
departure from sincere obedience to God alone, and a snare is laid for
the conscience.

<span id="ii.xlv-p19"></span>To this last description the present
passage unquestionably relates; for the *washing of hands,* on which the
Pharisees insisted, could not in itself be charged with wicked
superstition; otherwise Christ would not have permitted the water-pots
to be used at the marriage, (<span id="ii.xlv-p19.1"></span>[Joh
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006)<span id="ii.xlv-p19.1"></span>,)
if it had not been an allowable ceremony; but the fault lay in this,
that they did not think that God could be properly worshipped in any
other way. It was not without a specious pretext that the practice of
*washings* was first introduced. We know how rigidly the Law of God
demands outward cleanness; not that the Lord intended that this should
occupy the whole attention of his servants, but that they might be more
careful to guard against every spiritual defilement. But in *washings*
the Law preserved some moderation. Next came teachers, who thought that
they would not be reckoned sufficiently acute, if they did not make some
appendage to the word of God;  <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393)
and hence arose *washings* of which no mention was made in the Law. The
legislators themselves did not give out that they delivered any thing
new,  <span id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) but only that they
administered cautions, which would be of service to assist in keeping
the Law of God. But this was immediately followed by great abuse, when
ceremonies introduced by men began to be regarded as a part of divine
worship; and again, when in matters that were free and voluntary
uniformity was absolutely enjoined. For it was always the will of God,
as we have already said, that he should be worshipped according to the
rule laid down in his word, and therefore no addition to his Law can be
endured. Now as he permits believers to have outward ceremonies, by
means of which they may perform the exercises of godliness, so he does
not suffer them to mix up those ceremonies with his own word, as if
religion consisted in them.  <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395)

<span id="ii.xlv-p23"></span>*For they wash not their hands.* The ground
of offense is explained more fully by Mark; but the substance of his
explanation is, that many things were practiced by *the scribes,* which
they had voluntarily undertaken to keep. They were secondary laws
invented by the curiosity of men, as if the plain command of God were
not enough. God commanded that those who had contracted any defilement
should wash themselves, (<span id="ii.xlv-p23.1"></span>[Lev.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#025),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#028)<span id="ii.xlv-p23.1"></span>;)
and this extended to cups, and pots, and raiment, and other articles of
household furniture, (<span id="ii.xlv-p23.2"></span>[Le
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#032)<span id="ii.xlv-p23.2"></span>,)
that they might not touch any thing that was polluted or unclean. But to
invent other ablutions was idle and useless.  <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) They were not destitute of
plausibility, as Paul tells us that the inventions of men have *an
appearance of wisdom,* (<span id="ii.xlv-p24.2"></span>[Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span id="ii.xlv-p24.2"></span>;)
but if they had rested in the Law of God alone, that modesty would have
been more agreeable to Him than solicitude about small matters.

<span id="ii.xlv-p25"></span>They were desirous to warn a person not to
take food while he was unclean, through want of consideration; but the
Lord reckoned it enough to wash away those defilements of which they
were aware. Besides, no end or limit could be set to such cautions; for
they could scarcely move a finger without contracting some new spot or
stain. But a far worse abuse lay in this, that the consciences of men
were tormented with scruples which led them to regard every person as
chargeable with pollution, who did not on every occasion wash his body
with water. In persons who belonged to a private rank they would perhaps
have overlooked the neglect of this ceremony; but as they had expected
from Christ and his disciples something uncommon and extraordinary, they
reckoned it unbecoming that ceremonies, which were *traditions of the
elders,* and the practice of which was held sacred by *the scribes,*
should not be observed by the disciples of a master who undertook to
reform the existing state of things.

<span id="ii.xlv-p26"></span>It is a great mistake to compare the
sprinkling of the water of purification, or, as the Papists call it,
*blessed water,* with the Jewish *washing;* for, by repeating so
frequently the one baptism,  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397)
Papists do all that is in their power to efface it. Besides, this absurd
sprinkling is used for exorcising.  <span
id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398) But if it were lawful in itself, and
were not accompanied by so many abuses, still we must always condemn the
urgency with which they demand it as if it were indispensable.

<span id="ii.xlv-p29"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p30"></span>**3.** *Why do you also transgress?* There
are here two answers that are given by Christ, the former of which is
addressed, as we say, to the person; while the latter decides as to the
fact and the question in hand. *Mark* inverts that order; for he first
represents Christ as speaking on the whole subject, and afterwards adds
the reproof which is directed against hypocrites. We shall follow the
narrative of Matthew. When the Lord, in his turn, puts the question to
the scribes *why* they break the Law of God on account of their
traditions, he does not as yet pronounce a direct acquittal of his
disciples from the crime charged against them; but only points out how
improper and unwarrantable is this readiness to take offense. They are
displeased when *the commandments of men* are not observed with
exactness; and how much more criminal is it to spend the whole time in
observing them, to the disregard of the law of God? It is manifest,
therefore, that their wrath is kindled rather by ambition than by a
proper kind of zeal, when they thus prefer men to God.

<span id="ii.xlv-p31"></span>When he says that they *transgress the
commandments of God,* the meaning of the expression is easily learned
from the context. They did not openly or professedly set aside the law
of God, so as to look upon any thing as lawful which the law had
forbidden; but there was an indirect *transgression* of it, for they
permitted duties which God had enjoined to be neglected with impunity. A
plain and familiar instance is adduced by Christ. The *commandment of
God* is, that children shall honor their parents, (<span
id="ii.xlv-p31.1"></span>[Ex
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012)<span id="ii.xlv-p31.1"></span>.)
Now as the sacred offerings yielded emolument to the priests, the
observance of them was so rigidly enforced, that men were taught to
regard it as a more heinous sin not to make a free-will offering than to
defraud a parent of what was justly due to him. In short, what the Law
of God declared to be voluntary was, in the estimation of the scribes,
of higher value than one of the most important of the commandments of
God. Whenever we are so eager to keep the laws of men as to bestow less
care and attention on keeping the law of God itself, we are held as
*transgressing* it. Shortly afterwards he says, that they had *annulled
the commandment of God on account of the traditions of men;* for the
scribes led the people to entertain so strong an attachment to their own
injunctions, that they did not allow them leisure to attend to the word
of God. Again, as they reckoned those persons to have discharged their
duty well who obeyed these injunctions to the letter, hence arose a
liberty to commit sin; for whenever holiness is made to consist in any
thing else than in observing the Law of God, men are led to believe that
the law may be violated without danger.

<span id="ii.xlv-p32"></span>Let any man now consider whether this
wickedness does not at present abound more among the Papists than it
formerly did among the Jews. It is not indeed denied by the Pope, or by
the whole of his filthy clergy, that we ought to obey God; but when we
come to the point, we find that they consider the act of eating a morsel
of flesh as nothing less than a capital crime, while theft or
fornication is regarded as a venial fault, and thus, on account of their
traditions, they overturn the Law of God; for it is utterly insufferable
that the enactments of men shall withdraw any part of that obedience
which is due to God alone. Besides, the honor which God commands to be
yielded to parents extends to all the duties of filial piety.  <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) The latter clause which Christ adds,
that *he who curseth father or mother* deserves to be put to death, is
intended to inform us, that it is no light or unimportant precept to
*honor* parents, since the violation of it is so severely punished. And
this is no small aggravation of the guilt of the scribes, that so severe
a threatening does not terrify them from granting an extension of
liberty to those who despised their parents.

<span id="ii.xlv-p34"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p35"></span>**5.** *But you say, etc.* The mode of
expression is defective, and is more fully exhibited by Mark, who adds,
*you suffer them not to do anything more to their father or to their
mother* The meaning is, that the scribes were altogether wrong in
acquitting those persons who fail to perform their duties to their
parents, provided that this deficiency be supplied, on their part, by a
voluntary sacrifice, which might have been omitted without offending
God. For we must not understand Christ’s words to bear that the scribes
had forbidden men to render all proper obedience;  <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) but they were so eager to pursue their
own gain, that children were allowed, in the meantime, to neglect their
duties to their parents.

<span id="ii.xlv-p37"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p38"></span>**7.** *Well hath Isaiah prophesied
concerning you.* Our Lord now proceeds farther; for he decides on the
question in hand, which he divides into two clauses. The first is, that
they relied on outward ceremonies alone, and set no value on true
holiness, which consists in sincere uprightness of heart; and the second
is, that they worshipped God in a wrong way, according to their own
fancy. Now though his reproof of pretended and hypocritical holiness
appears hitherto to be restricted to persons, yet it includes the
substance of this doctrine, from which the full conclusion was, first,
that the worship of God is spiritual, and does not consist in the
sprinkling of water, or in any other ceremony; and, secondly, that there
is no reasonable worship of God but what is directed by the rule of his
word. Although Isaiah (<span id="ii.xlv-p38.2"></span>[Isa
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="ii.xlv-p38.2"></span>)
did not prophesy for futurity alone, but had regard to the men of his
own age, yet Christ says that this prediction relates to the Pharisees
and scribes, because they resemble those ancient hypocrites with whom
the prophet had to contend. Christ does not quote that passage exactly
as it stands; but the prophet expressly mentions two offenses by which
the Jews provoked against themselves the divine vengeance. *With their
lips* only, and by an outward profession, they made a pretense of
godliness; and, next, they turned aside to modes of worship invented by
men. First, then, it is wicked hypocrisy, when the honor which men
render to God is only in outward appearance; for to *approach to God
with the mouth, and to honor him with the lips,* would not be in itself
evil, provided that the heart went before. The substance of what our
Lord states on this subject is, that, since the worship of God is
spiritual, and as nothing pleases him that is not accompanied by the
inward sincerity of the heart, they who make holiness to consist in
outward display are hypocrites.

<span id="ii.xlv-p39"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p40"></span>**9.** *But in vain do they worship me*
<span id="ii.xlv-p40.2"></span>The words of the prophet run literally
thus: *their fear toward me has been taught by the precept of men.*
<span id="ii.xlv-p40.3"></span>But Christ has faithfully and accurately
given the meaning, that *in vain is God worshipped,* <span
id="ii.xlv-p40.4"></span>when the will of men is substituted in the room
of doctrine. By these words, all kinds of *will-worship,* <span
id="ii.xlv-p40.5"></span>(<span
id="ii.xlv-p40.6"></span>ἐθελοθζησκεία<span id="ii.xlv-p40.7"></span>,)
<span id="ii.xlv-p40.8"></span>as Paul calls it, (<span
id="ii.xlv-p40.9"></span>[Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span
id="ii.xlv-p40.9"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p40.10"></span>,) are plainly
condemned. For, as we have said, since God chooses to be worshipped in
no other way than according to his own appointment, he cannot endure new
modes of worship to be devised. As soon as men allow themselves to
wander beyond the limits of the Word of God, the more labor and anxiety
they display in worshipping him, the heavier is the condemnation which
they draw down upon themselves; for by such inventions religion is
dishonored.

<span id="ii.xlv-p41"></span>*Teaching doctrines, commandments of men*
In these words there is what is called *apposition;*  <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) for Christ declares them to be
mistaken who bring forward, in the room of *doctrine, the commandments
of men,* or who seek to obtain from them the rule for worshipping God.
Let it therefore be held as a settled principle, that, since *obedience*
is more highly esteemed by God than *sacrifices,* (<span
id="ii.xlv-p42.11"></span>[1 Sam.
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023)<span id="ii.xlv-p42.11"></span>,)
all kinds of worship invented by men are of no estimation in his sight;
nay more, that, as the prophet declares, they are accursed and
detestable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_389"></span>[390](cc32046.htm#fr_389) <span
id="ii.xlv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p5.1"></span>Propter;” —
“<span id="ii.xlv-p5.2"></span>par vostre ordonnance;” — “by your
statute.”

<span id="fn_390"></span>[391](cc32046.htm#fr_390) <span
id="ii.xlv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p13.1"></span>En cas
qu’ils l’eussent trouve bon maistre a leur gre;” — “provided that they
should find him to be a good master to their liking.”

<span id="fn_391"></span>[392](cc32046.htm#fr_391) <span
id="ii.xlv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p15"></span> See Harmony, vol. 1, p. 281.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[393](cc32046.htm#fr_392) <span
id="ii.xlv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p16.1"></span>Elles
avoyent este forgees en leur boutique;” — “they had been manufactured in
their workshop.”

<span id="fn_393"></span>[394](cc32046.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ii.xlv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p20"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p20.1"></span>Sinon
qu’ils adioustassent a la parole de Dieu quelques repetasseries de leur
invention;” — “if they did not add to the word of God some patches of
their own invention.”

<span id="fn_394"></span>[395](cc32046.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ii.xlv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p21"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p21.1"></span>Les
premiers autheurs de ces loix ne disoyent pas qu’ils voulussent
commander rien de nouveau;” — “the first authors of these laws did not
say that they intended to issue any new command.”

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](cc32046.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ii.xlv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p22.1"></span>Qu’elles
soyent meslees avec sa Parole, et mises en mesme rang, comme si quelque
partie du service de Dieu gisoit en icelles;” — “that they should be
mixed with his Word, and put in the same rank, as if any part of the
worship of God lay in them.”

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](cc32046.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ii.xlv-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p24.1"></span>C’a este
un amusement de gens oisifs, et qui ne scavoyent que faire;” — “it was
an amusement of persons that were idles and did not know what to do.”

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](cc32046.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ii.xlv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p27.1"></span>Le
Baptesme, qui suffit une fois receu;” — “Baptism, which is enough when
once received.”

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](cc32046.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ii.xlv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p28.1"></span>En apres,
ceste badinerie d’eau beniste est appliquee a faire exorcismes et
coniurations, et ils croyent fermement qu’elle a vertu d’effacer les
pechez;” — “Besides, this foolery of *blessed water* is applied to
exorcising and conjuring, and they firmly believe that it has power to
blot out sins.”

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](cc32046.htm#fr_399) <span
id="ii.xlv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p33.1"></span>Comprend
tous devoirs d’obeissance, secours, et soulagement;” — “includes every
duty of obedience, assistance, and relief.”

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](cc32046.htm#fr_400) <span
id="ii.xlv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.xlv-p36.1"></span>De faire
aucune assistance au pere et a la mere;” — “to grant any relief to their
father or mother.”

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](cc32046.htm#fr_401) <span
id="ii.xlv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlv-p42"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p42.1"></span> “<span
id="ii.xlv-p42.2"></span><span id="ii.xlv-p42.3"></span>C’est une figure
et facon de parler que les Latins nomment Apposition<span
id="ii.xlv-p42.4"></span>;” — “it is a figure and mode of speech which
the Latins call Apposition.” — “The Latin Grammarians employ the word
<span id="ii.xlv-p42.5"></span>*Appositio* <span
id="ii.xlv-p42.6"></span>to denote a figure, by which two words,
denoting the same thing, are put in the same case, such as, <span
id="ii.xlv-p42.7"></span>*Urbs Roma, Fluvius Sequana* <span
id="ii.xlv-p42.8"></span>In the same sense the Greek word <span
id="ii.xlv-p42.9"></span>ἐπεξήγησις<span id="ii.xlv-p42.10"></span> was
often used. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 15:10-20; Mark 7:14-23; Luke 6:39](cc32047)
