[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32032)  [Next](cc32034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xxxii"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
22:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xxxii-p1.2"></span>[Luke
14:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
22:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
14:15-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p4"></span>**1**. And Jesus answering, spoke again by
parables, and said, **2**. The kingdom of heaven is like a human king
who made a marriage for his son, **3**. And sent out his servants to
call those who were invited to the marriage, and they refused to come.
**4**. Again he sent out other servants, saying, Tell those who are
invited, Lo, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen and fatlings are killed,
and all things are ready: come to the marriage. **5**. But they treated
it with indifference, and went away, one to his farm, and another to his
merchandise: **6**. And the rest took his servants, and abused and
killed them. **7**. But when the king heard it, he was angry, and sent
his soldiers, and slew these murderers, and burnt up their city.
**8**. Then he said to his servants, The marriage is indeed ready, but
those who were invited were not worthy. **9**. Go then to the highways,
and whomsoever you shall find invite to the marriage. **10**. And his
servants went out to the roads, and collected all that they found, both
bad and good, so that the marriage-apartment was filled with guests.
**11**. And the king, having come in to see the guests, when he saw
there a man not wearing the wedding garment, **12**. Said to him,
Friend, how camest thou hither, not having the wedding garment? And he
was speechless. **13**. Then said the king to his attendants, Bind him
hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness: weeping and gnashing of
teeth will be there. **14**. For many are called, but few are chosen.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxii-p6"></span> **15**. And when one of those who sat at
table with him heard these things, he said to him, Blessed is he that
eateth  <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) bread in the kingdom of
God. **16**. But he said to him, A certain man had prepared a great
supper, and had invited many. **17**. And he sent his servant at the
hour of supper to say to those who were invited, Come; for all things
are now ready. **18**. And they all began together  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289) to excuse themselves. **19**. The
first said to him, I have purchased an estate, and I must go and see it:
I beseech thee hold me excused. **20**. And another said, I have married
a wife, and therefore I cannot come. **21**. And the servant returned,
and brought back these things to his master. Then the master of the
house, being angry, said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets
and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and
the lame, and the blind. **22**. And the servant said, Sir, it is done
as thou hast commanded, and still there is room. **23**. And the master
said to the servant, Go out to the roads and hedges, and compel them to
come in, that my house may be filled. **24**. For I say to you, That
none of those men who were invited shall taste of my supper.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xxxii-p11"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p12"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxii-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#001)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p12.2"></span>.** *And Jesus answering.* Though *Matthew*
relates this parable among other discourses which were delivered by
Christ about the time of the last Passover, yet as he does not specify
any particular time, and as *Luke* expressly affirms that Christ
delivered this discourse *while he sat at table in the house of a
Pharisee,* I have thought it better to follow this order. The design
which Matthew had in view was, to point out the reasons why the scribes
were excited to the highest pitch of fury; and therefore he properly
placed it in the midst of those discourses which were hateful to them,
and interwove it with those discourses, without attending to the order
of time. But we must attend to *Luke’s* narrative, who says that, *when
one of those who sat at table with him said, Blessed is he that eateth
bread in the kingdom of God,* Christ took occasion from it to upbraid
the Jews with ingratitude. It is by no means probable, that the guest
and friend of a Pharisee broke out into this exclamation from any
sincere feeling of piety. Still, I do not look upon it as having been
spoken in derision; but, as persons who have a moderate knowledge of the
faith, and are not openly wicked, are in the habit of indulging, amidst
their cups, in idle talk about eternal life, I think that this man threw
out a remark about future blessedness, in order to draw out some
observation in return from Christ. And his words make it manifest, that
he had nothing in view beyond what was gross and earthly; for he did not
employ the phrase, *eat bread,* as a metaphor for *enjoy eternal life,*
but appears to have dreamed of I know not what state, filled with
prosperity and abundance of all things. The meaning is, *Blessed shall
they be who shall eat the bread of God,*  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290) after that he has collected his
children into *his kingdom.*

<span id="ii.xxxii-p14"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p15"></span>**2.** *The kingdom of heaven is like a
human king* As it was long ago said by a Spartan, that the Athenians
knew what was right, but did not choose to practice it; so Christ now
brings it as a reproach against the Jews, that they gave utterance to
beautiful expressions about *the kingdom of God,* but, when God kindly
and gently invited them, they rejected his grace with disdain. There is
no room to doubt that the discourse is expressly levelled against the
Jews, as will more plainly appear a little afterwards.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p16"></span>*Matthew* and *Luke* differ in this
respect, that *Matthew* details many circumstances, while *Luke* states
the matter summarily, and in a general manner. Thus, *Matthew* says that
*a king made a marriage for his son: Luke* only mentions *a great
supper* The former speaks of *many servants,* while the latter refers to
no more than *one servant;* the former describes *many* messages, the
latter mentions *one* only; the former says that some of the servants
were *abused* or slain, the latter speaks only of their being treated
with contempt. Lastly, the former relates that a man was cast out, who
*had* *gone in to the marriage without a wedding garment,* of which Luke
makes no mention. But we have formerly pointed out a similar
distinction, that *Matthew,* in explaining the same thing, is more
copious, and enters into fuller details. There is a remarkable agreement
between them on the main points of the parable.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p17"></span>God bestowed on the Jews distinguished
honor, by providing for them, as it were, a hospitable table; but they
despised the honor which had been conferred upon them. The marriage of
the king’s son is explained by many commentators to mean, that *Christ
is the end of the Law,* (<span id="ii.xxxii-p17.1"></span>[Ro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p17.1"></span>.) and that God had no other design in his
covenant, than to make him the Governor of his people, and to unite the
Church to him by the sacred bond of a spiritual marriage. I have no
objection to that view. But when he says, that the *servants were sent
to call those who were invited,* these words are intended to point out a
double favor which the Jews had received from God; first, in being
preferred to other nations; and, secondly, in having their adoption made
known to them by the prophets. The allusion is to a practice customary
among men, that those who intended to *make a marriage* drew up a list
of the persons whom they intended to have as guests, and afterwards sent
invitations to them by their servants. In like manner, God elected the
Jews in preference to others, as if they had been his familiar friends,
and afterwards *called them* by the prophets to partake of the promised
redemption, which was, as it were, to feast *at a marriage* It is true
that those who were first invited did not live till the coming of
Christ; but we know that all received an offer of the same salvation, of
which they were deprived by their ingratitude and malice; for from the
commencement, God’s invitation was impiously despised by that people.
 <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291)

<span id="ii.xxxii-p19"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p20"></span>**4.** *Again he sent other servants.* He
speaks as if it had been the same persons who were invited, for it was
one body of the people. The meaning is, that when the happy and joyful
day of redemption drew near, they were warned to be ready; for they had
been long ago informed as to the time. But now Christ told them that, at
the very hour, fresh messengers were sent to entreat them to come with
haste; for the first invitation which he mentions includes all the
former prophecies, down to the publication of the Gospel. For a long
period, they exercised cruelty on the prophets; but their fury grew as
the time advanced, and at length spent all its force on Christ and the
apostles. For this reason, he charges the ancient people with nothing
more than contempt and pride, but says, that the servants who had been
last sent, and who arrived at the hour of supper, were *abused* or
*slain.* That people arrived at the highest pitch of their crimes, when
their haughty rejection of his grace was followed by the madness of
cruelty. And yet he does not charge all of them equally with crime; for
even at the latest call, which was given by the Gospel, the grace of God
was in part ridiculed by careless despisers, and in part was furiously
rejected by hypocrites. And thus it usually happens, that ungodly men
break out into fiercer rage against God, in proportion to the
earnestness with which he invites them to salvation.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p21"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p22"></span>We must now consider that part of
doctrine which is conveyed both by Matthew and by Luke. *One went to his
field, and another to his merchandise;* or, as Luke expresses it, one
pleaded that *he had married a wife;* another that he had *purchased a
field;* and another that he had *bought five yoke of oxen.* By these
words Christ pronounces the Jews to have been so entirely devoted to the
world and to earthly things, that no man found leisure to approach to
God; for the cares of this world, when we become entangled by them, are
so many impediments in our way to keep us back from the kingdom of God.
It is truly base and shameful, that men who were created for a heavenly
life, should be under the influence of such brutish stupidity, as to be
entirely carried away after transitory things. But this disease is
universally prevalent; so that hardly one person in a hundred can be
found, who prefers the kingdom of God to fading riches, or to any other
kind of advantages. Though all are not infected with the same disease,
every man is led away by his desires; in consequence of which, all are
wandering in various directions.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p23"></span>Besides, it deserves our attention, that
ungodly men hold out fair pretences for rejecting the grace of God; as
if their indolence might be excused, because they are entirely occupied
with the affairs of the present life, and care little about a heavenly
inheritance. But we see how Christ takes from us all such excuses, that
no man may imagine it to be of any advantage for him to plead that he is
detained by engagements of an earthly nature. On the contrary, men
commit a double fault, when they allow themselves to be retarded by
those things which are in themselves lawful, and which ought rather to
have aided their progress. For why does God allow us the conveniences of
the present life, but in order to draw us to himself? And yet so far is
it from being true, that all have earnest desires towards heaven, in
proportion as they are assisted by acts of the Divine kindness, that
even holy marriage, and fields, and other riches, are so many snares to
bind every man more closely to the earth.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p24"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p25"></span>**7.** *But when the king heard it.* This
punishment is mentioned by *Matthew* alone; for Luke makes no mention of
any outrage committed on the servants. Both concur in stating, that
those who did not come at the appointed time were shut out, and deprived
of the honor of being present at the banquet. But this doctrine applies
equally to us; for the same destruction which Christ denounces against
the Jews awaits all the ungodly, who violently oppose the ministers of
the Gospel. Those who are so entirely occupied with earthly cares, as to
set no value on the divine invitation, will at length perish miserably
in famine and want; and therefore, whenever God calls us, let us be
prepared and ready to follow.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p26"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p27"></span>**9.** *Go therefore to the highways.*
Having shown that they are unworthy of the grace of God who disdainfully
reject it when offered to them, he now says that their place is supplied
by others, by the mean and despised common people. And here is described
the calling of the Gentiles, which is to excite the Jews to jealousy, as
we have it in the Song of Moses;

<span id="ii.xxxii-p28"></span>They have provoked me by those who are
not gods, and I will provoke them by that which is not a people, and by
a foolish nation will I enrage them,  
(<span id="ii.xxxii-p28.2"></span>[De
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p28.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxii-p29"></span>Having been first elected, they imagined
that the grace of God was bound to them, as if God could not want them;
and how haughtily they despised all others is well known. Thus by way of
admission, he compares the Gentiles *to the poor, the blind,* and *the
lame.* He says that they are called from the *cross-roads,* and from the
*streets,* as strangers and unknown persons; but yet declares that they
will occupy that place which friends and domestics had treated with
indifference. What the prophets had obscurely foretold about creating a
new church is now plainly expressed. This dishonor was the completion of
the divine vengeance on the Jews, when God

<span id="ii.xxxii-p30"></span>cut them off, and ingrafted wild branches
into  
the stock of the olive-tree, (<span id="ii.xxxii-p30.2"></span>[Ro
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p30.2"></span>;)

<span id="ii.xxxii-p31"></span>when he threw them off, and received the
polluted and filthy Gentiles into his house. But if at that time *he
spared not the natural branches,* (<span id="ii.xxxii-p31.1"></span>[Ro
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p31.1"></span>,) the same punishment will this day be
inflicted on us, if we do not answer to his call. The supper which had
been prepared for us will not be lost, but God will invite other guests.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p32"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p33"></span>**<span id="ii.xxxii-p33.2"></span>[Luke
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p33.2"></span>.** *Compel them to come in.* This expression
means, that the master of the house would give orders to make use, as it
were, of violence for compelling the attendance of the poor, and to
leave out none of the lowest dregs of the people. By these words Christ
declares that he would rake together all the offscourings of the world,
rather than he would ever admit such ungrateful persons to his table.
The allusion appears to be to the manner in which the Gospel invites us;
for the grace of God is not merely offered to us, but doctrine is
accompanied by exhortations fitted to arouse our minds. This is a
display of the astonishing goodness of God, who, after freely inviting
us, and perceiving that we give ourselves up to sleep, addresses our
slothfulness by earnest entreaties, and not only arouses us by
exhortations, but even *compels* us by threatenings to draw near to him.
At the same time, I do not disapprove of the use which Augustine
frequently made of this passage against the Donatists, to prove that
godly princes may lawfully issue edicts, for *compelling* obstinate and
rebellious persons to worship the true God, and to maintain the unity of
the faith; for, though faith is voluntary, yet we see that such methods
are useful for subduing the obstinacy of those who will not yield until
they are compelled.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p34"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p35"></span>**<span
id="ii.xxxii-p35.2"></span>[Matthew
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p35.2"></span>.** *And the king, having come in to see the
guests.* Here Christ does not reproach the Jews with having wickedly
despised the grace and calling of God; but gives early warning to those
who would be placed in their room, not to pollute with their filth the
holy marriage, when God shall bestow upon them admission to his table.
Hitherto he has taught that the Jews, on account of their ungodly and
disdainful conduct, would be deprived of the peculiar honor and
privilege which they had enjoyed; and that from among the irreligious
and abhorred Gentiles would men be called to occupy their place. But now
he threatens that, out of this very number, those who bring reproach
upon the Church will be expelled; for God invites all indiscriminately
by the Gospel, and thus many unholy and abominable persons creep in,
who, though for a time they are admitted along with others, yet, when
God reviews the guests, will be thrown out and dragged to punishment.
The general truth conveyed is, that not all who have once entered the
Church will become partakers of everlasting life, but only those who are
found to wear the dress which befits the heavenly palace.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p36"></span>As to the *wedding garment,* is it faith,
or is it a holy life? This is a useless controversy; for faith cannot be
separated from good works, nor do good works proceed from any other
source than from faith. But Christ intended only to state, that the Lord
calls us on the express condition of our being renewed by the Spirit
after his image; and that, in order to our remaining permanently in his
house, we must *put off the old man with his pollutions,* (<span
id="ii.xxxii-p36.1"></span>[Col
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009)<span id="ii.xxxii-p36.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xxxii-p36.2"></span>[Eph
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p36.2"></span>,) and lead a new life, that the *garment*
may correspond to so honorable a calling. But a question arises, how
comes it that a beggar is punished so severely for not bringing a
*wedding garment;* as if it were unusual to see the wretched people, who
beg their bread on the public roads, wearing tattered and ugly clothes?
I reply, the question is not as to the manner in which the *garment* is
to be procured; for whomsoever the Lord invites he at the same time
supplies with clothing, and in all of us is fulfilled what Ezekiel says,
(<span id="ii.xxxii-p36.3"></span>[Eze
16:6-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p36.3"></span>,) that God finds nothing in us but
wretchedness, and nakedness, and abominable filth, but adorns us with
magnificent attire. We know also, that there is no other way in which we
are formed anew after the image of God, but by *putting on Christ,*
(<span id="ii.xxxii-p36.4"></span>[Ro
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p36.4"></span>; <span id="ii.xxxii-p36.5"></span>[Ga
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span
id="ii.xxxii-p36.5"></span>.) It is not, therefore, the declaration of
Christ, that the sentence of *casting them into outer darkness* will be
executed on wretched men who did not bring a costly *garment* taken from
their own wardrobe, but on those who shall be found in their pollution,
when God shall come to make a scrutiny of his guests.

<span id="ii.xxxii-p37"></span><span id="ii.xxxii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p38"></span>**14.** *For many are called, but few are
chosen.* The object of the parable is pointed out by the conclusion,
that *few are chosen,* though *many are called;* from which we infer,
that we ought not to attempt an ingenious explanation of every minute
clause. But lately, Christ did not threaten that the greater part would
be thrown out, but mentioned one man only; and now we learn from him,
that out of a large number few will be retained. And certainly, though
in the present day a more numerous body of men is collected into the
Church by the Gospel than was formerly collected by the Law, it is but a
small portion of them whose faith is evinced by newness of life. Let us
not flatter ourselves with the empty title of faith, but let every man
seriously examine himself, that at the final review he may be pronounced
to be one of the lawful guests; for, as Paul reminds us, that *the
vessels* in the Lord’s house are not all of the same kind, so

<span id="ii.xxxii-p39"></span>let every one that calleth on the name of
the Lord  
depart from iniquity, (<span id="ii.xxxii-p39.2"></span>[2 Tim.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020)<span id="ii.xxxii-p39.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xxxii-p40"></span>I enter no farther, at present, into the
question about the eternal election of God; for the words of Christ mean
nothing more than this, that the external profession of faith is not a
sufficient proof that God will acknowledge as his people all who appear
to have accepted of his invitation.  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc32033.htm#fr_288) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p7"></span> “<span
id="ii.xxxii-p7.1"></span>Bien-hereux sera celuy qui mangera;” —
“blessed shall he be who shall eat.”

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc32033.htm#fr_289) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxii-p8.1"></span>D’un
accord;” — “with one accord.”

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc32033.htm#fr_290) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxii-p13.1"></span>Qui
seront nourris de Dieu;”— “who shall be fed by God.”

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc32033.htm#fr_291) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxii-p18.1"></span>Ce
peuple-la a vileinement et meschamment mesprise l’honneur auquel Dieu le
convioit;” — “that people basely and wickedly despised the honor to
which God invited them.”

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc32033.htm#fr_292) <span
id="ii.xxxii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xxxii-p41"></span> “<span id="ii.xxxii-p41.1"></span>Tous
ceux qui semblent s’estre rangez sous son enseigne;” — “all those who
appear to have ranked themselves under his banner.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 16:1-15](cc32034)
