[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32079)  [Next](cc32081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.lxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p1"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
25:14-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.lxxix-p1.2"></span>[Luke
19:11-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p2"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
25:14-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#014)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p3"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p3.1"></span>[Luke
19:11-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p4"></span> **14**. For as a certain man, setting out
on a journey, called his servants, and delivered to them his goods.
**15**. And to one he gave five talents, and to another two, and to
another one; to every one according to his own ability; and immediately
set out. **16**. And he who had received five talents went away and
traded with them, and amassed other five talents. **17**. And likewise
he who had received two, he also gained other two. **18**. But he who
had received one went away, and dug in the earth, and hid his master’s
money. **19**. And after a long time the master of those servant cometh,
and reckoneth with them. **20**. And he who had received five talents,
saying, Master, thou deliveredst to me five talents: lo, I have gained
by them other five talents. **21**. His master saith to him, Well done,
good and faithful servant; thou has tbeen faithful over a few things, I
will place thee over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy master.
**22**. And he also who had received two talents came, and said, Master,
thou deliveredst to me two talents: lo, I have gained by them other two.
**23**. His master saith to him, Well done, good and faithful servant;
thou hast been faithful over a few things: enter thou into the joy of
thy master. **24**. But he who had received one talent came and said,
Master, knew thee that thou art a harsh man, reaping where thou didst
not sow, and gathering where didst not scatter: **25**. And, being
afraid, I went away, and hid thy talent in the earth: lo, thou hast what
is thine. **26**. And his master answering said to him, Wicked and
slothful servant, thou knowest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather
where I did not scatter: **27**. Thou oughtest therefore to have given
my money to the bankers, and, when I came, I would have received my own
with usury. **28**. Take away then from him the talent, and give it to
him who hath ten talents. **29**. For to every one that hath shall be
given, and he shall abound; but he that hath not, even that which he
hath shall be taken from him. **30**. And cast out the unprofitable
servant into outer darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxix-p6"></span> **11**. While they were hearing these
things, he added, and spoke a parable, because he was near Jerusalem,
and because they thought that the kingdom of God would immediately be
revealed. **12**. He said therefore, A certain nobleman set out for a
distant country, to receive for himself a kingdom,  <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) and to return. **13**. And, having
called his ten servants, he gave to them ten pounds, and said to them,
Trade till I come. **14**. And his citizens hated him, and sent a
message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.
**15**. And it happened that he returned, after having obtained the
kingdom,  <span id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684) and commanded those
servants to be called to him, to whom he had given money, that he might
know how much everyone had gained by trading. **16**. And the first
came, saying, Master, thy pound hath gained ten pounds. **17**. And he
said to him, Well done, good servant; because thou hast been faithful in
a very small matter, have though power over ten cities. **18**. And
another came, saying, Master, thy pound hath gained five pounds.
**19**. And he said to him, And be thou ruler over five cities.
**20**. And another came, saying, Master, lo, thy pound, which I have
kept laid up in a napkin: **21**. For I feared thee, because thou art a
harsh man: thou takest up what thou didst not lay down, and reapest what
thou didst not sow. **22**. He saith to him, Out of thy mouth will I
judge thee, wicked servant. Thou knewest that I am a harsh man, taking
up what I did not lay down, and reaping what I did not sow: **23**. And
why didst not thou give my money to the bank, and, when I came, I would
have demanded it with usury? **24**. And to those who stood by he said,
Take from him the pound, and give it to him who hath ten pounds.
**25**. And they said to him, Master, he hath ten pounds. **26**. For I
say to you, That to him that hath it shall be given; but from him who
hath not, even what he hath shall be taken away. **27**. But bring
hither those my enemies, who refused that I should reign over them, and
slay them before me. **28**. And, having said these things, he went
before, to go up to Jerusalem.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxix-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.lxxix-p11"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p12"></span>**<span id="ii.lxxix-p12.2"></span>[Luke
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p12.2"></span>.** *While they were hearing these things.*
It was next to a prodigy that the disciples, after having been so
frequently warned as to the approaching death of Christ, flew aside from
it to think of his kingdom. There were two mistakes; first, that they
pictured to themselves rest and happiness without the cross; secondly,
that they judged of *the kingdom of God* according to their own carnal
sense. Hence it appears how slight and obscure their faith was; for
though they had entertained a hope of the resurrection, yet the taste
was too slight for forming a fixed and decided opinion about Christ.
They believe him to be the Redeemer who had been formerly promised, and
hence they conceive a hope that the Church will be renewed; but that
knowledge immediately degenerates into vain imaginations, which either
overturn or obscure the power of his kingdom. But the strangest thing of
all was, that so many warnings should have passed away from their
recollection without yielding any advantage. At least, it was brutal
stupidity that, though Christ had lately declared, in express terms,
that he was just about to undergo a bitter and ignominious death, they
not only remained unconcerned, but rushed forward, as if to a joyful
triumph.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p13"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p14"></span>**12.** *A certain nobleman. Matthew*
interweaves this parable with others, without attending to the order of
time; but, as his intention was, in the twenty-second chapter, to make a
collection of Christ’s latest discourses, readers ought not to trouble
themselves greatly with the inquiry which of them was delivered on the
first, or the second, or the third day within that short period. But it
is proper to observe the difference between *Matthew* and *Luke;* for,
while the former touches only on one point, the latter embraces two.
This point is common to both, that Christ resembles *a nobleman*, who,
undertaking a *long journey* for the sake of *obtaining a kingdom*, has
entrusted his *money* to the management of *his servants*, and so on.
The other point is peculiar to Luke, that the subjects abused the
absence of the prince, and raised a tumult in order to shake off his
yoke. In both parts Christ intended to show, that the disciples were
greatly mistaken in supposing that his royal authority was already
established, and that he was coming *to Jerusalem*, in order to commence
immediately a course of prosperity. Thus by taking away the expectation
of an immediate *kin*g*dom*, he exhorts them to hope and patience; for
he tells them that they must long and steadily endure many toils, before
they enjoy that glory for which they pant too earnestly.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p15"></span>*Into a distant country.* As the
disciples thought that Christ was now about to enter into the possession
of his kingdom, he first corrects this mistake by informing them, that
he must undertake a *long journey*, in order *to obtain the kingdom*
 <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685) As to what is meant by the
*distant country*, *I* leave it to the ingenious expositions of those
who are fond of subtleties. For my own part, I think that Christ
expresses nothing more than his long absence, which would extend from
the time of his death to his last coming. For, though he sits at the
right hand of the Father, and holds the government of heaven and earth,
and though, from the time that he ascended to heaven, *all power was
given to him*, (<span id="ii.lxxix-p16.2"></span>[Mt
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p16.2"></span>,) *that every knee might bow before him*,
(<span id="ii.lxxix-p16.3"></span>[Php
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p16.3"></span>;) yet as he has not yet subdued his enemies
— has not yet appeared as Judge of the world, or revealed his majesty —
it is not without propriety that he is said to be absent from his
people, till he return again, clothed with his new sovereignty. It is
true, indeed, that he now reigns, while he regenerates his people to the
heavenly life, forms them anew to the image of God, and associates them
with angels; while he governs the Church by his word, guards it by his
protection, enriches it with the gifts of the Spirit, nourishes it by
his grace, and maintains it by his power, and, in short, supplies it
with all that is necessary for salvation; while he restrains the fury of
Satan and of all the ungodly, and defeats all their schemes. But as this
way of reigning is concealed from the flesh, his manifestation is
properly said to be delayed till the last day. Since, therefore, the
apostles foolishly aimed at the shadow of a kingdom, our Lord declares
that he must go to seek a *distant* kingdom, that, they may learn to
endure delay.  <span id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686)

<span id="ii.lxxix-p18"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p19"></span>**13.** *And having called his ten
servants.* We must not inquire anxiously into the number of the
servants, or into the sums of money. For Matthew, by expressing various
sums, includes a more extensive doctrine, namely, that Christ does not
lay on all an equal charge of trafficking, but commits to one a small,
and to another a larger sum of money. Both agree in this, that till the
last day of the resurrection Christ, in some respects, goes to a
distance from his people, but yet that it would be highly improper for
them to sit down in idleness and do no good; for each has a certain
office enjoined him, in which he ought to be employed, and, therefore,
they ought to be diligent in *trading*, that they may be careful to
increase their Lord’s property.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p20"></span>Luke says simply, that to each he gave *a
pound;* because, whether more or less may be committed to us by our
Lord, every man must equally give account for himself. Matthew, as I
have said, is more full and copious; for he states various degrees. Let
us know that the Lord does not bestow on all indiscriminately the same
*measure of gifts*, (<span id="ii.lxxix-p20.1"></span>[Eph
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007)<span id="ii.lxxix-p20.1"></span>,)
but

<span id="ii.lxxix-p21"></span>distributes them variously as he thinks
proper,  
(<span id="ii.lxxix-p21.2"></span>[1Co
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p21.2"></span>,)

<span id="ii.lxxix-p22"></span> so that some excel others. But whatever
gifts the Lord has bestowed upon us, let us know that it is committed to
us as so much money, that it may yield some gain; for nothing could be
more unreasonable than that we should allow to remain buried, or should
apply to no use, God’s favors, the value of which consists in yielding
fruit.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p23"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p24"></span>**<span
id="ii.lxxix-p24.2"></span>[Matthew
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p24.2"></span>.** *To every one according to his own
ability.* By this term Christ does not distinguish between natural gifts
and the gifts of the Spirit; for we have neither power nor skill  <span
id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) which ought not to be acknowledged as
having been received from God; and, therefore, whoever shall determine
to give God his share will leave nothing for himself. What then is meant
by saying, that the master of the house gives to each person more or
less, *according to his own ability?* It is because God, as he has
assigned to every one his place, and has bestowed on him natural gifts,
gives him also this or the other injunction, employs him in the
management of affairs, raises him to various offices, furnishes him with
abundant means of eminent usefulness, and presents to him the
opportunity.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p26"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p26.1"></span>It is
absurd, however, in the Papists to infer from this, that the gifts of
God are conferred on every man according to the measure which he
deserves. For, though the old translator,  <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688) <span id="ii.lxxix-p27.2"></span>
employed the word *virtus*<span id="ii.lxxix-p27.3"></span>,  <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689) <span id="ii.lxxix-p28.5"></span>he
did not mean that God bestows his gifts, according as men have acquitted
themselves well, and obtained the praise of *virtue*<span
id="ii.lxxix-p28.6"></span>, <span id="ii.lxxix-p28.7"></span>but only
so far as the master of the house has judged them to be suitable. Now we
know that no man is found by God to be suitable till He has made him so;
and the Greek word <span id="ii.lxxix-p28.8"></span>δύναμις<span
id="ii.lxxix-p28.9"></span>, *(power*<span id="ii.lxxix-p28.10"></span>,
*ability*<span id="ii.lxxix-p28.11"></span>,*)* <span
id="ii.lxxix-p28.12"></span>which Christ employed, is free from all
ambiguity.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p29"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p30"></span>**20.** *And he who had received five
talents.* Those who employ usefully whatever God has committed to them
are said to be engaged in *trading* The life of the godly,  <span
id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690) is justly compared to *trading*, for
they ought naturally to exchange and barter with each other, in order to
maintain intercourse; and the industry with which every mall discharges
the office assigned him, the calling itself, the power of acting
properly, and other gifts, are reckoned to be so many kinds of
*merchandise;* because the use or object which they have in view is, to
promote mutual intercourse among men.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p32"></span>Now the gain which Christ mentions is
general usefulness,  <span id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691) which
illustrates the glory of God. For, though God is not enriched, and makes
no *gain*, by our labors, yet when every one is highly profitable to his
brethren, and applies advantageously, for their salvation, the gifts
which he has received from God, he is said to yield *profit*, or *gain*,
to God himself. So highly does our heavenly Father value the salvation
of men, that whatever contributes to it he chooses to place to his own
account. That we may not *become weary in doing well*, (<span
id="ii.lxxix-p33.2"></span>[Ga
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span id="ii.lxxix-p33.2"></span>,)
Christ declares that the labor of those who are faithfully employed in
their calling will not be useless.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p34"></span>According to *Luke*, he says that *he who
gained five pounds obtains the government of five cities;* by which
words he informs them, that the glory of his kingdom will be very
different at his last coming from what it now appears. For now  <span
id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692) we have labor and anxiety in managing,
as it were, the affairs of an absent master; but then he will have at
his command an ample and copious supply of honors, to ennoble and enrich
us. The form of expression employed by *Matthew* is more simple, *Enter
thou into the joy of thy master;* by which he means that faithful
servants, whose discharge of duty shall meet with his approbation, will
share with himself a blessed abundance of all good things.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p36"></span>But it is asked, What is meant by what is
added, *Take from him the talent, and give it to him who hath ten
talents?* For every kind of *trading* will then be at an end. I reply,
We ought to keep in remembrance what I formerly mentioned, that those
who insist on explaining, with exactness, every minute phrase, are
mistaken. The true meaning is, though slothful and unprofitable servants
are now endued with the gifts of the Spirit, yet they will at length be
deprived of them all, that their wretched and shameful poverty may
redound to the glory of the good. Now these slothful persons, Christ
tells us, *hide* either the *talent* or the *pound* in the earth;
because, while they consult their own ease and gratifications, they
refuse to submit to any uneasiness; as we see very many who, while they
are privately devoted to themselves and to their own advantage, avoid
all the duties of charity, and have no regard to the general
edification. When it is said that the master of the house, after his
return, called the servants to account; as this ought to impart courage
to the good, when they understand that they do not lose their pains, so
the indolent and careless, on the other hand, ought to be struck with no
small terror. Let us therefore learn to call ourselves daily to account,
before the Lord come, and *make a reckoning* with us.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p37"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p38"></span>**24.** *I knew thee, that thou art a
harsh man.* This *harshness* has nothing to do with the substance of the
parable; and it is an idle speculation in which those indulge, who
reason from this passage, how severely and rigorously God deals with his
own people. For Christ did not intend to describe such *rigor*, any more
than to applaud *usury*, when he represents the master of the house as
saying, that the money ought to have been deposited with a *banker*,
that it might, at least, *gain interest* Christ only means, that there
will be no excuse for the indolence of those who both conceal the gifts
of God, and waste their time in idleness. Hence also we infer that no
manner of life is more praiseworthy in the sight of God, than that which
yields some advantage to human society.

<span id="ii.lxxix-p39"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p40"></span>**29.** *To every one that hath shall be
given* has been explained  <span id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693) under
<span id="ii.lxxix-p41.2"></span>[Mt
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012)<span id="ii.lxxix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p42"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p43"></span>**30.** *And cast the unprofitable
servant into outer darkness.* We have also explained,  <span
id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694) under <span
id="ii.lxxix-p44.2"></span>[Mt
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span id="ii.lxxix-p44.2"></span>,
that *outer darkness* is contrasted with the light which is within the
house;  <span id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695) for, as banquets were
anciently held, for the most part, at night, and were illuminated by
numerous torches and lamps, of those who are banished from the kingdom
of God, Christ says, that they are cast *without into darkness*

<span id="ii.lxxix-p46"></span><span id="ii.lxxix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p47"></span>**<span id="ii.lxxix-p47.2"></span>[Luke
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027)<span
id="ii.lxxix-p47.2"></span>.** *But those my enemies* In this second
part, he appears to glance principally at the Jews, but includes all who
in the absence of their master, determine to revolt. Now Christ’s
intention was, not only to terrify such persons by threatening an awful
punishment, but also to keep his own people in faithful subjection; for
it was no small temptation to see the kingdom of God scattered by the
treachery and rebellion of many. In order then that we may preserve our
composure in the midst of troubles, Christ informs us that he will
return, and that at his coming he will punish wicked rebellion.  <span
id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_683"></span>[684](cc32080.htm#fr_683) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p7.1"></span>Pour
conquester un royaurae;” — “to conquer a kingdom.”

<span id="fn_684"></span>[685](cc32080.htm#fr_684) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p8.1"></span>Apres
avoir conqueste le royaume;” — “after having conquered the kingdom.”

<span id="fn_685"></span>[686](cc32080.htm#fr_685) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p16.1"></span>Pour
conquester ce royaurae;” — “to conquer this kingdom.’

<span id="fn_686"></span>[687](cc32080.htm#fr_686) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p16.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p17.1"></span>Qu’ils
apprenent de porter patiemment la longue attente;” — “that they may
learn to endure patiently the long delay.”

<span id="fn_687"></span>[688](cc32080.htm#fr_687) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p25.1"></span>Il n’y
a ne puissance, ne industrie, ou dexterit;” — “there is neither power,
nor industry, nor skill.”

<span id="fn_688"></span>[689](cc32080.htm#fr_688) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p27.1"></span>Le
translateur Latin ancien;” — “the old Latin translator.”

<span id="fn_689"></span>[690](cc32080.htm#fr_689) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p27.4"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p28"></span> An interpreter who was willing to twist
a passage, so as to bring out of it any meaning that he chose, would
find the vagueness of the Latin word <span
id="ii.lxxix-p28.1"></span>*virtus* to be well suited to his purpose.
Its derivation from <span id="ii.lxxix-p28.2"></span>*vir*, *a* man,
shows that it originally signified *manliness*, from which it easily
passed to denote *courage*, and, from the high estimation in which
*courage* was held among warlike nations, became the general expression
for *moral excelle*n*ce*, out of which arose the application of it to
other kinds of *excellence*, as in the phrase, <span
id="ii.lxxix-p28.3"></span>*virtutes orationis*, *the ornaments of
style*. Again, from denoting *manly vigor* it came naturally to denote
*ability;* and it is undoubtedly in this sense, with which our English
version accords, that <span id="ii.lxxix-p28.4"></span>*rirtus* is
employed by the Vulgate in this passage. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_690"></span>[691](cc32080.htm#fr_690) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p31"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p31.1"></span>Des
fideles;” — “of believers.”

<span id="fn_691"></span>[692](cc32080.htm#fr_691) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p33.1"></span>C’est
le profit ou l’avancement de toute la compagnie des fideles en commun;”
— “it is the profit or advancement of the whole company of believers in
common.”

<span id="fn_692"></span>[693](cc32080.htm#fr_692) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p35"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p35.1"></span>En ce
monde;” — “in this world.”

<span id="fn_693"></span>[694](cc32080.htm#fr_693) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p41"></span> See p. 104 of this volume.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[695](cc32080.htm#fr_694) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p44"></span> *Harmony*, vol. 1. p. 384.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[696](cc32080.htm#fr_695) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p44.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p45"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p45.1"></span>De la
lumiere et clarte qui est en la maison;” — “with the light and
brightness that is within the house.”

<span id="fn_696"></span>[697](cc32080.htm#fr_696) <span
id="ii.lxxix-p47.3"></span>

<span id="ii.lxxix-p48"></span> “<span id="ii.lxxix-p48.1"></span>Il se
vengera contre les traistres, et les punira de leur rebellion;” — “he
will take vengeance on traitors, and will punish them for their
rebellion.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 21:1-9; Mark 11:1-10; Luke 19:29-38](cc32081)
