[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32002)  [Next](cc32004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 11:1-6; LUKE 7:18-23

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span><span id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
11:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span><span id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
7:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#018)<span id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span>**1**. And it happened that when Jesus had
made an end of commanding his twelve disciples,  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) he departed thence to teach and to preach in
their cities. **2**. Now when John had heard in the prison the works of
Christ, he sent two of his disciples, **3**. And said to him, Art thou
he who was to come, or do we look for another? **4**. And Jesus
answering said to them, Go and relate to John those things which you
hear and see. **5**. The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk;
the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear; the dead are raised up, and
the poor receive the message of the Gospel.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) **6**. And blessed is he who shall not be
offended at me.

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>**18.** And the disciples of John informed
him of all these things; **19**. And John called to him two of his
disciples and sent them to Jesus, saying, Art thou he who was to come,
or do we look for another? (Shortly afterwards.) **21**. And in the same
hour he cured many of diseases and plagues, and evil spirits, and to
many who were blind he gave sight. **22**. And he answering said to
them, Go and relate to John those things which you have heard and seen,
that the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf
hear, the dead rise again, to the poor the Gospel is preached.
**23**. And blessed is he who shall not be offended at me.  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span><span id="ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span>**<span id="ii.ii-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)<span id="ii.ii-p11.2"></span>.**
*And it happened that when Jesus had made an end* In this passage
Matthew means nothing more than that Christ did not desist from the
exercise of his office, while the Apostles were laboring in another
direction. As soon, therefore, as he sent them away, with the necessary
instructions, to perambulate Judea, he performed the duties of a teacher
in Galilee. The word *commanding,* which Matthew employs, is emphatic;
for he means that they did not receive a commission to do what they
pleased, but were restricted and enjoined as to the statements which
they should make, and the manner in which they should conduct
themselves.

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span><span id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p13"></span>**2.** *Now when John had heard.* The
Evangelists do not mean that John was excited by the miracles to
acknowledge Christ at that time as Mediator; but, perceiving that Christ
had acquired great reputation, and concluding that this was a fit and
seasonable time for putting to the test his own declaration concerning
him, he sent to him his disciples. The opinion entertained by some, that
he sent them partly on his own account, is exceedingly foolish; as if he
had not been fully convinced, or obtained distinct information, that
Jesus is the Christ. Equally absurd is the speculation of those who
imagine that the Baptist was near death, and therefore inquired what
message he should carry, from Christ’s mouth as it were, to the deceased
fathers. It is very evident that the holy herald of Christ, perceiving
that he was not far from the end of his journey, and that his disciples,
though he had bestowed great pains in instructing them, still remained
in a state of hesitation, resorted to this last expedient for curing
their weakness. He had faithfully labored, as I have said, that his
disciples should embrace Christ without delay. His continued entreaties
had produced so little effect, that he had good reason for dreading
that, after his death, they would entirely fall away; and therefore he
earnestly attempted to arouse them from their sloth by sending them to
Christ. Besides, the pastors of the Church are here reminded of their
duty. They ought not to endeavor to bind and attach disciples to
themselves, but to direct them to Christ, who is the only Teacher. From
the beginning, John had openly avowed that he was not *the bridegroom,*
(<span id="ii.ii-p13.2"></span>[Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="ii.ii-p13.2"></span>.)
As the faithful *friend of the bridegroom* he presents the bride chaste
and uncontaminated to Christ, who alone is the *bridegroom* of the
Church. Paul tells us that he kept the same object in view, (<span
id="ii.ii-p13.3"></span>[2Co 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span
id="ii.ii-p13.3"></span>,) and the example of both is held out for
imitation to all the ministers of the Gospel.

<span id="ii.ii-p14"></span><span id="ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p15"></span>**3.** *Art thou he who was to come?* John
takes for granted what the disciples had known from their childhood; for
it was the first lesson of religion, and common among all the Jews, that
Christ *was to come,* bringing salvation and perfect happiness. On this
point, accordingly, he does not raise a doubt, but only inquires if
Jesus be that promised Redeemer; for, having been persuaded of the
redemption promised in the Law and the Prophets, they were bound to
receive it when exhibited in the person of Christ. He adds, *Do we look
for another?* By this expression, he indirectly glances at their sloth,
which allowed them, after having been distinctly informed, to remain so
long in doubt and hesitation. At the same time, he shows what is the
nature and power of faith. Resting on the truth of God, it does not gaze
on all sides, does not vary, but is satisfied with Christ alone, and
will not be turned to another.

<span id="ii.ii-p16"></span><span id="ii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p17"></span>**4.** *Go and relate to John* As John had
assumed for the time a new character, so Christ enjoins them to carry to
him that message, which more properly ought to have been addressed to
his disciples. He gives an indirect reply, and for two reasons: first,
because it was better that the thing should speak for itself; and,
secondly, because he thus afforded to his herald a larger subject of
instruction. Nor does he merely supply him with bare and rough materials
in the miracles, but adapts the miracles to his purpose by quotations
from the Prophets. He notices more particularly one passage from the
35th, and another from the 61st, chapter of Isaiah, for the purpose of
informing John’s disciples, that what the Prophets declared respecting
the reign of Christ was accomplished and fulfilled. The former passage
contains a description of Christ’s reign, under which God promises that
he will be so kind and gracious as to grant relief and assistance for
every kind of disease. He speaks, no doubt, of spiritual deliverance
from all diseases and remedies; but under outward symbols, as has been
already mentioned, Christ shows that he came as a spiritual physician to
cure souls. The disciples would consequently go away without any
hesitation, having obtained a reply which was clear and free from all
ambiguity.

<span id="ii.ii-p18"></span>The latter passage resembles the former in
this respect. It shows that the treasures of the grace of God would be
exhibited to the world in Christ, and declares that Christ is expressly
set apart for the poor and afflicted. This passage is purposely quoted
by Christ, partly to teach all his followers the first lesson of
humility, and partly to remove the offense which the flesh and sense
might be apt to raise against his despicable flock. We are by nature
proud, and scarcely anything is much valued by us, if it is not attended
by a great degree of outward show. But the Church of Christ is composed
of poor men, and nothing could be farther removed from dazzling or
imposing ornament. Hence many are led to despise the Gospel, because it
is not embraced by many persons of eminent station and exalted rank. How
perverse and unjust that opinion is, Christ shows from the very nature
of the Gospel, since it was designed only for the poor and despised.
Hence it follows, that it is no new occurrence, or one that ought to
disturb our minds, if the Gospel is despised by all the great, who,
puffed up with their wealth, have no room to spare for the grace of God.
Nay, if it is rejected by the greater part of men, there is no reason to
wonder; for there is scarcely one person in a hundred who does not swell
with wicked confidence. As Christ here guards his Gospel against
contempt, he likewise reminds us who they are that are qualified to
appreciate the grace of salvation which it offers to them; and in this
manner, kindly inviting wretched sinners to the hope of salvation,
raises them to full confidence.

<span id="ii.ii-p19"></span><span id="ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p20"></span>**5.** *The poor receive the message of the
Gospel* By *the poor* are undoubtedly meant those whose condition is
wretched and despicable, and who are held in no estimation. However mean
any person may be, his poverty is so far from being a ground of despair,
that it ought rather to animate him with courage to seek Christ. But let
us remember that none are accounted *poor* but those who are really
such, or, in other words, who lie low and overwhelmed by a conviction of
their poverty.

<span id="ii.ii-p21"></span><span id="ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p22"></span>**6.** *And blessed is he who shall not be
offended in me. By* this concluding statement Christ intended to remind
them, that he who would adhere firmly and steadfastly to the faith of
the Gospel must encounter *offenses,* which will tend to interrupt the
progress of faith. This is said by way of anticipation, to fortify us
against offenses; for we shall never want reasons for rejecting it,
until our minds are raised above every offense. The first lesson,
therefore, to be learned is, that we must contend with *offenses,* if we
would continue in the faith of Christ; for Christ himself is justly
denominated a

<span id="ii.ii-p23"></span>rock of offense and stone of stumbling, by
which many fall,  
(<span id="ii.ii-p23.2"></span>[1Pe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.ii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ii-p24"></span>This happens, no doubt, through our own
fault, but that very fault is remedied, when he pronounces those to be
*blessed who shall not be offended in him;* from which too we infer,
that unbelievers have no excuse, though they plead the existence of
innumerable offenses. For what hinders them from coming to Christ? Or
what drives them to revolt from Christ? It is because he appears with
his cross, disfigured and despised, and exposed to the reproaches of the
world; because he calls us to share in his afflictions; because his
glory and majesty, being spiritual, are despised by the world; and in a
word, because his doctrine is totally at variance with our senses.
Again, it is because, through the stratagems of Satan, many disturbances
arise, with the view of slandering and rendering hateful the name of
Christ and the Gospel; and because every one, as if on purpose, rears up
a mass of *offenses,* being instigated by not less malignity than zeal
to withdraw from Christ.  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc32003.htm#fr_3) <span
id="ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p5.1"></span>Quand Iesus
eut acheve de donner mandemens a ses douze disciples;” — “when Jesus had
finished giving injunctions to his twelve disciples.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc32003.htm#fr_4) <span
id="ii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p6.1"></span>Et l’Evangile
est annonce aux poures;” — “and the Gospel is preached to the poor.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc32003.htm#fr_5) <span
id="ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p8.1"></span>Qui ne sera
point scandalize, *ou offense,* en moy;” — “who shall not be
scandalized, *or offended,* at me.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc32003.htm#fr_6) <span
id="ii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p25"></span> “<span id="ii.ii-p25.1"></span>Pource que
tous non seulement sont bien aises de se retirer de Christ, mais aussi
tachent malicieusement d’entrouver les moyens;” — “because not only are
all strongly disposed to withdraw from Christ, but they even endeavor
maliciously to discover the means of doing so.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 11:7-15; Luke 7:24-28](cc32004)
